    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 A STRATEGIC THEORY OF INFLATION



          Mordecai Kurz



      Working Paper No. 3T9




NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
         Cambridge MA 02138

            August 1979
                                                     NBER Working Paper 379
                                                                August 1979




                   A Strategic Theory of Inflation


                               ABS TRACT




     A strategic mechanism of price adjustment is introduced to explain
inflations in the U.S. during 1909—1974. The mechanism follows from
our theory that when the profit rate is above a normal—target rate,
competitive forces operate to lower prices while if the profit rate
is below the target a correlated strategy among firms operates to
generate a rise in prices as a strategy to improve profitability. The
notion of "correlated strategy" is adopted from game theory. The
mechanism may operate in harmony or against demand and the net effect
is what we call the "basic inflation." Contrary to a—priori notions of
positive association between inflation rates and profit rates, our theory
proposes a critical test of a negative association between these variables.
Such a relationship is in fact empirically established.
      The analysis shows that large and persistent inflationary pressures
are generated by low profitability and during 1971-1977 those accounted
for some 20%—50% of total inflation. These pressures would be present
even if no increase in cost occurs. This suggests that an important
cause of the 1970's inflation is the low profit rate in the private
sector and any public policy against inflation will fail if it does
not aim at the same time to raise the profit rate on private capital.




                                              Professor Mordecai Kurz
                                              Institute for Mathematical Studies
                                                in the Social Sciences
                                              Encina Hall, Fourth Floor
                                              Stanford University
                                              Stanford, CA 94305
                                              415/497—2220
                                                       Revised April 1979




                   A STRATEGIC THEORY OF INFLATION *

                                     by
                             Mordecai Kurz


1.       Introduction

         The inflation—unemployment configurations of the 1970's have

created a gap in contemporary macro—economic thinking. The "Phillips

Curve" (see Phillips [1958], Lipsey [1960] and Perry [196111 for the u.s.)

was rejected as a basic analytical and policy tool and with it the

validity of an extensive body of modern thought became questionable.

This has left wide open the task of explaining the observed relation-

ship    between unemployment and    inflation

         Without aiming to review the "Phillips Curve" episode it is

relevant to this paper to clarify some aspects of why this analytical

tool led to unsatisfactory results. To do this we recall that the

Phillips curve was developed as a relationship between w(t)/w(t)—

the rate of change of nominal wages and u(t)-the rate of unemployment.

This equation can be written    as

                         w(t)   =
(1.1)                    w(t)       w (u(t),x (t))


where x(t)) are "other" variables in the wage equation. Although

in many contributions it is not always explicit what the interpretation
*This research was partly supported by the National Bureau of Economic
Research and partly by the National Science Foundation Grant SOCT5—2l820
at the Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences at
Stanford University. It appears jointly as an NBER working paper and
IMSSS technical report. The author wishes to thank his assistant
Kenneth Lutich for dedicated assistance and many discussions which con—
tributed substantially to this paper. He also thanks Steven Galatis for
his help.

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
social insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                    —2—



of the Phillips curve is, it should be clear that it represents an

equilibrium condition in the labor market (see, for example, Sainuelson—

Solow [1960], Tobin [1912] and     Friedman   [1910], [1911]).

        In many of the uses-of the Phillips curve a.relationship is

derived between the rate of inflation and the rate of unemployment. To

accomplish this a price determination equation is postulated and this

is usuafly a model based on full—cost pricing. A typical such equation

can be found, for example, in Perry [1966] and is defined by



(1.2)       =       + __+ __+ 3K(t) +                      __
where

         r
        p (t) =   price   of raw materials at t

                = an index of capacity utilization at t


One usually interprets equation (1.2) as an equilibrium condition in the

commodities markets resulting from excess demands in these markets being

equal to 0.

        Now in order to obtain the relation between (t)Ip(t) and

u(t) one inserts (1.1) into (1.2) in order to obtain



(1.3)         =   (u(t),x(t))

where x(t) are "other" variables. Since j(t)Ip(t) as well as r(t)fw(t)

and u(t) are all endogenous variables, one thinks of (1.3) as a

relation between the equilibrium values of the two endogenous variables.
                                 —3-..




This relationship depends both on the "other" variables as well as the

random shocks to the system as a whole.

        We now note that the "trade—off" between p(t)fp(t) and    u(t)
as specified in equation (1.3) can be incorrectly specified due either

to incorrect specification of the Phillips curve (1.1) or the price

formation equation (1.2). Thus the failure of the empirical relation

(1.3) in recent years may be due to either one of these factors. Although

we do not believe that equation (i.i) provides a correct specification

of   the equilibrium condition in the labor market, we shall not study
this relationship   between r(t)/w(t) and u(t) in the present paper.

Instead, we concentrate here on the price formation mechanism (1.2),

'which we believe is an important ingrediant in understanding the process

of inflation, and propose in this paper a reformulation of the mechanism

(1.2). More specifically, in developing our strategic approach to infla-

tion we shall regard firms as adopting equilibrium strater of price

adjustment and equations type (1.2) will provide the equilibrium quan-

titative description of this strater.

        A word may be in order about cost—push and demand—pull theories

of inflation. The attempt to establish a causal relation between cost

and inflation or demand and inflation would involve the same set of

problems discussed earlier with regard to the Philips curve: cost, demand

and inflation rate are all endogenous variables and without a theory of

inflation which will define the structural relations among them no useful

causal interrelationships can be discussed.E! With this reservation made,
                                 —'i—




we   shall argue below that the cost—push demand—pull distinction may
have   a classificatory value which is useful.   The strategic theory of
inflation which   we develop here will regard the decision to change

prices as an endogenous decision with explicit structural description.

At different times adeision to raise-prices comes either in

response to increased cost or increased demand and    then   it looks

like a cost-push or demand—pull inflation. However, the theory will

         state the circumstances in which despite rising cost, the
explicitly

endogenously determined rate of inflation will be less than the corre-
sponding rate of rising cost and perhaps even negative when cost is
rising. Furthermore, circumstances may be specified in which high
demand may be associated with either rising or declining prices and
in the same way low demand may be associated with either rising or

declining prices. In this sense one can use the cost—push demand—pull

characterization as a classificatory tool of inflationary processes and

with that aid the understanding of the deeper structural explanation

of inflation.

         A final introductory note must be related to the methodology

of analyzing inflation, In the context of a general equilibrium system

of market clearing any process of rising prices must be induced by excess

demand causing the "auctioneert' to raise prices. From this view point

the study of inflation must necessarily be the study of those causes

making for general excess demand in all markets which would then cause

the "auctioneer" to raise all prices. When looked at from the auctioneer's

view point the deeper issues cannot be uncovered since many situations
                                  —5—




appear to lead to contrasting conclusions: we have manr periods of
recession about which we may think as periods of excess supply in which

prices do rise and we also observe periods of recovery with high

and perhaps excess demand when prices are stable or even falling. What

one discovers is that even in periods of recession a situation of excess

demand may develop in commodity markets and this may lead to rising

prices.   This can be caused by the decision by firms to lay—off workers,
reduce output and   cut   back the supply to avoid losses. This suggests
that   there may be circumstances in which price targets may be set   and
supplies adjusted to them. This would lead to the conclusion that

recessions, in which demand falls, are not necessarily periods of

de—facto excess supplies and recoveries are not necessarily periods

of de-facto excess demand. With this in mind one may conclude that

studying inflation as a process in which the auctioneer raises prices

in response to excess demands is probably not a fruitful way of looking

at the problem. We propose that the study of inflation must shift

attention back to the behavior of firms who make the market. Furthemore,

one must look at inflation as a state in which all firms elect to raise

prices as a rational choice in the given environment. Such a theory

will need to concentrate on those factors which induce all firms to

adopt similar optima]. price change strategies. Inflation, in this con-

text, is an equilibrium strategy adopted by all firms to achieve whatever

goals they cannot achieve without the inflationary strategy.
                                       —6—



2.        Conrpetition,   Normal   PrQfits and Correlation of Strategies
          2.ä Competition and Correlation of Pricing Strategies
          We view our competitive firm as operating in a dynamic environ-

ment   and aiming to maximize its long term profits      by selecingQptimal

output,    investment and pricing strategies. The idea of the firm as
a long run profit maximizer is well known and a similar view was adopted
by many writers (see, for example, Modigliani [1958] and [197T, pages
6—8]). What     we shall do here is develop this hypothesis in a strategic
context    of an indefinitely repeating economy and     carry   out an empirical

test   of the approach.
      n optimal long run profit maximizing strategy is different
from short—term strategy in the fact that the firm must take into
account at any date        t not only the state of the world at later dates

but also the future       response   of the competitors to its currently

chosen actions (at t). This means, for example, that if a firm lowers

its prices at t it must take into account the possible retaliation

of   its competitors both at the present and also in all future market
dates. In a one—period static world no such considerations need be
taken into account since any         strategy adopted by all participants has

a duration of one market period only. It then follows that the essential

nature of a long—term strategy hinges on the fact that the economy
repeats    itself indefinitely often and the market,      so to speak, reopens
every    ttmorninght or even continuously. As long as we have a finite

number    of firms there does not exist a natural notion of a "small"
firm   whose strategy may be ignored by the others.-'1 This means that
                                       —1—



regardless of how small, in the context of a repeated economy, the

strater of' each firm must be considered by all others and an equilibrium

will consist of a set of optimal long—run strategies adopted by every

firm taking into account the strategies adopted by all the other firms.

       The repetition of the economic game enables a great deal of

information to pass implicitly among the participants. This is done

simply through a complex structure of signals which enables the participants

to learn all they need about each other and thus to coordinate their

strategies. This situation has often been viewed as "implicit collusion"

and thus long—term profit maximization was regarded by Modigliani [1958:1

as a reflection of oligopolistic behavior. This conclusion is not

necessary since even in a perfectly competitive economy with a finite

number of firms  implicit coordination of strategies may occur and such
coordination   does not require a "small" number of participants.
        The idea of coordination as resulting from the repetitive nature
of the economy has received significant attention in Game Theory (see for
example,   Aumann   [1959],   Kurz   [l977a],   Gerard.—Varet and   Moulin   [1918] and

others).   The notion used in Game Theory is one of "Correlated Strategies"

applicable in non—cooperative games of conflict which are repeated. Here

the participants cannot make binding contracts (like in the famous "pris-

oner's dilema") but overcome this non—cooperative limitation by adopting

modes of behavior, or strategies, which signal their desire for cooperation.

The repetition of the game provides ample opportunities both to test

the sincerity of those who signal a desire for cooperation and also to
                                  —8—




retaliate   against those who may double—cross the "honest" participtants.

Thus in   an indefinitely repeating game a "correlated strategy't could
constitute an equilibrium which looks as if it were a result of a
completely   collusiveprocess. The stability of such an equilibrium is

derived from the constarrt threat of retaliation by all the participants

against a deviator from the adopted correlated strategy. Such a retalia-

tion may be applied immediately and could continue into the indefinite

future. An important conclusion    which must be derived from this theory
is that the extent to which correlated strategies may be adopted depends

upon two essential elements: the perceived gain which can potentially

be enjoyed by all the players and the punishment—retaliation1 ability

of the participatns against any deviator.

          As long as free entry to an industry is available the establish-

ment of implicit collusion or "correlated strategy" in competitive

markets do not turn them into oligopolies. However, let us consider

for a moment the effect of fixed entry or exit cost on the nature of

the equilibrium. If there are no such costs then a correlated pricing

strategy may create temporary abnormal profits but free entry with zero

fixed entry and exit cost will keep expanding output and push the. profit

rate down towards its normal level. Thus with zero entry and exit cost

the retaliation ability of the participants is restricted to the gain

from correlation. This can be significant if the profit rate is below

normal and correlated pricing strategy may prevent it from getting even

lower. This means that when the profit rate is above normal the process

of free entry and the expectations that the profit rate cannot stay
                                      —9—



abnormally high will act against the formation of correlated pricing

strategies and is likely to result in competitive price cutting.

However if the profit rate drops below normal due to an unexpected

rise in cost or some other factor, the industry will obviously attempt

to make technological or organizational adjustments to improve

its profitability and some firms may leave the industry. However in

addition to these normal competitive adjustments, forces will be set

in motion for the formation of a correlated price increasing strategy

and due to this strategy the profit rate will not be as low as it might

be. Due to the fact that in this case there is no entry and. exit cost,

the retaliation ability of the participants against a deviator is derived

only from the fact that such a correlated strategy is beneficial to all

and a deviation will prove harmful to all.

         A more complex case arises when significant entry and exit costs

are present. We note that in our reality of imperfect information and

irreversible investments such costscould be prohibitive. They include

all dimensions of set up cost: legal, financial, locational, labor

and   managerial   training, but also all   irreversible   investments. These
include   informational development, product advertising, community and
public relations and     finally   all the cost of   specific   plant and
equipment   which cannot be transfered costlessly to other industries.
In   many industries a significant part (if not all) of total invest-

ments falls in these specific categories.

        With   fixed entry and exit cost a correlated pricing strategy in
a   repeated economy provides the participants a significant retaliatory
                               —10—



tool. This may be used against any new entry or against any deviator

from the accepted pricing policy. Since drastic price cutting can

result in widespread losses which cannot be recovered due to the

specificity of the investments, such circumstances would. have two

consequences: first,no new entrywill occur before the profit rate

goes above a certain level which would provide compensation for the

risk of entry. Second, correlated strategies are more likely to

be established and. have a more stable character due to the high cost,

to all the participants, of a breakdown in the coordinated activity.

We can thus conclude that correlated pricing strategies are more

likely to be formed the lower is the profit rate and the higher are

the costs of entry and exit.



       2.b The Normal Profit Rate

       The establishment of a correlated pricing strategy is conditional

upon the existence of a well defined set of signals which are clearly

understood. and the interpretation of which is commonly agreed upon.

We proposed above that the position of the actual profit rate R(t)

in relation to the target profit rate R*(t) is crucial to this signal-

ling process. But what is the normal target profit rate R*(t)? Since

this concept is one of the key ideas of this work we must clarify

its meaning.

       We are assuming that given the technological conditions of

the economy, the political and legal foundations of property rights,

the availability of resources and the functioning of our institutions
                               —11—




there   is a target after-tax profit rate R* which my be designated

R*(t) which may change over time due to the change in exogenous con-

ditions. Similarly there is a distribution of profit rates R(t)

over industries depending uponthe risk level, the stage of

technological development, the cost of entry and exit and other

characteristics. The after—tax profit rate R*(t), with its

associated industrial distribution R(t), is viewed as a target

rate which firms in the various industries believe they can earn

and will ultimately earn after they have selected their optimal

decision rules and made all the technological and administratiVe

adjustments needed to improve their profitability. The actual after—

tax profit rate R(t) may be above R*(t) or below R*(t) and

the temporary relation between them may reflect all the random

elements in our economic universe in addition to other unexpected

factors. The latter may include sudden changes in the tax laws,

unexpected rise in labor or other input cost, unexpected change in

the   political environment resulting in legal restrictions on the
activities of the firms and other restrictions like environmental
requirements   which may demand capital investments and adjustment time.

         The belief in R*(t) can be explained in two separate ways

which are complementary. The first explanation may concentrate on

the long term supply of capital and the rate of technological progress.

These could have combined in modern time to create excess supply of

goods and capital when the profit rate goes above R*(t) and excess
                                                       —4.2—




demand when it goes below R*(t). Thus based on historical facts it

is perfectly rational to expect the economy to return to it.

            To justify this view consider in Diagram 1 a plot of the after

tax gross and net rates of return on capital in the U.S. 19O9—l9'f1.

The mean value are rg1 = 5.lt% and                                       =    .2%.            Note that

the gross rate demonstrates no trend and the major fluctuations

in this rate are due to such unexpected factors as wars and the

depression. The very slight downward trend in the net rate is

probably due to the tax treatment of depreciation.

             A second interpretation of R*(t) can be only sketched here.

It   will start from the hypothesis that both the tax rate and the
after—tax wage rate and rate of return on capital——all are outcomes of
the political andeconomic balance of power in our society. Such a.

 0.1% •            TUE CHOZ3 RATE 0? RL'J0N ON CAPITAL: U.S. )9O9197!.                          THE lIlT RATE O   RETUICI CR   CAPITAL: U.S. 1909_1971.



 1.0%




                                                                             'JO



                                                                             0.06

 Ilk.




 S.134




 0.004                                                                    .090
          l0 1%0 ll0 1916 I94 I93 1990 9960 1946 1954 1960 1906 tOIL                lOll 9106 9902 016 l9. 9991 9136 0942 II'.. 9154 0900 0900 tIll
                                       YI*0                                         -                               Ilk.


                                                     Diagram 1
                                —13—



balance of power is reflected in the constitutional rights of the

various   economic agents. Thus the target profit rate R*(t) is
simply a reflection of all the economic options constitutionally

available for the employment of private capital. Since the constitu-

tional rights of the agents have changed little during the 20—th

century, the rate of return has not changed either. We may note,

however, the distinct decline in the rates between 1966 and 19T14.



          2.c The Formation of Pricing Strategy: The Basic Hypothesis

          Given the target profit rate R*(t) the firm can   define   the

normal    price   p*(t). In Diagram 2 below we plot AC* ——the average



                                                                            Ac*(t)
   p*(t)




   (t)
                                                              AC (t)




                                                      I.
                                               I      I

                                               I      I

                                               I      I
   p(t)                                        I      I




                                               Q                     Q(t)



                              Diagram 2
                                 —l4—



cost curve with R*(t) built into the cost     function and   AC   ——the


average   cost function associated with a 0 profit. In a completely

stationary environment the strategy of the firm is based on the expecta-

tions that p(t) should be equal to p(t) and output equals to Q.

A   long terni equilibrium will in fact determine the number of firms
which will   operate in the industry. Due to fluctuations in productivity

and variations in prices of inputs, the curves AC*(t) and AC(t)

move and the firms continuously adjust product prices so as to respond

to these changes. This means that product price adjustments come about

in response to actual or expected changes in profitability: any actual

decline in the profit rate or an expectation for a future decline based

on observed rise in cost initiate the forces which will establish a

correlated price increase strategy. Sudden increases in demand may

accelerate the price adjustment process and declines in demand may slow

but not stop it since the process is initiated by long term considerations

rather than the temporary condition of demand. This means that varia-

tions in demand may complement or slow down the basic pricing strategy

initiated by conditions of profitability while part of the changes in

demand will be translated into changes in output level and to changes

in the number of firms in the industry rather than changes in prices.

We return to this key observation below.

          If the industry were operating under short term profit maxi-

mization, changes in demand would have caused prices to fluctuate

above p since below this price many firms would close down rather
                                    —15—



than produce. Under such short term profit maximization, we have a

very   simple   price strategy:


                   w(t) =
                    (t)
                            marginal product of labor


         There are    a   few arguments why we do not follow this approach

and    these   we discuss now:

          (i) The observed facts are that fluctuations in output are

                 more extensive than fluctuations in prices. This suggests

                 that the long term strategy of firms   is   to select the

                 price p*(t) such that as long as demand fluctuations
                 stay within say Q* and Q** output will be adjusted
                 but prices will remain constant resulting in a mean pro-
                 fit rate   of R*. However if the cost functions move so that

                 a mean rate R* cannot be attained then prices will       be
                 adjusted. The most important changes in the cost curves are

                 caused by changes in taxes, productivity and prices of inputs.

                 Furthermore, if demand expands beyond Q*      firms   will either

                  allow shortages to develop or expand capacity. This is

                  essentially the Keynesian outlook on the problem and is

                  shared by such writers as Patinkin [1965] and Tobin

                  [1972].

          (ii) In an industry where price strategies are correlated,

                  every participant is reluctant to lower prices since

                  he might invite retaliation by the other suppliers.
      Given that it takes time to establish a correlated strategy,

      each producer would rather allow small fluctuations in

      demand to translate into small variations in output.

(iii) Changing the labor force so as to equate the short term

      marginal cost of labor to the wage rate entails extensive

      long term cost. First it creates both the cost of recruiting

      and also the risk of not being able to obtain the best

      workers when the demand for labor expands. But more

      important is the fact that by shifting all the risk of

      fluctuations in demand to labor, the firm invites long

      term hostility and retaliation by labor. By providing

       its labor force somewhat greater job security the firm

       attains industrial tranquility at the cost measured by

       the difference p — p which is the amount needed to

       pay for this insurance cost. The firm can also diversify

       its investments and thus indirectly reduce the needed

       premium p - p.        This idea of the firm providing the

       insurance is fundamental     in the. "Labor Contracts"
       literature   (see   Azariadis [1975], [1978], Baily [19714],

       and Gordon [19114]). According to this approach if workers

       are risk averse while firms are risk neutral     then optimal
       collective bargaining contracts would favor rigid wages and
       fluctuating   employment. In such an    environment lowering

       prices   without lowering wages could be used only as    a
                                   —17—



               short term device to get rid of excess inventories and

               these appear to be the observed facts.

          Having rejected the idea of a rigid short term profit maximization

::strategy:we propose, s the aschypQhs.i. ohis york thttho profit
  gap [R*(t) —R(t)] is the basic cause for the formation of correlated

 pricing strategy. The rest of this section will clarify      this hypothesis
  and. for that purpose we shall divide the discussion into two parts:

  the first case of R(t) >    R*(t)   and the second case of R(t) <   R*(t).


          Case 1: R(t) >   R*(t)
          In this case the temporary price established in the industry

  is p(t) >   p*(t).   It is important to keep in mind that firms are

  price takers but the nature of their price taking depends upon how

  firmly a correlated price strategy is established. Under the present

  circumstances of abnormal profits there is little chance for a

  success of correlation of strategies since there are two forces

  operating   in the market: the first is some expansion of capacity
  through new entries into the industry and   further   build—up by those
  in   the industry. The. second, and more important factor, is the

  realization by all firms that the abnormal profits cannot last very long

  and there is insufficient time to establish a correlated pricing

  strategy thus each firm would want to use the transition period to

  expand its market share. Competition, therefore, will prevent the

  establishment of correlated pricing strategy arid cause p(t) to

  gradually fall relative to the cost defining AC*.
                                      —18—




           In   the circumstances at hand the decline in the relative price

 may    simply   take the form of slow or no price increases when costs

 are rising unless major declines in demand are experienced. This is

:-so   since in principle- firms are reluctant to lower prices since changes-,
 are important signalsin en environment in which a correlatèdprice
 strategy is potentially in effect. Under such circumstances price
 cutting   may be interpreted as the unwillingness of a firm to follow a

 price raising strategy when the environment will justify it. Furthermore

 keeping prices reasonably stable when costs are rising becomes a positive

 signal that when in the appropriate environment, the firm will join a

 correlated price raising strategy.



            Case 2: R(t) <    R*(t)
           When the profit rate is below target and p(t) <     p*(t)    firms

  know that the danger of new entry is minimal and attempts will be

  made to establish strategies to raise prices. This is not a simple

  matter since for a correlated strategy to function all firms- have to

  recognize that r(t) <       r*(t)   and this takes time. Furthermore

   since no firm would wish to lose its market share the movement from

  p(t) towards p*(t) will be slow particularly since p*(t) is

  moving through time. The critical observation which we make can be

   stated. as follows:

                   The lower is R(t) relative to R*(t) the greater

                   is the incentive of all firms to cooperate and ad—
                                —19-



            here to a correlated strategy of raising prices and

            the more rapid will be the rate at which prices will

            be raised toward p*(t).

       Note that in Diagram 3 when p(t) <   p*(t)   the firms may be

operating at a level of say q1. If the price is raised to p2(t)

the firm may retain the lower output       with a much improved profit

inargin6/' on its capital stock. When R(t) <   R*(t)   for the industry,

some firms may elect to lower their capacity or leave the industry

rather than sustain the lower profit rate. Those who stay and improve

their profitability by raising prices may be viewed as price takers

in the sense of adhering to a fixed strategy of raising prices which

will be followed by all. An interesting theoretical work would




   price



                                             MC


     ( t)                                              AC*


                           — -p
   p2(t)



    p(t)




                              2        1
                            q          q                     Q

                            Diagram 3
                                 —20--




construct a model like the one we are describing here and derive the

equilibrium strategies which will be followed under     alternative   condi—

tions of the profit gap [R*(t) —    R(t)I.   Here we shall treat this as

the key empirical question to be resolved by the data and such a formula-

tion will be presented in the next section.

      We can thus conclude the description of our hypothesis by

specifying its two components:

        (1) For fixed level of productivity and input prices the

            larger is the profit gap R*(t) —     R(t)   when R*(t) >

            the more likely it is that a correlated strater
            of price increase will be formed and the faster would

            prices be raised.

        (2) Apart from the actual profit gap firms will consider

            the potential or predicted profit gap due to rising

            cost relative to productivity. Our hypothesis is that

            the more negative this gap becomes the more likely is a

            correlated strategy to form and the more rapidly would

            prices be raised.

        Again we need to emphasize that a firm adhering to a correlated

 price strategy is a price taker. Clearly what is the mechanism for

 actually raising prices and. who is the first who raises prices is

 besides the point. The mechanism may be based on some random process

 in response to which all would raise prices; or the price increase

 may occur in response to a rise in the price of some input which will,
                                 —21--




somehow, trigger a product price above what can be explained by the

rise of cost. With this in mind it is useful to examine the rela-

tionship between our "Basic Hypothesis" and       the   cost-push demand—pull

explanations for inflation.

      Perhaps the simplest way of putting it is to say that our

hypothesis implies that holding all      other   factors constant a higher

inflation rate is caused by lower profitability. Thus there are two

iniporant   implications   to be kept in mind:

       (1) If a rise in cost occurs it will be associated with

             more than a proportional increase in prices when

             profitability is low and less than a proportional

              increase in prices when profitability is high. When

             the profit rate is high, rising cost may even be

              associated with actual lowering of prices.

      (ii) If a high level of demand occurs, it will complement the

             pressure on rising prices when profitability is low but

              could be associated with declining prices when profitability

              is high. Thus, apart from extensively unexpected demand

              due to such factors as wars, the rate of price change when

              demand fluctuates depends upon the rate of profits. However,

              since recessions (thus low demand) are sometimes associated

             with low profit rates, our     Basic   Hypothesis suggest that

              inflationary forces may be operating during periods like

              this even if there is lnsufficient aggregate demand to

              support it.
                                      —22-



     This suggests to us that the classification of inflations should be

     made to depend upon the rate of profit in the sense that when

     R(t) <   R*(t)   profitability factors may be stronger while when

-.
     R(t)                                    may dominate..        :

      -
              The reason forthe above classification is that when R(t) >      H*(t)
     then atomistic competitive forces operate and large shifts in demand could

     cause price changes. If, however, R(t) <      R*(t) then   fluctuations in

     demand have far less influence on price changes. In this environment

     a correlated price strate,r will usually respond, to any cost increases

     by raising prices more than cost in order to close the profitability

     gap. We shall refine this classification below.

              A very important dimension of our   theory   is found in its provision

     of a critical test to distinguish it from the conventional, static model

     of price formation. The usual "auctioneer" model of price formation

     predicts that excess demand results in both rising profits and prices

     thus establishing a positive association between the rate of inflation

     and the rate of profit. Our approach proposes the opposite: a negative

     association between the rate of inflation and the rate of profits. This

     crucial test will be evaluated below.



     3.       The Basic Hypothesis and Econometric Specifications

              3.a Specification of the Basic Hypothesis

              Our "basic hypothesis" stated earlier decomposes the

     strategy into two components
                                             —23—



         (i)   the effect of the profitability gap on price changes
        (ii)   the   effect of the expected change in the profitability
               gap   if prices are not altered.

This. hypothesis canbe-expressedin--its simplest linear form by an
                                                  -
equation like



(3.1)     p(t)- p(t- 1) =                             -') - (t   -   1)1 + [E(R(t))     -   R(t -


where


        R*(t —    1) = the        normal—target profit rate which firms believe

                          they     could     potentially earn        in   t — 1

          R(t —   1) = the actual profit rate at t — 1

          E(R(t)) =       the     expected profit rate in t given that product prices

                          are not changed


The rest of this section is devoted to the development and elaboration

of equation (3.1) above.

         Starting with the primitive cQncept of R(t —                       1),   it is defined

by


(3.2)      R(t -     i)   =   (1- r(t - 1))P(t            -   )()                   l)L(t   - 1)


                              +          —   1)
                                  wk(t
or with



(3.2a)     r(t -1) =            (1-     t(t         ))P(t      lt                i)(t -i)

We define


(3.3)      R(t - 1)             r(t -      i)   +
                                                    k(t - 1)
where:


                   —   1) = the tax rate at t — 1
           p(t - 1) =           price      of output at t — 1

           Y(t-l)outputleveiat t—i
           w(t—i)=wagerateat t—i
           L(t —       i)   =   labor input at t — 1
          Pk(t —       1) = price of unit of capital goods at t — 1

          K(t —        i)   =   capital         stock employed at t — 1

          k(t — 1) = the relative rate of capital gains at t — 1


hence

                                       —   1) - Pk(t     -   2)
                        -       Pk(t                              p(t — 1) -   p(t   —   2)
          k
                                       Pkt2                            pt-i

The 1 period lag in (3.1) is based on the idea that it takes time

for a firm    to   know its exact level of profitability. In addition,

in order for a correlated strategy to be successfully established
                                        —25—



firms    will have to be convinced of the state of their own profitability
as well as the state of profitability of all other firms in the
industry. The profit rate of any given firm may fluctuate but a
correlated strater will be established only when all firms share the
same environment.
          In    the application below we shall test            models with 2 period
lag   and   a   Koyck model with a lag of infinite number of periods.

            Turning now to R*(t — 1)           we shall assume that



(3.5)           R(t — 1) =    r* +   k(t — i)
where r* is a constant to be estimated. The justification for

this assumption is based on the simple observation (see Diagram i)

that during the 20th century the post-tax rate of return r(t) fluc-

tuated around a constant and we shall take r* to be related to the long

term mean value of r(t). We thus can combine (3.5) and (3.1) to

obtain


 (3.6)           [R*(t -   1) - R(t -   ifl      [r* -   r(t   -   ifl
            To complete the exposition of equation (3.1) one needs to

consider        what would happen to the profitability of the            firm if   it
did   not change prices. Thus the expression E(R(t)) is the expected

profit rate when all the variables under the control of the firm

 are held constant. More precisely this expression is defined as
                                         —26—



(3T)            E(H(t)) =      r(t       —   1)

                               ÷              =         ((t)- w(t - 1))

                               +              =      (Et(t -.1)- T(t -1))
                               +
                                                           (Ep(t) Pk(t -1)

                               +              :            (EY(t) -          y(t   -   1))

                               + ETrk(t)



Equation (3.7) says that E(R(t)) is equal to the profit rate from

operations at Ct —1) (i.e., r(t —                      1))         plus the expected rate

of relative capital gains (Elrk(t)) less the change in the

profit rate induced by changes in the wage rate, the tax rate, the

cost of capital goods and       productivity.
         Now from (3.2) we     can define



(3.8a)                   :         (Ew(t) -          w(t       -   1))

                                                           l)L(t                       r(t) - w(t - 1).
                                        l))(t                                1)
                                              w(t -                      -
                    -(1 -    T(t   -
                                                               l)K(t -                       w(    -1)


(3.8b)                   =         (ET(t)        -   r(t - i))
                -
                — —(1 —      T(t   —    i     p(t      -   i)Y(t         -   i)    -   w(t   -    l)L(t   -.1)
                                                                Pkt —         l)K(t      —   1)

                                       t(t — -    1)
                      (ET(t) -
                          i —      (t         i)
                =                            (ET(t)        -   T(t   -       1))
                                             —27—




(3.8c)
                        (_)              (Ep(t) -         Pk(t
                                                                 - 1))


              -
              —    —(1—         (t      —   1))P(t -                     -1)      -   w(t - 1)L(t -1)
                                                             pk          -
                                                                              1)K(t    —   1)



                                Pk(t_1)
                                       Ep(t)-p(t)
                   —rt—1)
                                            Pk(t_1)


(3.8d)                      :          (Ey(t)- Y(t              1))

                                                     -i)Y(t - 1) (EY(t) -                       Y(t   -
                                                Pk(tt
               -
               —   (1 — T( t —           1))P(t                      —       i)        Y(t — 1)           1))


We think of the three variables defined in (3.8a)—(3.8c) as three cost

changes and t3.8d) as productivity change holding inputs constant.

Combining (3.2), (3.7) and              (3.8a)—(3.8d)           we obtain


(3.9)          [E(R(t))            -    n(t - 1)]
                        —   r(t          1)W(t —      l)L(t       —      i)       Ew(t)     —
                                                                                                t(t — 1)
                                             Pk(t_ 1)K(t —                            w(t      —


              -                                             t(t -
                   1   r(; )) (Er(t)                  -               1)

                                   Ep (t) —         pk (t   —   1)
              -r(t-1)

              +    (1       T (t         1))P(t -        i) (EY(t) y(t —
                                                          i)Y(t      —                     —
                                                                                                          1))
                                                                  y(t — i)
                                    —
                                                                     —
                                                Pk(t_K(t 1)
              +
                   (E'irk(t)
                                   —
                                        Trk(t
                                                —   1))
                                           —28—



where in (3.9) we use the notation (Ey(t)                       —
                                                                    y(t   —   l))/y(t i)
                                                                                     —



to   indicate change in             productivity holding factors constant.

No.w,   the   right hand. side         of (3.9)   contains      the expression

{E*k(t)
              —
                  rrk(t
                          —   1)]   which is the expected change in the relative

rate of capital gains (relative to the rate of inflation). Thus

this is an expectation of the structural relation between the change

in prices of finished products relative to capital goods. Being

essentially a second order effect, this factor may be ignored. How-

ever, it has been observed that during the 20th century

              pk(t)/Pk(t) —         p(t)/p(t)     has averaged about .89%           (see, however,
k(t)
Kendrick [1976], p. 27). Thus, given the systematic nature of

this    variable it is reasonable to assume

 (3.10)                              Ek(t) =    k(t    —   1)


 and test         the hypothesis 5 = 1.           To add a word of            caution we are not
 certain      of the meaning of the data for pk(t) which is the implicit

 price deflator of the capital stock. The fact that lTk(t)                               has a

 positive rather than 0 mean may suggest that the rise in the

 price index for pk(t) really represents quality or productivity

 changes and as           such should be subtracted from             the third term of the

 expression on the right of (3.9) (i.e., from (Epk(t) _pk(t_1))/pk(t_l)).

 Also, if the positive mean of lrk(t) measures quality changes it,

 should       really not he viewed         as capital gains on the entire stock
                                           —29—



since pk(t) represents the price of the marginal units rather than

the price of the stock. We have elected. to leave the specificatioi

as developed in equation (3.9) since two tests are readily available

to us: by (3.9) all the expressions on the right hand of (3.9) must

have the same coefficient which we shall denote by .                    This   means

that the coefficient of 7rk(t —              1)    is 8(6 — 1)   enabling us to

identify 6 and test its difference from 1. We can now summarize

the specification of the basic model. To do that note from (3.2a) that



(3.11) (1 —                  =r   + (1 -



Thus using (3.11) we obtain


 3. 12)       (1
                               pk(tt
                       (t —1)) p(t—i)Y(t-l) (EY(t)_(t_1))
                                                y(t—l)

          —   r (t —1)(Ey(t)—y(t—l))
                          y(t—l)
                                                            w(t1)L(t1) (EY(t).Y(t_1))
                                             + ( 1—i ( t_l)p(t_l)K(t_l)
                                                          )
                                                                            y(tl)

Now in order to combine (3.11) and (3.9) define



                            -T Ct —l ))w(t_1)r.i(t_1)                       Ey(t)—y(t—l)
              Ct) —    (1                                   [Ew(t)_w(t_l) —
                                      pk(t_l)K(t_l)            w(t—1)            y(t—1)

          x2(t)
                   =                (ET(t)-       T(t-l))


               -
          X3 t —       r(t-l)[Epk(t)Pk(t1)
                                pk(t1)
                                                       — Fr(t)-y(t-l)1
                                                              y(t—l)

then equation (3.1) combined with (3.6), (3.9) arid (3.10) and (3.12)

can be written
                                          —30—



                        -   1•)
                                      [r*r(tl)] -[x1(t) + x2(t) + x3(tfl
                                      -      - )iTk(t -     1)


We shall in fact    estimate an equation like

())        p(t)                   =       - ar(t   -   1)    1x1(t) -   2x2(t)
                                      -
                                          3x3(t)
                                                   -
                                                       1k(t - i)

but   restrict 1 =       =            and   test the hypothesis      5 = 1.



        3.b The Effect of Demaid             and   the   Concept of. "Basic   Inflation"

        Our theoretical      development in the previous section indicates

that small fluctuations in demand will result in fluctuations in output

rather than prices. However, this does not contradict the possible

traditional effects on the rate of price changes that may be caused

by fluctuations in excess demand particularly if such fluctuations

are large and     unexpected      in intensity and duration. Under the pressure

of fluctuations in excess demand the atoniistic market forces may

complement or weaken the complex process of forming correlated pricing

strategies. Thus what we are stressing here is the fact that factors

of excess demand should be viewed as operating on the rate of inflation

independently of the effects of the profit gap. These two factors

can either intensify or cancel out each other. Since the empirical

analysis which is carried out below covers the period l9O9-l97 one
                                             —31—



would   expect    that some of the intense fluctuations in excess demand

were important explanatory factors of inflation during the period

of study.

        We shall use the unemployment rate u(t) as a proxy measure

of the fluctuations in excess demand and add this variable to

equation (3.13).

        The introduction of demand considerations changes, however, the

dynamic structure of equation (3.13). A critical element in the

specification is the assumption of no intercept. It then follows that

when r(t —    i) = r*, x1(t) = x2(t) = x3(t) = 0 and S = 1 then
p(t)    = p(t-.
               i). Thus in order to preserve the dynamic interpretation
of (3.13) we need to measure not u(t) by itself but the difference

between u(t) and u*_the normal level of unemployment associated

with 0 excess aggregate demand when r* =                        r(t   —   1)    and

                   =           = 0.      Under the hypothesis                  = 1   we can thus
x1(t) =   x2(t)        x3(t)
rewrite   our    model with demand effects in the following form:



(3.15)      t)-(t-i)
                                    +    y[u(t) —u]

with model (3.15) we can now define the concept of "basic inflation"

b(t) to be


(3.16)      b(t) =     c4r*    —   r(t   —   1)1 + y[u(t)   —
                                 —32—




Since   neither the target profit rate._r* nor the normal, 0 excess

demand unemployment rate -u are observable it is clear that by

estimating (3.15) with an unrestricted intercept we shall be estimating

the expression


                            ar*_yu*

and this means that r* and u* are not identifiable. We do have,

however, some idea of what a reasonable range for u can be and in

most of the calculations below we shall assume u =            5%   and then

estimate the corresponding value of r*.

        Apart from the identification issue it is the "basic inflation"

factor b(t) which plays the crucial role in this research and we

need to amplify this point now.

        We note first that in the present paper we are not attempting

to explain what pushes wages and other cost in response to change in

output prices. What is proposed here is that even if there were no

expected increase in cost thus x1(t) =               =           = 0   there wifl
                                             x2(t)       x3(t)
till be a residual factor, namely the "basic inflation" b(t), which

will continue to exert pressure on prices and in this sense the factors

of the profit gap and excess demand are viewed as causiflg inflation.

Obviously, once the inflationary process gets started the feedback

between prices and wages and other cost may attain a much greater

quantitative weight than the "basic" component of inflation. In order

to understand    more fully the relative importance of the "basic" and
the   "feedback" components of   inflation   the present model will need
                                     —33—




to be expanded and completed. This we expect to do later. In the
present paper we shall be able to provide a quantitative measure
of the "basic" component.


        3.c Other Exogenous Factors
        In addition to the unemployment rate as a proxy to fluctuation
in   excess demand we shall   also   test the possible independent effect

of the growth rate of real GNP (i.e. (y(t) —        y(t   —   i)/y(t   —
                                                                           1)) since
the rate of unemployment and the growth rate are not           perfectly correlated.
         The data to be used in this study covers the U.S. economy

during the period l9O9_l971 and during this period we isolated

four episodes which could represent special situations:

         (1) WW1 = a dummy variable taking the value 1 for the

                    years 1917—1918 measuring the special circum-

                    stances of the years     of   the first World War.

        (ii) WW2 = a dummy variable taking the value 1 for the

                    war years l9I2_l945 and measuring in fact the

                    effect of price controls during the war.

       (iii) d1 = a dummy variable taking the value 1 for the year
                    l946 to indicate the year in which price controls

                    were removed.

        (iv) d2 = a dummy variable taking the value 1 for the
                    year 1951 to measure the effect of the unexpected

                    Korean War.
                             —34—



       3.d Simultaneous Equation Bias

      We view the price determination model as part of a larger

system which simultaneously determines the inflation rate, the wage

rate w(t), the output level Y(t), the tax rate T(t), the price of

capital goods pk(t) and the unemployment rate u(t). In the esti-

mation procedure to be used, these are always treated as endogenous

variables to be replaced by corresponding instrumental variables.

The list of exogenous variables used in the estimated first stage

equations is given in the Appendix. In equation (3.9) the expected

values Ew(t), Et(t), Ep(t) and EY(t) are all estimated with an

instrumental variables procedure and are then used in the second

stage for the estimation of the price equation.



1.     Estimation and Empirical Results

       As indicated earlier we estimate our basic model using annual

U.S. data for l9O9l97'1. The three subsections here will present

the estimates of the basic model and those of variants allowing for

different lag structure and the effect of import prices.



       1.a Estimation I: Model (3.15)

      Table 1 presents the result of using 2 stage least squares methods

to estimate model (3.15) as discussed above. In choosing the data

for r(t) we examined both the post-tax gross and net rates of return

on capital, the difference between them being the treatment of deprcia—

tion. These two variables are obviously highly correlated and in
p



                                                                 —35—


                                                               Table 1

                                          2SLS       Estimates     of Model (3.15)


                                    Gross Rate of Return                                 Net Rate of Return

    Variables                     1                    2                 3           1            2             3
                                                 -
    Constant                    .13142               .1142          .1391        .0533          .014145       .08314
                            (.0398)              (.01409)          (.0219)      (.0263)        (.0269)     (.0206)
    r(t—1)                 —1.9070             1.7114].          _2.014614     8226           —.7873      —1.2913
                            (.56142)             (.5865)           (.14297)     (.3879)        (.14016)    (.3363)
                           2.57514               14.0053          14.0212       2.1252         3.1281     3.1237
    x1(t)
                            (.7036).             (.141478)         (.141462)    (.5705)        (.3659)     (.3rr5)
                           2.57514               4.0053           14.0212       2.1252         3.1281     3.1237
    x2(t)
                            (.7036)              (.14478)          (.141462)    (.5705)        (.3659)     (.3775)

                           2.57514               14.0053          14.0212      2.1252          3.1281     3.1237
    x3(t)
                            (.7036)              (.14478)          (.4462)      (.5705)        (.3659)     (.3775)
                             .5286                                               .4690                         —
                            (.2068)                        .
                                                                                (.2095)
    u(t)                   —.4585                —.3382           — .14154      —. 3172        — .2312    —.42149'
                            (.1535)              (.1533)           (.1219)      (.1593)        (.1602)     (.1366)
    Y(t)                        .014814           .0868                          .18142         .2082
     Y(t)                   (.1002)              (.1039)                        (.0941)        (.0969)
    WW].                     .1582                .1272             .1402        .1321          .1128       .1390
                            (.0308)              (.0297)           (.0252)      (.0281)        (.0277)     (.0257)
    WW2                         .0211                .00147         .0105        .00614        —.0087       .0051
                            (.0175)              (.0170)           (.0155)      (.0180)        (.0173)     (.0166)
                             .0167             — .0086            .-.0190         .0137        —.0072     —.0407
                            (.0353)              (.0355)           (.0332)      (.0370)        (o371)      (.03147)

                           —.01145             —.0033             — .ooi6       — .0136        — .00141     .0009
    a2
                            (.0280)              (.0290)           (.0289)      (.0292)        (.0299)     (.0308)
      Test of                              .                                                       -
    Restrictions
    t value for                 .2983 .              .2153          .6287        .2570          .50114     1.14688

         81—82
    t value      for            .6810                .0998          .4625       1.1393          .0263         .7608
      82 =
                83
    F    value for              .3860                .04141         .21814       .2108          .5735         .1731
     818283
    against no
    restriction
    Estimated Model
      Parameters (under               u .05)
            r*                                       .057           .058         .o146           .0142        .048
                                .058
            a               1.9070               1.71141           2.014614      .8226           .7873     1.2913

            B          .    2.57514              14.0053           14.0212      2.1252         3.1281      3.1237

                                .79148                —                 —        .7793            —            —


    Mean    Square          .   .00072               .00080         .00079       .00079          .00085       .00091
         Error
                                           —36—




principle     it should matter little which one we select. However, since

the depreciation rate is really an endogenous policy variable, the

net rate of return is influenced by the way accounting methods of depre-

ciatiOn change over time and the tax treatment of these changes.                      This

means   that   the reported net rate of return may provide an inaccurate

picture of the true profitability of the firm. The example of accelerated.

depreciation provides a particularly sharp demonstration how inappropriate

is the net rate to our purpose. Here accelerated depreciation increases

the true profitability of the firm due to reduced taxes but it                    decreases

the reported after-tax net rate of return on capital. Due to these
considerations we accept in this work the gross rate as a basis for
analysis     and all the discussion in later sections is based on the results

of the "gross" equations. We present the estimates for the "net" equa—

tions in Table 1 only. Note that as far as the goodness of fit is

concerned the gross rate of return provides a better statistical fit

to models (3.15) and (1.3)            below.
            We must first dispose of the question of testing the hypothesis

cS =   1.    The estimated value of          S    is .T9148   in   the "gross" equation

and      .T793   in   the "net"   equation. Recall from (3.13) that if we denote
 the coefficient of lrk(t         —   1)    by y then the true        relation   is


 (.i)                                 (1-6)=
       Bao's theorem (see Dhrymes          [l971], Proposition 6, pages      112—113) the
 By

 random variable (i        —   ) has       an asymptotic normal      distribution with a


 variance      given by the expression
                                  -37-



                             1'      1


(Li)
                            _i     __x_




where        is the estimated variance covariance matrix of the vector
(y,8).   Calculating the standard deviation of (1 —       6), we find that    it

is   .1291 for the "gross" model (thus the t value       is 1.5859) and
.11496 for   the "net" case (resulting in a t value of l.471414). In
either   one of the two cases 6 is not significantly different from 1.

This leads us to accept the hypothesis 6 = 1         and. proceed in the rest

of this paper to analyze the model under this restriction. The conclu-

sion to ignore the variable Trk(t —       i)   is reinforced by our earlier

doubts about its interpretation.

         Before proceeding to the analysis of our basic model note the

two variables u(t) and Ay(t)/Y(t). These variables represent the

fluctuations in demand and these are clearly important. The unemploy-

ment variable has a negative coefficient which is statistically signifi-

cant while the growth rate of real output is positive and not significant.ui'

Furthermore, since AY(t)/Y(t)      is    correlated with u(t) the removal

of LiY(t)/Y(t) increases the coefficient of u(t) and reduces the

standard errors of other variables. We thus conclude that the effect

of variations in demand on the rate of inflation is statistically

significant and will be represented by the unemployment variable only.

We thus restrict our discussion to equations type 3 in Table 1.
                               —38-



       Turning now to the evaluation of the model parameters we note

that in the 'Tgross" equation 3, r .068,      =   2.0146)4   and B = 14.0212.

Since the mean value of the gross rate of return r(t) is .051414

the difference between the target r* and .0514)4 is of great interest

and we return to this question later. On the other hand, the basic

restrictions proposed by the model i.e. B1 = B2 =              B are justified
                                                  B3
by the passage of their significance tests.

       The crucial variable of our model is r(t — 1)          and. as suggested

earlier the essential test of our model is represented by the sign and

size of its coefficient. We find that & = 2.014614      representing a

major trade—off between the rate of inflation arid the rate of profits:

for each 1 percentage point variation in the gross profit rate this

model suggests an induced change of 2 percentage points in the inflation

rate. Interestingly enough the value of B is estimated to be around

14, indicating an extremely rapid rate of price reaction to current

changes in the profit rate due to cost. This major difference between

a and B is interesting and we shall return to it below after reviewing

all the eniprical results. The net effect of fluctuations in demand

is interesting. The unemployment rate has a significant net negative

effect on the rate of inflation and the estimate of —.141514 is important.

It suggests that in order to reduce the inflation rate by 1 percentage

point the unemployment rate will need to rise by 2.14 percentage points!

This is a much more extreme trade—off than is familiar from the Phillips

curve literature.

       Finally the dummy variables describing the "special" episodes

contribute little except for the first world war. We find this to be
                                   —39—




an encouraging result suggesting that the variations in the rate of

inflation are well explained by the other variables of the model.



        l.b Estimation II: The Indirect Effect of Import Cost

        Our theory of endogenous inflation rate relates to the prices

of all domestically produced commodities over which producers have

control. The variable which measures this rate of inflation is.

the GNP deflator which measures the price index of domestic

value added. Because of this we used the GNF price deflator for p(t)

and the GNP itself for y(t). It is crucial to note that the GNP

deflator is totally unresponsive to the direct changes in import prices.

To see this note that nominal GNP is the sum of consumption, investment,

government   expenditures and exports minus imports. If the price of
imports rises while all quantities do not change then both the nominal
as   well as the real GNP do not change explaining why the deflator is

not directly sensitive to the changes in the price of imports.

         The critical observation which should be made is that changes in the

prices of imports could influence the prices of domestic value added only

via their effects on profitability. Thus, if we think of all imports as

if they were producer goods used in the production of domestic commodities,

then we can define "output" by the expression


             = consumption   + investment + governnent expenditures + exports


and think of p as     the price deflator of this quantity. On this basis

we have the identity
                                       —140—




            p(t)Y(t)   -   Imports     p(t)Y(t)


and therefore


                                —    w(t)L(t)   — p   (t)i (t)
(14.2)      r(t) =                                               (1-

where

         pim(t) =    price   of import goods

         i(t) = volume        of imports

         p(t)
                =    the   price deflator of the aggregate value of consumption,

                     investment,     government expenditures and exports.

Since p     is a domestic price which is controlled by domestic producers

                                         variable and do not assume that any
we think of it as an endogenouS
                                        should necessarily induce a corresponding
 change in the price of imports

 change in p. We can thus conclude that a rise in pim(t) ——the price
                                                         will not change the GNP
 of imports—-without changing domestic prices

 or   the price deflator but it will reduce total profits! This suggests

 that our   theory   of domestic inflation should consider the effect of

 changes in the price of imports not in terms of the direct effect of

 import prices on commodity prices in the domestic markets, but rather

 in terms of the indireç effect of such price changes on domestic

 profitability. To accomplish this we need to redefine model (3.13) with

 the aid of definition (14.2). To do this, define
                                           _14_




                               - 1))W(t1)L(t—3) [EW(t)W(t1) -                Ey(t)—y(t.—1)
            (t) -   (1 -T Ct                                                        y(t-l)
       xl
                —
                                       pk(t_t1)   v(t-i)


       x2(t) =      1t()(ET(t)T(t1))
            Ct) —
                -   r Ct —                               —   Ey(t)-y(tl)1
                                                               y(t—l)
       x3                               pk(t1)
                                                                                    — (t)-y(t-l)
            (t) -   (1 —t    Ct 1))PImm[ImIm
                                p(ti)K(tl) pim(t_1)
                                  —
                                                                                        y(t—l)

and with these definitions we can rewrite the price adjustment model as

follows:



()     pCt)-p(t-1)            =


                                  +   y[u(t) — u*]   +
                                                         yl   +       + Y3 + yd2

Table 2 presents the results of estimating equation (l.3). A comparison
                                                                                     are basi-
of Tables 1 and 2 indicates that the estimates of r, ct and

cally the same except that the mean square error in Table 2 is some 35%

lower than in Table 1 and the standard errors of the coefficients are much

lower. Thusthe estimates of model (.3) suggests an improvement in effi-

ciency overmodel (3.13). It is also encouraging that the basic test of the

restrictions l =                  =3=         =      leads to accepting all of them. We

                                                                            while
have separately tested the null hypothesis 1
                                                                  =
                                                                      2=
and         unrestricted. We find that the F test of the hypothesis

                                        no restrictions leads to the acceptance
   =
       2= 3=                 against
of the equality of all the 3•
                                Table 2

    2SLS Estimates of Model ()4.3) with Import Variable
                          Gross Rate of Return
         Variables
         Constant                                 .11416
                                              (.0225)
         r(t —       i)                      —2.0345
                                                 (.3)468)

          x (t)                                  3.73)47
                                                 (.3205)
          x
           2
               (t)                               3.73)47
                                                 (.3205)
          x    (t)                               3.73)47
                                                 (.3205)
                                                 3.73)47
          x)4(t)
                                                 (.3205)

           u(t)                                  —.14)467
                                                 (.0975)
           wwi                                    .1)4214
                                                 (.0205)
           WW2                                     .0105
                                                 (.0126)

              d                                  —.0115
               1                                 (.0266)
                                                 — .0059
                                                  (.0236)

     Test of Restrictions
t   value for 1 =           2                      .2764

t   value for 2           =
                            3                      .1348
t value for               =                        .14832

F value for                       =                .1031
                          2
    against no restrictions

 Estimated Model Parameters
                r*                                 .059
                                                  2.0345
                                                  3.73147

       Mean Square Error                           .00053
                                  .)4 3_




        c    Estimation III: The Lag Structure and. Serial Correlation
      The "profit     gap" in equation (3.11)          is defined by [r—r(t—ifl.
If firms take longer than 1 period to establish what the profit rate
is we may replace r(t — 1) by an expression r(t — 1) defined by
                                               J
                             r(t-l)            ir(t-l-i)
                                               j=l

                                                     also arise from the time it
The need for a longer lag structure may
                                                             However the results in
takes to establish a correlated price strateJ.

Table 3 which give the estimates for J2 suggest that a longer lag

is not needed.
                                                                                     =
       We have also tested a Koyck type distributed lag in which

0 < X < 1.     The results were inconsistent and. unsatisfactory convincing

                                           =
us to reject the possibility of J

       The    fact   that the profit-lag is short suggests that firms

establish    their   pricing strategies rather quickly. This conclusion

 is particularly interesting in view of the long duration of an infla—

 tionary process. The conclusion of short rather than long profit lags

 raises the possibility of no lag at all suggesting to define the

 profit gap by the expression [r* —            r(t)1.    We have rejected this

 formulation as inappropriate for our theory and the reason is now given.

        In order to think of the profit gap as                      a formation of

 a price adjusting correlated strategy there must be a time lag between

 the observations made on the profit rate and the actual price adjustment.
                                       Table 3
           2SLS EStimates of Model (14.3)    vith Longer Lag Structure
                              Gross   Rate of Reti.rn

Variables                                        2 Lag Model

Constant                                            .l40l
                                                   (.0230)
r(t —      1)                                    —1.60214
                                                   (.6230)
r(t —      2)                                     —.14133
                                                   (.14727)

x1(t)
                                                   3.7585
                                                   (.32914)
x Ct)
    2                                              3.7585
                                                   (.32914)

x Ct)                                              3.7585
 3
                                                   (.32914)

x (-t)                                             3.7585
                                                   (.32914)
u(t)                                                .14306
                                                   (.1033)
ww1                                                 .1333
                                                   (.0238)
WW2                                                 .0067
                                                   (.0135)
                                                   —.0110
dl
                                                   (.0239)
d                                                  —.0053
    2
                                                   (.0239)
Test of Restrictions
t       value for        82
                                                    .0077
t       value for   82   83
                                                    .05146

t value for 83 =                                    .17140
F value for             82 = 8 =                    .0272
        against no restrictions
Estimated        Model Parameters
                r* (vith u = .05)                   .059
                a                                  2.0157
                8                                  3.7585

Mean Square Error                                  .000514
                                  -145-




This time lag measures the rate at which information flows among firms

and decisions are made. Given the fact that it takes firms     a   signifi—

cant amount of time to discover their own profit rate and even longer

to establish the profit rates of their competitors it is clear that

some time lag must be allowed and in the context of our theory the

profit   rate of a firm and its price adjustment strater cannot possibly
be assumed to be simultaneously determined. What may cause a problem
is the annual structure of our data and the possibility that the time
lag is less than one year. If one goes to the other extreme and assumes
no time lag, then, holding all other variables constant, the definition
of   r(t) in (3..2a) or (14.2) establishes in the annual data used here

an accounting identity between r(t) and p(t). With this, no

causal relationship between them would make any    sense.   Inspite of our

own reasons     to reject the no lag model the interested reader may   find

in Table 14 the results for the simultaneous equations estimates of

model (14.3) with no lag. However, the main objective of Table 14 is

to present the results of reestimating model (14.3) with a correction

for serial correlation. The procedure adopted here is based on Fair

[1910] (Section 3).

         As Table 14 shows, the results for the one year lag model with

full correction for serial correlation are very similar to the results

in   Table 2.
                             Table l

    2LS Estimates     for Model (1.3)       with   Import Variable
 Gross Rate of Return, Correction for Serial Correlation


Variables.                   One    Year Lag                 No Lag

Constant                            .138lL
                                                             —   .002
                                   (.0231)                    (.o'75)

r(t)                                                             .3886
                                                              (.7201)
r(t —     1)                      _l.911.12
                                   (.3561)

x1(t)                              3.5929                     3.5508
                                   (.283)                     (*3557)
                                   3.5929                     3.5508
x2(t)                              (.28li3)                   (.3557)
x   (t)                            3.5929                     3.5508
                                   (.28'3)                    (.35r)
                                   3.5929                     3.5508
x14(t)                                                        (.3557)
                                   (.28143)

u(t)                               —.14518                    —.1262
                                   (.ioi6)                    (.i8i14)
WW1                                  .1269                      .0687
                                   (.0193)                    (.0318)
WW2                                  .0092                    — .0089
                                   (.0138)                    (.02014)

                                   — .0127                    —. 0423
                                   (.0233)                    (.0267)
                                   — .0007                       .0U0
                                   (.0208)                    (.02142)
                                                              — .3902
p—Autoregressive parameter — .2396
                                   (.1223)                    (.n6o)

Estimated      Model Parameters
          r* (with u = .05)          .060                        .027

                                   1.91412                    —.3886
                                    3.5929                    3.5508

Mean Square Error                    .00014142                   .000658.
                                      —4 7—




5.       Implications   of the Empirical Results

         This section will draw a few of the immediate implications of our

results. Deeper analysis relating to a general equilibrium model of

the U.S. economy will be postponed to another paper.



         5.a The Trade—Off between Inflation and Profitability

        The stochastic form of (li.3) can be written in the following way:



(5')    p(t)-p(t-l) =       [r*r(tl)]+B[Ep(R(t))R(t_l)I+ Y[u(t)u*]
                            +
                                Y1wl+Y2w2+13d1+yd2+c(t)

In order to isolate the effect of the "profit gap" [r* —        r(t — in
in   relation to c(-t) we can define the "adjusted rate of inflation" as



(5.2) (t) =      P(t)-P(t-1)      -   [Ep(R(t-Rt-1)I - y[u(t)u*I_y,1
                  —
                    122 — y3d1—y1d2
             =    ct[r — r(t — 1)] + (t)

Thus i(t)    is    the inflation rate corrected for all the variables except

for the profit gap. Now given the estimates of r*, a,
                                                                    y, 2' 3
and        we calculate (t)—-the estimated value of (t) and plot

it against r(t —      1).   Using the equation (-i..3) with imports, Diagram 4

presents   the scatter for the gross rate of return equation. The scales

of     (t) and r(t — 1)         are the same so that the slope of the scatter

is the actual slope measured by c. One notes that the negative

slope is distinct and even the extreme points fit the slope well.
0.t5 +
       1


0.13 +
                                       *
0.11 +

0.09+
                 *
                              * *.
0.07+                *        *
       I                  **
                            *
0.05 +                    ***
           I                           *
o.oa+                    *

           I                      **               *
0.01   +
                                   *               *
     I.
—0.01+
           I
                                       *
                                           *
                                                   *
                                                       *

           I                                   *
—0.03 +

—0.05 +
           I
                                                           *.
—0.07 +


—0.09 +                                                    *

                         —+            —+          —+      —+   —+   —+   — +—-
           ——+
           0.02       0.0k 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 Olt& 0.16

                                               Diagram 1

                                  Gross Rate of Return
Clearly every percentage point change in the profit gap causes a

2.0345 percentage point change in the inflation rate which is measured

by the GNP   deflator.   This is a large effect and. a major trade off

indeed.



          5.b The Rate of Basic Inflation

          Let us disregard, for the moment, the variables wi, ww2, dl

and d2 and write the estimated model in the following way:



(5.1)         =   2.O3S[r*_r(t_l)]+3.T3T[EP(B(t))(t)]_6T[u(t)_u*}

Then one can see that the implied relationship between      r* and u

is illustrated in the following table:

                            u               r*

                           0.00             .0690
                             .01            .0668

                             .02            .o616
                             .03            .o621
                                            .0602
                             .05            .0580
                             .06            .0558


 keep in mind that u* is important to our model only to the extent

 that it is a proxy for the condition of no excess demands. If we could

 observe excess demands directly, we would have estimated the model with

 this variable and would have derived the target profit rate from it

 as proposed above in (5.1).
                                            —50--




            The   key explanatory variable          in our theory is the "basic inflation"

rate defined in (3.16) and           is estimated         to be


                     b(t)        .i1i6 —   2.0345r(t—1)— .l6Tu(t)

In practice it is this variable which is the focus of this research

since it      measures       the basic inflationary pressures which are present

even    without the feedback of the cost—price spiral. To understand
this, point note again that in this paper we are not attempting to
explain what pushes tip wages and other cost. What we have established
is that even if we take the cost increases as given, there are basic
inflationary forces at work even if costs do not rise. Since the "basic
inflation" measures these forces it                 has   the character of being a cause
for inflation. To indicate the relative importance of the "basic
inflation" as an explanatory factor of total inflation let us calculate

it    for   recent years:

Year               Inflation                Basic                 Basic Inflation as a
                     Rate                  Inflation               Fraction of Total
1967                 2.9%                    —.2%                         —6%


1968                  ]4.5                     .7                          16

                                             1.6 '                          32
1969                  5.0

1970                  5.)4                   2.0                            37

1971                  5.1                    2.1

1972                  li.l                   1.7
1973                  5.9                    2.0                            3)4



19714                 9.7                    1.5                            15
                                   —51—




         5.c    The Adjustment Rates

         Since both [r* —    r(t — i)]    and [E(R(t)) — R(t —    i)]    measure

profitability gaps (in percentages) one would expect a and                to

be similar in magnitude. It is an interesting fact that our

estimate of a is about 2 while the estimate for              is about 3.7.

This   result means that a change in the profit rate due to changes in

current cost induces a response which is almost twice as fast as the

response to an accumulation of factors (some random) which resulted in

inequality between r* and r(t —           i).   Putting this same thing differently

there is a significant difference between adjusting prices in response

to changes in cost which provide an observed signal to a]], and adjusting

prices in response to an accumulation of factors which create a

profitability gap. In view of the delicate process of forming a

pricing strater this result is not totally surprising.

          The   basic explanation to the phenomenon at hand is related to
the    way information is passed among the participants in the market and to

the way it is being perceived. Rising cost is a very simple and uniform

signal    which is clearly seen and understood by all      and would   thus generate
a uniform response regardless whether r* >          r(t) or r* < r(t).      On

the    other hand the existence of a profit gap will induce a more subtle

and complex process and there are three main reasons why the estimated

a may be smaller than :

          (1) it takes time for information to pass and to have all the

                 participants agree to adhere to a price adjustment strategy.
                                               —52—



                   During such a transition period there will be no observ-ed

                   response to a profitability gap

            (ii) since the process involves some uncertainties, even after

                   the adoption of a price adjustment strategy the tendency

                   would   be   to move slowly and to check that all are following

                   the strategy.         If prices are raised too fast some participants

                   may be reluctant to follow due to the risk involved

           (iii) the estimated coefficient a represents average reponses

                   when r* >      r(t)    and r* <       r(t).     It is possible that when

                   r(t) >   r*   the response tends to be slower than when r* >                r(t)
                   in which case the mean can be smaller than .



             5.d   Classification of Inflations

            Although we have made little use of the distinction between cost—

push and demand-pull inflations we do think that periods of rapid price

changes can be classified into different categories. However, in using

our model         for that purpose we have a slight terminological problem since
both       the profit gap [r* —          r(t   —
                                                   1)]   and the   expected gap {E(R(t)) —
R(t    —    i)]    are influenced by cost. For this reason we shall not use the

terminology        of "cost—push" inflation.
            We suggest      that an interesting classification of inflations can

be made by comparing the contribution of demand, measured by the rate of

unemployment, with the contributions of the profit gap [r* —                       r(t   —   ifl
to the inflation rate. If an inflation or a deflation is dominated by

demand we say that it is "demand induced" and if it is dominated by

the    profit gap we say that it is "profitability induced."
                                    —53—



To do this define


              (t) = 2.03l15[r* —   r(t   —   1)] with      r* = .0579

              d(t) = .l67[u* —     u(t)]             with u = .05


Here %(t) measures the inflationary pressures due to profitability

and c(t) measures the pressures due to demand. On this basis we

suggest the following classification:

        (i) Demand Induced Inflation: if               d(t)   >   (t), (t) > 0    and

                )(t)/p(t) >    0

        (ii) Demand Induced Deflation: if t) <                    (t), (t) < 0    and

                (t)/p(t)   <0
       (iii) Profitability Induced Inflation: if (t) >                  (t), t(t) > 0
                and (t)/p(t) > 0
        (iv)    Profitability Induced Deflation: if (t) < d(t),                (t) < 0
                and (t)/p(t) < .0.
         If an inflationary period does not satisfy any of the above we

shall   call it "ambiguous." On      the other hand if d(t) and

have   the same sign but are within        .5   of   each other we shall classify such

a   period as "both" because the classification           depends upon the selection

of   the unemployment rate u and we certainly regard the selection of
     = .05     as arbitrary.
         In    the analysis below we consider all         years   during l9O9—l9T4 in

which p(t)/p(t)        exceeded 3% in absolute value. The tables record the

 values of (t), d(t) and the implied classification.
                                    -5'-

                        Period 1:    1909—1929

Year       (t)/p(t)      d(t)
                                     (t)                Classification. of Price Changes

1912         3.9%        ÷.i8        +.85                    Profitability induced
                                               •

1915         3.2        —1.58       +2.22                    Profitability induced
1916.       12.8         —.05        —.37                    Ambiguous
1911        23.2         ÷18        —3.72                    Demand induced
1918        16.5        +1.62       —8.09                    Demand induced
1919         2.5        +1.62       —8.16                    Demand induced
1920        13.9         —.09                                Ambiguous
1921       —i4.8        -.3.02       —.31                    Demand induced
1922        —5.5         —.77       +1.75                    Demand induced
1923         2.8        +1.17       +2.3k                .
                                                             Profitability   induced


We may note that the period 1911-1922 appears to have very irregular

variations in the price level arid     in   the estimated model (1i.3)          the    dummy

variable   for the first world war is significant with a coefficient of

ii.8%.   Thus a good part of the inflation in this period seems to be
explained by the special circumstances of the war economy.


                          Period 2: 1929_19140

Year       p(t)/p(t)                  (t —         i)         Classification of Price Chang

             —2.6%       —i.6i              —.59                 Demand induced
1930
1931         —9.1        1.6)-              1.08                 Demand induced

            —10.3         —7.88             2.95                 Demand induced
1932
             —2.2         —7.02             6.27                 Demand induced
1933
1934          7J                            6.8                   Profitability induced

1935               .9     —)-l.14           5.21                  Profitability induced

                          —2.21             3.97                  Profitabili.ty induced
 1936              .2

 1937          1.2        —1.85             3.07                  Profitability induced

               —.1        —3.38             3.01                  Demand induced
 1938
                                      —55-.




          This period is interesting in the fact that during 1930—1938 demand

forces appear to exert pressures on price declines while profitability

was   exerting pressures on prices to rise. The outcome appears to be
divided: the early period (1930-1933) exhibits the domination of demand
factors while the later period shows the domination of profitability
factors. This period provides unusual demonstration of the key element

of our theory: inspite     of    a 16% unemployment rate in 1931i. inflation
was proceeding    at an annual rate of 7.14%         (!)   and   the low profitability
of that era is the important factor in explaining it.
                          Period 3: 19111—1967
          During this period the effects of price controls during the war
and the    effects of removing      the controls in l9l1.6—l1.7——all cause a slight
distortion; the high inflation rate in 19146_l1.T is a bit abnormal and is
mostly explained by the rapid rise in wages immediately after the war
Year        p(t)/p(t)                                  Classification     of Price Changes
                          d(t)           (t)
191.1.1        7.5%        —.11.5        +2.11.0            Profitability induced
1911.2        12.3         +.86           1.95              Profitability induced
1911.3         7.0        +1.11.11.       —.39              Demand induced
191414         2.6        +1.71          _2.11.11.          Demand induced
l945           2.6        +1.140         —14.52             Demand induced
19146         11.7          +.50         —3.50              Demand induced
191.1.7       12.8          +.50         +1.20              Profitability induced
19)48          6.9          +.514        +1.79              Profitability induced


1951           6.8                       +1.2)4             Both


1956           3.1          +J11           +•77             Both

1957           3.14         +.32           —.143            Demand   induced
                                —56—



                        Period 14:     1968_19114

Year     (t)/p(t)                    (t)       Classification of Price Chang

1968        14.5%       +.63          +.08          Demand induced

1969        5.0         +.68          +.85          Both

1970        5.14        +.05         +1.19          Profitability induced

1971        5.1         —.141        +2.314         Profitability induced

1972.       14.1        — .27        +1.89          Profitability induced

1973        5.9         +.05         +1.73.         Profitability induced

19714       97.         —.27         +1.69          Profitability induced


The most distinct feature of the 1966—19714 period is the sharp decline

of the profit rate from the peak of 6.2% in 1966 to 14.5% in 19714.

Our model suggests that by 1970 the rate of price increase switched

from being demand induced to being profitability induced.



        5.6 The Anatomy of Inflation 1971-1977

        We now use model (14.3) to predict the inflation rates for the

period 1975-1971. Since we do not have updated information for all the

independent variables used in the first stage, we shall use in the

predictions below the actual italues of the variables on the right hand

side of (14.3). In order to aid the comparability of the results we

also present the corresponding values for the period 1971—19714 the data

for which was used in the estimation.

        Table 5 presents the results. One may note that apart from

l974-1915 the prediction error is not large. The negative error in

 19714 resulted from the fact that the model responded to the large

 cost increases in 19714 faster than the economy. Thus it took the
                                    —57--




                                 Table 5

                   Analysis of   Inflation      1971—197T


                           1971         1972    1973     19Th.    1975    1976   1977

    Actual                                      5.80%    9.69%   9.62%   5.27%   5.56%
                           5.10%      h..1hi%
Inflation Rate

  Predicted                                                      7.10    b.52    5.63
Inflation Rate
                           1.16       5.02      5.86    ii.68       .

Decomposition
of Prediction
  Due to the Profit Gap    2.h7%      2.04%     1.87%    1.92%   2.61%   2.05%   1.91%

  Due to demand                       —.27      —.05     —.27    —1.56   —1.21    .89


  Expected Increased       2.32       3.10      3.29     7.76    5.68     3.71   1i.2T

  Gap due to Domestic
  Cost

                            .06         .i1      .65     2.27      .37            .31
  Expected Increase Gap
  due to Import Cost

  Error =   Actual          .6hi.      —.88     —.06    —1.72     2.52     .75   —.07
            — Predicted




economy an extra year to absorb the extra—ordinarily high rate of
10.7% wage increase and 50.b% increase in the unit price           of imports.
Due to this   temporary adjustment period the model prediction is above

the actual rate in l971 and below the actual rate in 1975.

         The analysis shows that the profit gap has accounted consistently

for some 2—2.5 percentage points of the inflation rate during this period.

The effect of demand has been more volatile arid so has been the cost

components. It is perhaps worth indicating that the 2.27% contributions
                                  —58—




of   imports in 1974   should be understood to   mean that the rise of import

cost, in. causing a potential decline in the profit rate has induced a

price increase in the domestic value added of GNP due simply to the sub-

stitutability between imported and domestic commodities.        This should not

be confused with the direct increase in the price level due to the direct

increase in the imported component of the price index resulting from

the rise of import prices. Such a component does not exist in the

GNP   deflator   and. is excluded from analysis here.

         Using our earlier classification, the inflation of 1971—1977

would   certainly   be viewed as profitability induced. Clearly the com-

ponent which we called "basic inflation" has contributed significantly

during this period as the following shows:

                                                      Basic Inflation as
         Year               Basic Inflation         a Fraction of the Total

         1971                    207%                         1l%

         1972                    1.77

         1973                    1.82                         32

         19T1                    1.65                         17
         1975                    1.05                         11
         1976                      .81                        16
                                 1.02                         18
         1977

                                                       inflation in the
What is interesting here is that the fraction of basic

total falls from 1971 to 1975 and then rises again.         This is partly

 caused by the recorded unemployment rate which has undergone structural

 changes due to the labor supply of women and teen—agers.          This factor
                                   —59--




really causes a distortion of the explanator?T power of unemployment to
inflation. However the observed pattern may also suggest that once
the    inflationary process starts it tends to become dominated by the

feedback component. We note that by 1975 the basic inflation component

has declined to 11% of the total and one might suggest that the rise

of    this component after 1975 would represent a resurgence of inflationary
forces    beyond 1977.

          Clearly these are only conjectures which need much further study

and whose investigation will require a general equilibrium setting.

We expect to complete this work later on.

          Finally let us consider the evolution, in the 1970's, of the

profit and unemployment rates:


                                  Profit Rate         Unemployment Rate

             1971                    14.86%                   5.9%

             1972                    14.914                   5.6
                                                              14.9
             1973                    14.92

             19714                   14.58                    5.6
             1975                     14.85                   8.5
             1976                     14.92                   7.7



 Comparing these     figures to those in Diagram 1   it should be clear that

 the   profit rate in the 1970's has been abnormally low.        With   this   rate

 around   14.9%   and the unemployment rate in 1978—1979 going dowi      to   the

 5.8% range, the      rate of inflation due to low profitability remains
                   which constitutes some 140% of total   domestic value added
 around    2.03%

 inflation in the 1970' s excluding the extraordinarY years of 19114—1975.
                                 —6o—




This means that as long as the profit rate remains abnormally low the
basic   inflationary pressures will persist and. be intensified by a

public policy to expand demand in order to lower the unemployment

rate. The converse of this observation is equally clear: any public

policy aiming to reduce inflation will not be successful unless it

is also directed towards raising the profit rate on private capital.

For this same reason no compulsory price control program can reduce

inflation if it prevents the profit rate from rising. We expect to study

other policy implications of this theory after a further study of the

t?feedback inflation" mentioned earlier.
                               Appendix

(I) The key variables of this study will be listed below and                 a brief
    reference to the data sources will be made.

    Y(t): Real GNP: for 1909—1928; The Economic Almanac,                  the   Conference

                                           Board        1960.
                      for 1929-1912; National Income and                 Product Accounts
                                           of     the United States 1929l9714,         B.E.A., 1975
                      for 1973—1977; The Economic Report of the President,'1918.

     P(t): the GN Deflator: for 1909-1928; Long Term Economic Growth, Census

                                                        Bureau, l95, series B62.

                               for   l929—1945; Long Term Economic Growth, Census
                                                        Bureau, 1965, series B63.
                               for   19146—1912; Economic Report of the President,

                                                        1976.

                               for 1973-1917; Economic Report of the President,

                                                        1978.

     W(t)L(t): Labor Income Before Taxes was calculated by adding total

         compensation to employees and            the    imputed labor component of

         self employed.

         For the direct compensation
                                                          ii6.
             1909—1928; D. Creamer [1956], Table Al, page

                            National Income        and Product Accounts of the United
             1929-1912;

                            States   1929_1971,         B.E.A.   1915.

             1913       ; Survey     of   Current Business, July          1911.

              19114_1911;
                                             I?             TI
                                                                  , Ju]y 1978.
                                 —62—



   For the Self Employed Component we imputed the mean rate of

   compensation for the employed. The data for the number of self

   employed was obtained from

         1909—1928; D. Creamer [1956], Table Bl—B, pp. 131—132.

         1929—1965;      National     Income and   Product   Accounts of the United

                         States 1929—1965, OBE, 1966.

         1966—1913; Survey of Current Business, July 1970, 1976.

         l974-l977; our       calculations. Data        available on request.

L(t): Total Labor Employed. Total number of persons engaged in

   production multiplied by the number of weekly hours.

   For the number of persons engaged use exactly the same                   sources
    as   provided above. For the weekly rate of hours worked an

    analytical procedure was devised which integrated the following

    sources:

          1909—1953; Long Term Economic Grovth,              1965,   Series B6.

                          U      11        U        U         U        "    B7.
          195)4—1965;

          1966—191)4; BLS, Earnings and        Employment in the U.S. i969—197.
          1975—1977; Monthly Labor Review, B.L.S., Department of Labor,

                         October 1918.

U(t): Unemployment       Rate:
          1909—1930; Historical Statistics of the U.S.,Census Bureau, 1976.

          1931—19)43; Darby, M. [1916].

          19)4)4—1910;   Historical Statistics of the U.S., Census Bureau, 1916.
          1971—1974; The Economic Report of the President, 1976.
          1975—1977; B.L.S.,MonthlY Labor Review, October 1978.
                                  —63—




   k(t)1c(t),      K(t.): The Nominal and   Real Capita].   Stock. An analytical

       procedure was applied to synthesize information from the

        following sources:

              Goldsmith, R. [1915]

              Survey of Current Business: December1972, April 1976,

                                               September 1978

              Economic Report of the President, 1978

              Tice, H. S. [1967]

              Kendrick, J.   W. [1976]
              Construction   Review, Department of Commerce, November 1978
              The final data appears at the end of this appendix.
    Pim(t)Im(t): Nominal Value of Imports
        1909—1970: Historical Statistics of the U.S., 1976, Series U219.

        1971—1977; Economic Report of the President, 1978.

    P (t): Index of Import Prices
    —Im-———

        1909—1970; Historical Statistics of the U.S. 1976.
        1971—1977; Survey of Current Business, various issues.

    t(t): The Average Tax Rate. This variable measures the ratio of

        total taxes paid by all economic agents to GNP. Due to the

        complexity of all the sources used for the different taxes a

        detail description all these public sources will be omitted.

        The actual data used will appear below.


(ii) The Independent Variables Used in the First Stage

     (1) %    of   U.S. population under 18 years of age

     (2) %    of labor force unionized
   (3) Length       of time since the tottom of previous recession

    (Ii) %   change in import prices

    (5)   Educational     attainment: mean number of years completed,

          Males 25—64

    (6)    Value   of   imports

    (7)    The capital labor ratio

    (8)    The participation rate

    (9) The mean        number of weekly hours of work
   (10) Real per-capita wealth (including the government debt held by

           by the public)

   (II) Time

   (12) %    of    the population residing in cities with 100,000 or more

   (13) A variable measuring the distribution of wealth

   (14) The other exogenous variables appearing in equation .3)
                                                                        in

           the text.


(Iii) Special Data Tables

          As noted above some variables were either constructed by us or

significant analytical work was performed in their construction. These

we provide directly
                                    —65—




Year                K(t)         P (t)K(t)            r(t)               T(t)
         The Gross Real                              The Gross       The Mean
                                 The Gross
             Canital Stock
                .

                                  Nominal
                                     .                Rate of        Tax Rate
                         •
                    •

              p Billions            .                Return on   .    Out of
             1912 Prices
                                  Capital             Capital           GNP

 1909                   tj7.75     141.94            0.0710311       0.052973
 1910                1219.98       147.61            0,0633981       0.056685
 1911                1245.54       155.14            0.0537199       0.059459
 1)12                1270.44       162.38
                                                 •

                                                     0.0526748       0.059643
 1913                L296.88       170.24            0.0513352       0.055094.
 1914                1319.89       174.37            0.04.b9728      0.0b3070
 1915                1343.47       190.95            0.0596630       0.061484
 116                 1)61.75       222.61            0.0762416       0.066206
 1917                1382.74       283.51            0.0976610       0.091682
 1918                1397.38       355.09            0.0980349       0.094839
 1919    •           1421.23       406.96            0.0776073       0.086652
 1920                1445.58       442.12            0.0593931       0.074657
 1921                1463.08       377.25            0.0492788       0.08,3927
 1922                1492.85       351.03            0.0464258       0.092360
 1923                1542.89       381.22            0.0574245       0.084320
 1924                1590.92       396.43            0.0548589       0.086709
 1925                1660.08       411.07            0.0557538       0.090500
 1926                1726.37       422.51            0,0603845       0.090329
 1927                1783.18       433.92            0.0550969       0.096469
 1928                1833.06       450.14            0.0528220       0.102668
 1929                1879.48       456.81t           0.0607732       0.124581
 1930               1879.39        426.50            0.0526321       0.113692
 1931               1862.44        374.04            0.0433573       0.120503
 1932                1821.98       333.36            0.0270927       0.149064
 1933                1794.73       342.02            0.0246344       0.162242
 1934               1775.53        352.51            0.0323269       0.153480
 1935               1764.50        358.33            0.0383520       0.149769
 1936               1765.64        381.76            0.0428392       0.154545
 1937               1775.06        401.85            0.0430776       0,167913
 138                1764.39        400.10            0.0413190        0.170299
 1939               1763.56        408.19            0.0439655       0.lôlc,91
 1940               1782.92        434.40            0.0461260        0.171990
 1941               1811.18        484.20            0.0483211        0.200053
 1942               1813.31        524.35            0.0597262       0.202069
 1943               1798.82        553.31            0.0698775        0.246753
 1944               1784.67        579.15            0.0801124        0.230485
 1945               1769.56        618.98            0.0750518        0.236477
 194o               1810.24        732.94            0.0520068        0.236950
 1947               1842.21        852.99            0.0490589        0.244207
 1948               1893.78        918.58            0.0553948        0.2256o8
 1)49               1931.55        946.74            0.0540054        0.216028
 1950               2004.95       1050.71            0.0517555        0.239086
 1)51               2075.35       1156.19            0.0541792        0.257153
 1952                2131.88      1208.44            0.0522255        0.259335
 1953                2187,35      1252.40            0.0509079
 1954                2241.78      1301.30            0.0520941        0.244.376
 l9ss                2321.83      1397.02            0.0541358        0.251555
 1-
                                             •



                     2393.17      1503.35            0.0600306        0.256982
 19D7                2459.03      1591.79            0.0498152        0.258050
 19'                 2509.67      1670.60            0.0505429        0.251102
 1)5?                2587.90      1756.88            0.0509120        0.263604.
 19.>0               2o52.81      1820.70            0.0438845        0.272632
 1)&L               2706.55       1874.60            0.0503416        0.2711ó9
 162                2783.75       1945.64            0.0547267        0.2721,33
 ij                 2B63.02       2028.30            0.0550507        0.275942

 i
 i.
 Jj:j
 19F
 19o5
                    2950.57
                    3033,87
                    3162.14
                    3259.35
                    3364.82
                                  2122.02
                                  2242.06
                                  2384.34
                                  2576.96
                                  2851.16
                                                     0.0563339
                                                     0.0593158
                                                     0.3615956
                                                     0.0583378
                                                     0.0537171
                                                                      0.268425
                                                                      0.26d4'U
                                                                      0.275225
                                                                      0.280415
                                                                      0.297212
                    3480.74       3145.51            0.0491173        0.309958
 1)70                 579.82      3383.38            0.0454400        0.299470
 1971               3650.60       3631.65            0.0485605        0.294324
 1972               1817.06       3984.05            0.0493918        0.303612
 iii                3)85.58       4537.25            0.0491536        0.051i2
 1)74               4079.42       5037.11            0,0457511        0.3145u0
 1.7                4108.63       5646.19            0.0485139        0.298982
 lOb                4195.73       6275.48            0.0492248        0.307s58
 (7                 4301.83       6994.20            0.0487531        0.31L55o
                                       —66—




                                      Footnotes

1/    We are using the example of Perry [1966] equations (5.2)—(5.3).
      More accurately Perry identifies p(t) with the consumer price
      index p(t) and writes his price subsystem as follows:

              (t)                     'm(t -   1) + b    S(t)   +b   (t)
      (5.2)           =   b   +   b
                          0
              p(t)                 lnl(t       i)       2S(t)


      (5.3) P(t) = d          +
                                           + d2Prt       +
                                                             d3(i) + dA(i)
      where
         m
        p (t) =     price of manufactured goods at t
        p5(t)     price of services at t
                = price of raw foods at t

        p(t)    = price of raw materials at t
                =   index of capacity utilization at t

2/    This is also the point made by Saznuelson—SoloW [1960].

3/    This same fact is true in a general competitive economy with a
      continuum of agents who are small, but with a finite number of firms.
14/   Clearly the most important punishment is the withdrawal of the
      gain once it has been attained. Here we mean punishment above
      and beyond that.
5/    The distinction between r and R will be clarified later. Here
      r is defined as the after tax aggregate profits divided by the
      nominal value of the aggregate capital stock.

6/    Clearly for all prices below p(t) the demand elasticity is
      less than 1.

 7/   It is significant in the "net" equation 2.
                              —6'r—




                            References


Ashenfelter, 0.C., G.E. Johnson and J.H. Pencavel [1972], "Trade
       Unions and the Rate of Change of Money Wages in United
       States Manufacturing Industry," The Review of Economic
       Studies, Vol. )OOCIX, No. 1, January, pp. 27_514.
Au.manri, R.J. [1959], "Acceptable Points in General Cooperative
         n—Person Games," in A.W. Tucker and R.D. Luce (eds.),
         Contributions to the Theory of Gaines, IV, Annals of
         Mathematical Studies, No. it, New Jersey: Princeton
         University Press, pp. 28732lt.

Azariadis, C. [1975], "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment
       Equilibria," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 83,
       pp. 1183—1202.

Azariadis, C. [1978], "Stochastic Disequilibrium in a Labor Contracts
       Economy," in G. Schwodiauer (ed.), Equilibrium and
       rium in Economic Theory, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing,
       pp. 651—669.

Baily, M.N. [197it], "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand,"
       Review of Economic Studies, Vol. Iti, pp. 37—50.

Creamer, D. B. [1956], Personal Income during Business Cycles,
       NBER Studies in Business Cycles, No. 6, New Jersey: Princeton.

Da.rby, M.R. [1976], "Three-and-a-half Million U.S. Employees Have
       Been Mislaid; or, an Explanation of Unemployment, l93)4l9141,"
       Journal of Political Economy, •81t, February, pp. 1—17.

Eckstein, 0. [196lt], "A Theory of the Wage—Price Process in Modern
       Industry," The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 31, (14),
       No. 88, October, pp. 267—286.

Eckstein, 0. and T.A. Wilson [1962], "The Determination of Money
       Wages in American Industry," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       No. 305, August, pp. 379—1t14.

Fair, R. C. [1970], "The Estimation of Simultaneous Equation Models with
       Lagged Endogenous Variables and First—Order Serially Correlated
       Errors," Econoinetrica, Vol. 38, No. 3, May, pp. 507—517.
                                   —68—




Feldstein, M. and L. Summers [19771, "Is the Rate of Profit Falling,"
       Brookings Papers of Economic Activity, Vol. 4, pp. 211—228.


Friedman, M. [1970], "A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis,
       Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 8, March/April, PP. 193—
          238.
Friedman, M. [1971], "A Monetary Theory of Nominal Income," Journal
       of Political Economy, Vol. 79, March/April, pp. 323—337.

Gerard-Varet, L. A. and Ft. Moulin [1978], "Correlation and Duopoly,"
       Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 19, No. 1, pp. 123—149.

Goldsmith, R. W.    [1955], A Study of Saving   in   the United States,
          New Jersey: Princeton.
Gordon,    D.F. [19Tl], "A Neo-Classical Theory of Keynesian Unemploy-
          ment," Economic Inquiry, Vol. 12, pp. l31_1i59.

Gordon, R.J. [1975], "The Impact of Aggregate Demand on Prices,"
       Brookings Papers of Economic Activity, Vol. 3, pp. 613-.670.

Gordon, H.J. [1976], "Recent Developments in the Theory of Inflation
       and Unemployment," Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 2,
          April, pp. 185-219.

Kendrick,J.W. [1976], The National Wealth of the United States,
       The Conference Board, New York, N.Y.

Kurz, M. [1977], "Altruistic Equilibrium," Econolnic.5 Progress Private
       Values and Public Policy, Essays in honor of William Feilner,
       B. Belassa, and R. Nelson (ed.s.), Amsterdam: North—Holland,
       pp. 177—200.

Lipsey, R.G. [1960], "The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate
       of Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1862—1951:
       A Further Analysis," Economica, Vol. 27, February, pp. 1—31.

Lipsey, R.G. [1963], An Introduction to Positive Economics, Appendix
       to Chapter 33, Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Lipsey, R.G. and M.D. Steuer [1961], "The Relation Between Profits
       and Wage Rates," Economica, May.

Lucas, R.E. and L.A. Rapping [1969], "Real Wages ployment and
       the Price Level," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 77,
       September/October, pp. 721—754.
                              —69—



Lucas, R.E. and L.A. Rapping [19121, "Unemployment in the Great
       Depression: Is There a Full Explanation?," Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 80, January/February, pp. 186-191.

Modigliani, F. [1958], "New Development on the Oligopoly Front,"
       Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 66, June, pp. 215-233.

Modigliani, F. [1917], "The Monetary Controversy or, Should we
       Forsake Stabilization Policies," American Economic Review,
       Vol.67, No. 2, March, pp. 1—19.

Nordhaus, W.D. [l971], "The Falling Share of Profits," Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, pp. 169—217.

Patinkin, D. [1956], Money, Interest and Prices, Harper and Row,
       New York.


Perry, G.L. [196111, "The Determinants of Wage Rate Changes," Review
       of Economic Studies, Vol. 31, (1), No. 88, October, pp. 287—
       308.

Perry, G.L. [1966], Unemployment Money Wage Rates and Inflation,
       M.I.T. Press.

Phillips, A.W. [1958], "The Relation Between Unemployment and the
       Rate of Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom,
       1861—1957," Economica, Vol. 25, November, pp. 283—299.

Sainuelson, P.A. and R.M. Solow [1960], "Analytical Aspects of
       Anti—Inflation Policy," American Economic Review, Papers
       and Proceedings, Vol. 50, May, pp. 177_1911.

Sims, C.A. [1972], "Money Income and Causality," American Economic
       Review, Vol. 62, No. 1., September, pp. 50—552.

 Tice, H. S. [1961], Depreciation, Obsolescence, and the Measurement
       of the Aggregate Capital Stock of the United States 1900—1962,
       Appendix D (unpublished dissertation, Yale University).

 Tobin, J. [1972], "Friedman's Theoretical Framework," Journal of
       Political Economy, Vol. 80, No. 5, September/October,
       pp. 852—863.
