                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INVENTORIES, RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS,
                 AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE


                     Alan S. Blinder
                     Stanley   Fischer



                  Working Paper No. 381




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                        August 1979




We are grateful for helpful comments from Costas
Azariadis, Benjamin Friedman, John Helliwell, Bennett
McCallum, and participants in seminars at the University
of California, Davis, University of California, San Diego,
University of Pennsylvania, Queents University, University
of Rochester, and University of Virginia. The research
reported here is part of the NBERts research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Financial support from the
National Science Foundation and the Institute for Advanced
Studies in Jerusalem is gratefully acknowledged, as is
research assistance from Mark Bagnoli and Suzanne Heller.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 381
                                                              August 1979




     Inventories, Rational Expectations, and the Business Cycle


                              ABSTRACT



     The simplest macroeconomic models in which markets clear instan-

taneously, and expectations are rational preclude the existence of

"business cycles," that is, of serially correlated deviations of output

from trend. This paper studies one of several mechanisms that can be

used to make these so—called "new—classical" models produce business

cycles; the mechanism is the gradual adjustment of inventory stocks.

      Two microeconomic models of inventory holdings are formulated.

Both imply, first, that current output should be a decreasing function

of the stock of inventories and, second, that inventories, once perturbed

from equilibrium levels, should adjust only gradually. These two features

are then embedded into an otherwise standard macroeconomic model in which

markets clear instantaneously and expectations are rational. Two prin-

cipal conclusions are reached. First, disturbances such as unanticipated

changes in money will set in motion serially correlated deviations of

output from trend. Second, if desired inventories are sensitive to the

real interest rate, then even fully anticipated changes in money can

affect real variables.




Professor Alan S. Blinder                    Professor Stanley Fischer
Department of Economics                      Department of Economics
207 Dickinson Hall                           Massachusetts Institute of
Princeton University                           Technology
Princeton, NJ 08544                          Cambridge, MA 02139
609/452—4010                                 617/253—6666
                                                                  April 1978
                                                         Revised August 1979




1. Introduction.

    There are doubtless many mechanisms that co—operate in producing the

serial correlation of deviations of output from trend that we know as "the

business cycle." This paper studies the role of inventories in the propagation

of the business cycle in a model with rational expectations.1

     Even a cursory look at the data indicates the importance of inventory

fluctuations in the short—run dynamics of output. Table 1 shows peak to trough

changes in both real GNP and its most volatile component——inventory investment——

during the postwar recessions. The significance of inventory change is evident.

Table 2 focusses on the most recent recession and recovery. To cite only the

most dramatic figures, almost the entire decline in GNP during the worst quarter

of the downturn (1975:1) came from a swing in inventory investment; and about

two—thirds of the GNP change in the strongest quarter of the recovery (1975:3)

resulted from the end of inventory decumulation. This is not, of course, meant

to imply that autonomous movements in inventories cause business cycles, but

only to suggest that inventory dynamics play a fundamental role in their pro-

pagation.

     Recent work on business cycles and monetary policy has been greatly in-

fluenced by the approach to aggregate supply due to Lucas (1972, 1973). Basing

his argument on intertemporal substitution effects, and on the inability of

agents to distinguish between absolute and relative price movements in the short

run, Lucas has posited the aggregate supply function:




     1For a more complete, but similar, analysis of inventory behavior in a
conventional nonstochastic macro model without rational expectations, see
Blinder (l978a).
                                                           TABLE 2



                             Changes in Real GNP and Real Inventory Investment,         l973_l976*




                 1973:4    1974:1    1974:2   1974:3   1974:4        1975:1   1975:2        1975:3   1975:4   1976:1
Real GNP         +   6.3   —12.4     —5.7     —7.6     —17.2         —28.1    +18.3         +30.1    +7.9     +27.6



Real Inventory
  Investment     +11.3     —11.5    —4.7      —7.2     +   4.8       —26.2    +   2.7       +18.8    —7.3     +12.7




             *Change from previous quarter at annual rate, in billions of 1972 dollars.
                                    TABLE 1


                 Changes in GNP and in Inventy Investment

                          in the Postwar Recessions




         (1)                       (2)                  (3)
                                                    Decline in    Column (3) As
Dates of Contraction           Decline in            Inventory   a Percentage of
 Peak          Trough           Real a              Investment     Column (2)
1948:4         1949:4             $ 6.7               $13.0           194%

1953:2         1954:2              20.6                10.2            50

1957:3         1958:1              22.2                10.5            47

1960:1         1960:4               8.8                10.5           119

1969:3         1970:4              12.0                10.1            84

1973:4         1975:1              71.0                44.8            63




                 a
                  In billions of 1972 dollars.
                                     —2—



     (1.1)         y = k + y(p —       +
                                           e

where y is (the log of) real output, k is (the log of) the natural rate of

output, p is (the log of) the price level, and the notation t—l denotes the

expectation that is formed at time (t—l) of the variable X. In Lucas work,

and in this paper, these expectations will be assumed to be formed rationally.

Finlly, the error term, e, is assumed to be independently and identically

distributed.

     If the natural rate of output, the k term in (1.1), is exogenous, two

strong conclusions follow from coupling this supply function with the assumptions

that prices always move to clear markets within the period and that expectations

are rational. The first is that deviations of output from its natural rate are

pure white noise——there is no business cycle. The second is that no feedback

rule for monetary policy (or equivalently, no anticipated change in the money

stock) can affect deviations of output from the natural rate.

     That both these conclusions follow from rational expectations, price flex-

ibility, and (1.1), can be shown simply. The basic implication of rational

expectations is that errors in predicting the (logarithm of the) price level

must be uncorrelated with any variable that is known as of time t—l, including,

in particular, the previous prediction error. Letting u (unanticipated inflation)

denote these prediction errors, equation (1.1) can be written


               —
                   k=     +   e



which is just white noise. By like reasoning, no known monetary rule can cause

unanticipated inflation; only monetary surprises can do that. So, if markets
                                    —3-.




clear, equation (1.1) allows for no real effects of anticipated money, given

the assumed fixed natural rate of output.

     Explanations for the business cycle that build on the supply function

(1.1) focus on the determinants of the kt term. Lucas (1975) has shown that

the inclusion of capital in the model will produce serial correlation of output,

as unanticipated inflation affects current output and thereby future capital

stocks. A similar mechanism has been explored in Fischer (1979). Sargent

(1979, Ch. 16) has studied a model in which serial correlation of the natural

rate of output follows from gradual adjustment of the labor stock by firms faced

with adjustment costs.

     Modifications of the basic model to allow for serial correlation of output

do not necessarily modify the second conclusion——that anticipated policy actions

have no real effects. However, if capital is explicitly included in the model,

and it is assumed that the rate of accumulation of capital is directly or in-

directly a function of the anticipated rate of inflation, then the behavior of

thek term in (1.1) can be affected by anticipated monetary changes.2 Alter-

natively, a role for monetary policy in affecting cyclical behavior may be

found by dropping the market clearing assumption, which changes the form of the

aggregate supply function.3

     In this paper we study how the inclusion of storable output affects the

two basic conclusions arising from the combination of the supply function (1.1)

and rational expectations. First, we show that adding inventories to the model




     2Fischer (1979).


     3Fischer (1977), Phelps and Taylor (1977) and Taylor (forthcoming); however,
see also McCallum (1977) for a demonstration that some types of non-market clear-
ing still do not permit any role for monetary policy in affecting output.
                                       —4—



makes shocks persist. Second, we show that if the demand for inventories

is interest elastic, anticipated monetary changes can have real effects. Of

the two roles of inventories, we have no doubt that the propagation of distur-

bances caused by unanticipated events is much the more important. Nonetheless,

it is interesting to note that the inclusion of inventories opens a potential

channel for even fully anticipated monetary policy to have real effects.

     In the next two sections of the paper we show that, in the presence of

storable output, the aggregate supply function is modified to a form like:


     (1.2)        =
                      kt   +   p   —
                                        + A(N+i   —
                                                      N)   +
                                                               e
where N is the stock of inventories at the beginning of the period, and N is

the optimal or desired stock. Section 2 derives a supply function like (1.2)

based on utility maximization by a yeoman farmer working in a competitive market,

the case that seems closest in spirit to Lucas' analysis.4 Section 3 derives a

similar function in a different setting: that of a profit—maximizing firm with

some degree of monopoly power.

     The following two sections offer proofs of the assertions we have just made.

In Section 4 we show that, even in the most stripped—down macro model with in—

ventorLes that we can set up, shocks lead to persistent deviations of y from

its natural level, i.e., to business cycles. And Section 5 demonstrates that,

if N depends on the real interest rate, then anticipated changes in the money

stock can have real effects through inventory changes. Section 6 contains

conclusions.




     4Lucas (1977, p. 18) discusses the way in which the aggregate supply function
(1.1) should be modified to take account of inventory behavior, without, however,
embodying the modified function in a full model.
                                     —5—



2. The Lucas Supply Function Revisited: The Case of the Yeoman Farmer


    The Lucas supply function (1.1) is most conveniently thought of as arising

from the behavior of individuals selling their own labor in isolated markets

(Pheipsian islands).5 Each individual's supply of labor is an increasing

function of the real price (wage) he perceives. However, by virtue of an as-

sumed one—period information lag, he does not know the current aggregate price

level. Instead, when he decides how much labor to supply he knows only the

nominal price (wage) he receives in his isolated market. His inference problem

is to decide what real wage is represented by the nominal wage being offered in

his market. Since the price he receives for his services varies from period to

period both because the general price level varies and because there are changes

in relative prices, he typically believes that part of any unanticipated increase

in the nominal price he faces represents a change in the relative price of his

services. Accordingly, an unanticipated increase in the general price level is

misinterpreted as being in part an increase in relative price, and output is there-

fore increased. Aggregating over markets, Lucas derives the aggregate supply

function (1.1).

     Although the Lucas supply function is usually thought of as arising in mar-

kets in which services are sold by individuals, much the same derivation applies

when nonstorable output is supplied by firms which hire labor for the purpose of

production. Labor may be regarded as distributed randomly to Pheipsian islands

each period; workers are immobile between islands within the period, but mobile

between periods. Firms on each island are competitive, and demand labor as a



     5
      See Phelps (1970), Introduction.
                                       —6—




function of -the wage relative to the price of the good they produce. Workers,

however, are concerned with the wage relative to the average price level.6

An increase in the price of output in a particular market, observed by both firms

and workers, shifts up the labor demand curve (with the nominal wage on the ver—

tical axis) proportionately. However, workers interpret any increase in price

in this market as only in part an increase in the general price level. The

labor supply curve accordingly moves up less than the demand curve, the nominal

wage rises less than proportionately to the increase in the price in this market,

and output increases. As before, an unanticipated increase in the general price

level will lead to an increase in aggregate output. This is almost precisely

the story told by Friedman (1968) in explaining the short—run Phillips curve.

       In this section we use a similar framework to examine optimal behavior for

a yeoman farmer, working without any cooperating factors, who sells his output

in a competitive market. Since output is assumed to be storable, he can obtain

goods to sell in two ways: by working or by drawing down his inventory stocks.

At first we assume that the individual knows both the aggregate price level

(the average of the prices of things he buys) and the relative price of his own

output. Later we follow Lucas and Phelps in allowing for confusion between the

two.

       We start with this model not for its realism, but because it is so close

in spirit to Lucas' and Phelps' work. As will become clear, however, inventories

work in this model mainly through wealth effects——which is not how we imagine

they work in a modern industrial economy. Further, the utility analysis to follow

is plagued by the usual ambiguities arising from income and substitution effects.




     6Both the individual suppliers in the first paragraph and the workers in
the second must be assumed to be distributed randomly to other islands to do
their shopping after work.
                                      —7—




Little beyond the list of arguments for each demand function can in general be

derived; meaningful qualitative restrictions on demand and supply functions must

generally be assumed——either directly or by restricting the class of utility

functions. For both these reasons, we deal briefly with this model, and then

turn our attention to a model of the firm.

     Consider an individual living and working for two periods,7 whose output

is identical to his labor input:


                           t=0, 1.

He is endowed with beginning—of—period stocks of the good, N0, and of money,
                                                                                    M0,
and must decide how much to produce, how much to consume, and how to carry over

his wealth in the two assets available to him: N1 and M1. The prices of his own

good and of goods in general are     and P, respectively, where we assume ini-

tially that both W0 and P0 are known, but        and        are random. It is convenient

to work with transformations of     and P, namely, the individual's relative price,

w1 = W1/P1, and the purchasing power of money,          =
                                                            i/Pt.
     Assuming that exogenous transfers of money and goods are received only by

the young, budget constraints for periods 0 and 1 are:


     (2.1)     C0 = w0(L0 + N0 - N1) + q0(M0 -
                                                  M1)

     (2.2)     C1 = w1(L1 + N1) + q1 M1



where C is real consumption of goods in period t (t = 0, 1). In period 0, the




     71t is straightforward to embed these individuals in an overlapping genera-
tions model.
                                                 —8—



yeoman farmer decides how much to produce, and how much to carry over to period 1

in the form of the two assets available to him: inventories and money. He does

this without knowing w1 or q1. Thus the demand for money derives only from port-

folio considerations in this model, not from any special role of money as the

medium of exchange. In period 1, w1 and q1 are announced, the yeoman farmer de-

cides how much to produce, and then consumes what this output plus his accumulated

wealth allow him to. He is assumed to maximize a separable utility function:


        J =          L -         + EV(C1, L -
              U(C,         L0)                  L1)

where both U(.) and V(.) are strictly concave; any time discounting is embodied

in the functional form of V(.).8

        The period 1 problem is quite simple. With the carry—over stocks predeter-

mined and the two prices known, the problem is one of certainty, with only labor

supply to be chosen. That is, the yeoman farmer maximizes:


        V(w1L1 ÷ (w1N1 + q1M1), L -
                                          L1).

Assuming an interior maximum, the first—order condition is the usual one:

        (2.3)
                     w1V1—V2=O,

where V. denotes the derivative of V with respect to its i—th argument. Obviously,
       1
(2.3)    implies a labor supply function with the real wage and real wealth as arguments:


        (2.4)
                     L1 =F(w1, w1N1 + q1M1).




        8Note that this set—up is consistent with multi—period optimization.
                                             —9—



F1 will be positive if the substitution effect dominates the income effect, and

F2 will be negative if leisure is a normal good.

    Now, using the budget constraints (2.1) and (2.2) to substitute out for C0

and C1, the maximand for the period 0 problem can be written as



     (2.5)               Max         U(w (L + N — N   )   + q (M -   M ),    L   -   L   )

                  (L0,   q0M1, N1}
                                       + EV(w1F(.) + w1N1 + q1M1, L —       F(.))

subject to N1 > 0,         >   0.   Here it is convenient to treat real balances (q0M1)

rather than nominal balances (M1) as the choice variable. Notice that the second

argument of F(.) in (2.4) is:



    wN
     11+qM
         11=w1       q
             —wN01 +—qM
                    q0 01
By examining (2.4) and (2.5), and observing that wF(.) =                                     it is
                                                                     w0(w1/w0)F(.),
clear that the arguments of the demand functions for L0, q0M1, N1 (and therefore

also for C0) must be:


     (i) w0, the current wage or relative price;

    (ii) w0N0 + q0M0, real wealth;

   (iii) the distributions of the returns on money, q1/q0, and on inventory

             holdings, w1/w0.


The absolute price level is not an independent argument in the behavioral functions,

entering only to deflate the nominal value of money balances.

     For subsequent use, we are interested particularly in the supply function for

labor (which is also the supply function for output) and the demand function for
                                         —10—



 inventories. We write these as:


      (2.6)    L0 = L(w0,
                          w0N0 + q0M0; 4(RN, RN

      (2.7)    N1 = N(w0, w0N0 + q0M0;
                                                I))

where the (.) notation indicates that the functions depend on the joint distribution

of the two rates of return:
                                  RN E w1/w0 and RM        q11q0. (The consumption and
real balance demand functions that are also implied by the maximization process

are not of interest here.)

     The first—order conditions for an interior maximum in the first period are:

     (2.8')     w0U1 — U2 = 0



     (2.9')     —U1 + E { V1 [w1F2       ÷      -             } =   0
                                                    V2F2


                —U1 + E { v1 [w1F2 RN + RN ] — V2F2 RN } = 0
     (2.10')




Using (2.3), the first—order conditions can be simplified to:


                            = 0
     (2.8)     w0U1 —   U
     (2.9)     U1 =   EViRN}
     (2.10)    U1 = E{V1RN}



These conditions have simple interpretations. The first is the marginal condition

for optimal labor supply in period 0. The next two equations are optimal inter—

temporal allocation conditions. Equation (2.9) is the standard condition for

consumption decisions. And, combining (2.9) and (2.10), we obtain the usual
                                              —11—



portfolio—allocation condition for a two—asset problem, which equates the mar-

ginal—utility—weighted rates of return on the two assets.

          While we could now proceed to undertake comparative static exercises to

derive the properties of the functions (2.6) and (2.7), paying particular at-

tention to the effects of N0 on labor supply and inventory demand, we know in

advance that conflicting income and substitution effects will render most deri-

vatives ambiguous. So instead let us                 ask what are the natural assumptions

to make about (2.6) and (2.7).

          First consider a change in wealth which, we note, is the only way that N0

has effects in this simple model. If leisure is a normal good, and if demand

for both assets rises when wealth increases, then it will be the case that
                      aN
      <    0,   0 <        < 1.   tn words, an increase in inventories leads to a reduction
  0

in production, and to an increase in inventory carry—over which is less than the

increase in the initial inventory holdings. The latter amounts to assuming that

any increment to wealth will be divided among current consumption, investment in

inventories, and investment in money, with positive shares for each. Both of

these results will play critical roles in the macro model. Specifically, the

notion that if inventories become too large (small) for some reason, the indivi-

dual will eliminate the excess (shortfall) only gradually over time, constitutes

the basic source of the serial correlation of output in the macro model.

          Next, consider the effects of an increase in w0, the current relative price,

on labor supply (output) and inventory carry—over. From the first argument in

(2.6), production will rise if substitution effects dominate. The effects on

inventory demand of an increase in w0 are more difficult to predict. An increase
                                          —12—



 in w0,   given   a fixed distribution of w1, reduces the expected return to inven-

tory holding. This would be likely to depress inventory demand. C Production

might also be depressed by rate—of--return effects, but we assume that the direct

wage effect dominates. ) Under these circumstances high w0 encourages current

production, and reduces inventory demand, as inventories are sold off to take

advantage of a currently high relative price.

      If this yeoman farmer is placed in a standard Lucas—Phelps world in which

there is imperfect information about the current price level, q0, he will react

in the manner described by equations (2.6) and (2.7) to any disturbance that he

believes to be an increase in the relative price of his own good. Apart from

real balance effects and adjustments in his nominal money holdings, he will riot

react to changes in the aggregate price level. Thus, if he is located on a

Pheipsian island, he will react to any change in the nominal price of his own
              =
output,
                  w/q,   as if it were partly a relative and partly an absolute price

change. That is, his reactions to an increase in the nominal price in his iso-

lated market will be qualitatively the same as his reactions to an increase in
                                                                                      w0.
This is nothing but a restatement of Lucas' analysis with respect to price changes;

the novelty here is in the analysis of inventory holding behavior.



3.   Inventories and the Supply Function of Firms

     In the utility maximization model, we derived a demand for inventories even

with perfect competition, a linear production function, and no adjustment costs.

This will not be possible in a model of the firm; accordingly we assume a convex

cost structure, i.e., increasing marginal production costs. But, for reasons

explained more fully in Blinder (l978b), this too turns out not to be sufficient
                                       —13—




to yield a well—defined inventory policy, and certainly not enough to justify

an effect of the inventory stock on production decisions at the micro level.

       The nonexistence of a well—defined inventory policy at the level of the

competitive firm does not, of course, mean that output is independent of inven-

tory stocks at the level of the market, but only that the effects of inventories

are indirect: high inventory stocks lead to low market prices, and low prices

lead to low production. However, in order to examine the role of inventories at

the firm level, we turn next to a model of a firm with some (at least transitory)

monopoly power, that is, with a downward sloping demand curve.9

       Consider a firm with a demand curve that shifts randomly from period to

period:

       (3.1)    Pt =   vtPD(X),
where Pt is the firm's own absolute price, v is an identically and independently

distributed disturbance in relative price,     is the aggregate price level (also

random), and D(X) is a downward—sloping function of the amount that the firm
          10
sells, X.     We will assume initially that the firm can observe both
                                                                      v0 and P0
before making its current output and sales decisions, while v,    P (t = 1,   2, ...)
are   random variables. Later we shall comment on what happens if the firm cannot

distinguish between v0 and P0.




     9Blinder (1978b) shows, in a certainty context, that the implications of this
model are basically identical to those of a perfect competitor with a sales con-
straint. It is possible but tedious, to work out a model of the competitive indus—
    which has the same basic implications.


     10D(.) and the other functions introduced below do not have a time index only
to economize on notation. Nothing in the nature of this problem requires that D(.)
or production costs or inventory holding costs be the same in each period; however,
the firm's expected revenues cannot be growing too fast if an optimum is to exist.
                                                —14—



     Nominal production costs are assumed to be (a) homogeneous of degree one

 in the absolute price level, and (b) a convex function of output, Y. Specifi-

cally:


      (3.2)       Ct =                   C' > 0,       c" > 0


We assume that lim c'(Y) = 0 and lim c'(Y) =                ,    so that the firm will always


select an interior maximum for
                                    Y.
     In the current period, the firm must decide how much to produce and how much

to sell. These jointly determine its inventory carry over according to:

     (3.3)        Nt+l=Nt +yt -xt

where Nt is the beginning—of—period inventory stock.                    N0 is exogenous.     Inventory

carrying costs are given by an increasing and convex function, B(N).

     The firm wants to maximize the expected discounted present value of its real

profits. Thus it wants to find:



     (3.4)               max E 0    E                   —   c(y)              — B(N+i)
                                   t=0     t                    t              t+l
                                           TI   (l+r)           TI   (l+r )     TI (l+r )
                                                            s=l                s1        S




where R(.) is the real revenue function, defined as:


                  R(X,v) =               = vtD(X)Xt


which we assume has the following properties:

         >   0,    <   0, urn Rx(X,v) = + , D(X)Xt is bounded above.
                          x±0
                                                   —15—



 The latter assumptions assure us that                   will always achieve an interior maximum.

 The variable ri is the one period real interest rate in period i. The notation

 is understood to imply fl(l+r) = 1
                                                     ii t <   r

      The problem is set up in dynamic programming form by defining:



           = R(X ,v) — c(Y                —   B(N+i)
                                )
       t                                      1+




      J=
       1
         maxE Z                                —
                                                     c(Y,u)
                                                     t
                                                                  - _____
                                                                    B(Ni)
                                                                    t+l
                      l_l           II (1+r)
              {X,Y}                                  It(l-1-r)
                                                                   s=2 (l+r)J


so that (3.4) may be rewritten:



      (3.5)      J =     max         ii   + EJ
                                            o1
                                              l+r1
                        x0,Y0}

 It is clear from the set-up of the problem that the                    functions depend on the

initial inventory stock, Nt; the initial realizations of the two random variables,

v and p; the joint distribution of all the stochastic variables; the path of

real interest rates; and the functional forms of all the R, c, and B functions.

Since the inventory stock is the only state variable of the firm, we shall

simply write      =
                      Jt(Nt).       Our assumptions imply that the 7rt(.) are concave,

continuous, bounded functions; accordingly the                     are concave and continuous and,

given r > 0 for all s and the assumed stationarity of v, bounded. An optimal

policy therefore exists.11



     11See Foley and Hellwig (1975).
                                                      —16—



        To solve the problem for the first—period solution, it is easiest to use

 (3.3) to eliminate Y0, and treat                   and N1 as the firm's decision variables.

First—order conditions for an interior maximum, on which we concentrate, are

then:


        (3.6)     R(X0iv0) —        c' (X0     + N1
                                                       —
                                                           N0)
                                                                 = 0



        (3.7)     J(N1) — B'                           + N1 —           = 0
                                    (N1)   -   1 (x0              N0)
                        1 +
                              r1

        The first condition equates marginal revenue with marginal cost as usual.

The second says that the marginal value of adding one unit to inventories must

be equal to the sum of the costs of producing that unit and carrying it over

to the next period. Henceforth, to simplify the notation, we will work with

the composite function:


                 G(N1) =              — B'
                           J(N1)               (N1)



Since       < 0 and B" >   0,   G' (N1) <      0.

        These first-order conditions imply optimal decision rules for current sales

and inventory carry—over, and therefore production, of the form:

        (3.8)       =
                        X(N0, v0, 1+r1)

        (3.9)    N1 = N(N0, v0, 1+r1)


        (3.10)      =
                        S(N0,      v0, 1-1.r1) =
                                                      X(.)   + N(.) —
                                                                         N0


where future interest rates and the probability distribution of future v's are

embodied    in the functional forms. The derivatives of these                 functions can be
                                             —17—



worked out by the usual comparative statics technique. The following summarizes

their relevant properties:


                0<ax0<1,                         _____ >0
                      N0           v0            (l+r1)

                0<N1<1 N1<0 N1                             <0
     (3.11)
                      3N0          v0            (l+r1)

                                   ay
               —l <         < 0,        >   0,      0      < 0

                      N0           v0            (l+r1)


     We are most interested in the effects of the initial stock of inventories.

An increase in N0 leads to a drop in current production, an increase in current

sales (i.e., a cut in relative price), and an increase in next period's inven-

tories, but by less than the increase in current inventories. Thus the apparent

partial adjustment feature appears here just as it did in the yeoman farmer model.

     Thrning next to the relative price shock (shift in the demand curve), the

profit maximizing firm will respond by raising both sales and output. But the

sales response is greater so that inventory carry—over falls.

     The intuition behind these results is straightforward once we keep in mind

that the firm is operating on two margins: it is deciding how much to produce

for inventories, and it is deciding how much to withdraw from inventories for

sale. When the firm's relative price increases, the rewards for selling today

(rather than tomorrow) are increased. But neither production costs nor the re-

wards for selling tomorrow (assuming that               and v0 are independent) are affected.

So the incentive to raise sales is greater than the incentive to raise output,

and inventory stocks get depleted.
                                     —18—



     Naturally, an equiproportionate change in all prices will elicit no be-

havioral response from the firm. But what if the firm cannot distinguish

between a relative price shock (v0) and an absolute price shock? For the same

reasons as before, its reactions will be a muted version of its responses to a

known increase in v0.

     Thus the models of a yeoman farmer and of a monopolist have almost identical

predictions. Both current production and inventory carry—over depend on unan-

ticipated inflation (interpreted as an increase in relative price), on the current

relative price, on the initial stock of inventories, and on expected rates of

return. The next two sections embed the conclusiOns from the micro models into

an otherwise standard macro structure, and show that they lead to the two main

results mentioned in the introduction: that unanticipated shocks have persistent

effects, and that fully anticipated money can have real effects.



4. Inventories and Persistence

     The micro models of the previous two sections imply that production,

should react negatively (though     less than unit-for-unit) to the start-of-

period stock of inventories, Nt, and positively to the current price—level sur-

prise. Thus we write the supply function:


                                                   —                                            1.
                     Kt +
                              —
     (4.1)    X' =                     + X(N+1         N)   +
                                                                e1   ;   y >   0,   0 <   A <



Here for convenience    and Nt are levels, while        is the j of the current

price level. Kt is trend output and N÷l are steady-state desired inventories.

In terms of the micro models, N+l should be interpreted as the value of N0

such that, given the values of the other variables in (3.9), N1=N0. The supply function
                                                   —20—



        To close the model it is now necessary only to add a specification of N*

and an aggregate demand sector. The micro models imply that N* depends on

current and future interest rates and on the probability distribution of all

the shocks.12 To keep things as simple as possible, we write:


        (4.3)     N1 =            - Sr
where N* and S are constants and rt is the current real interest rate.

        The aggregate demand sector is almost totally conventional, and so we des-

cribe it very briefly. The equations are:


                              =         —          +
        (4.4)     Mt —   Pt       a1X        a2i       e3
        (4.5)       =
                         c1Y      +
                                      c2(Mt
                                              —
                                                       - c3r   +
                                                                   e4
        (4.6)
                  Nt+i=Nt+Yt_Xt
        (4.7)     i =    r    +          —




        Equation (4.4) is a standard LM curve except that final sales, X, is used
instead of output as the transactions variable. Though nothing important hinges

on this choice, our reason is as follows. It seems logical (and the micro models

imply) that a higher initial inventory stock, Nt, should lead to a lower current

price level, P. With X on the righthand side of (4.4) this obtains since higher

inventories lead to higher sales and hence to greater demand for money. With the

money stock fixed, the price level must decline. By contrast, had       appeared

instead of X in (4.4), a higher level of initial inventories, by depressing
                                                                                ''


        121n the yeoman farmer model, wealth is also relevant. We ignore that
here.
                                      —21—



would have led to a reduction in the demand for money and hence to an increase

in the price level.

        Equation (4.5) defines aggregate demand as a function of production

 (=   income), real balances, and the real interest rate. Equation (4.6), which

appears to be an accounting identity, tacitly brings the assumption of market

clearance into the model by stating that the amount that firms sell in (4.6)

is identical to the amount that consumers demand in (4.5). Notice that

equation (4.6) implies that a certain linear combination of
                                                              e1 e2, e3i and
e4 must be zero each period.




       Finally, equation (4.7) just relates the nominal and real rates of
            13
interest.




      131n using this definition for the real interest rate, we depart slightly
from the Phelpsian island paradigm. The island paradigm does not allow indi-
viduals to know the current aggregate price level with certainty, while equation
 (4.7) assumes they do know the current price level. A relatively simple way of
avoiding this difficulty would appear to be to define anticipated inflation as
         -
                  a device adopted by Sargent and Wallace (1975). However, this
too is inconsistent with the island story, since the absolute price in each is-
land gives each individual some information about the current price level. We
should actually write     instead of    in (4.7), where     is the current
estimate of the price level conditional on information available currently.
We know that     is a weighted average of the actual aggregate price level and
the expectation of      conditional on knowledge of the aggregate price level and
all other history up to and including t-l. Thus any effects captured in the
present version would be present in the more accurate——and considerably more
difficult--consistent island paradigm, so long as knowledge of the current
nominal interest rate does not serve to identify the current aggregate price
level——as it does not, in the present model, in which the money demand and other
disturbances prevent identification.
                                       —22—



     Solution of a rational expectations model of this complexity is a formidable

task. Fortunately, it is not necessary in order to make the theoretical points

we wish to establish. Our strategy is as follows. The conclusion that output

disturbances are serially correlated is straightforward and very robust. So, in

the remainder of this section, we demonstrate this central result in a stripped—

down version of the model that removes all interest-rate effects. This model,

however, leaves no room for fully anticipated money to have real effects. So,

in the next section, we restore interest—rate effects, but concentrate on a

version of the model in which there is no uncertainty.

     Turning to the demonstration of persistence, assume that 5              =   0.
                                                                        a2
Equations (4.5) and (4.7) are now superfluous to the model, and it is easy to

express current output       as a function of current and past unanticipated

inflation, which we denote by Ut:


                         —
     (4.8)      u =

     First,   from (4.2) with N* a constant, the level of inventories is seen to

be a function only of unanticipated inflation, and the stochastic term in the

inventory demand function, e2. Then solve the difference equation (4.2), as-

suming the economy has an infinite past so that initial conditions can be ignored

(given that the model is stable), to obtain:


                   = N* —      (1 —
     (4.9)
                                      8)1u_1   ÷ E (1 —
                                                          9)1e2,_1...

Equation (4.9) repeats what we already know—-that an unanticipated increase in

the price level leads inventories to be drawn down, and then only gradually

built back to their original level, so that the effect of any burst of unan-

ticipated inflation on the current stock of inventories is smaller the further
                                               —23—



 in the past the inflation surprise occurred.

       Now substitute (4.9) into (4.1) to obtain the desired expression for

 output:


        (4.10)    Y - Kt   =
                               lut   +   A (l - 0)'u_1..j       ÷ e1 -   A   E(l -


Equation (4.10) shows that output disturbances are positively serially correlated,

since unanticipated inflation in the current period pushes output above trend in

the current period and in all subsequent periods. Depending on the relative

magnitudes of y and A, unanticipated inflation may have its maximal effect on

output in the period it occurs, or one period later, and thereafter the effects

decline geometrically. If unanticipated inflation has a small direct effect on

output, so that y is small, but leads to a large reduction in inventories, so

that     is large, then the inventory rebuilding effects of unanticipated inflation

on output will predominate, and the maximwn impact on output will occur in the

period following a given unanticipated increase in the price level.

       Figure 4.1 shows how the stock of inventories and level of output are

affected by unanticipated inflation in this case. First, unanticipated infla-

tion reduces the stock of inventories, as sales are increased in response to

what firms regard in part as an increase in the relative price of output. Then

inventories are gradually built          back Up;   the (1 -   e)L terms in (4.9) result from
the partial adjustment of inventories. Equation (4.10) shows that output is in-

creased by current unanticipated inflation. Then in subsequent periods output

is higher than it would otherwise have been, as a result of the need to rebuil&

depleted inventories.

       Equation (4.10) also shows that systematic monetary feedback rules have

no impact on the behavior of output under rational expectations. Output is
                                     —24—




           I
                              -Kt


           0




          —4




Figure 4.1: Dynamic adjustment of output and inventories to an unanticipated
             increase in the money stock.




affected only by stochastic disturbances and   unanticipated   inflation. While

systematic feedback rules can produce anticipated inflation, they cannot pro-

duce unanticipated inflation, if the feedback rule depends only on information

that is available at the time expectations are formed and   expectations   are

rational, as we assume to be the case.

     For completeness, we examine also the determinants of the current price

level. Combining (4.1), (4.2), (4.6) and (4.4) with a2 =    0, we obtain
                                       —25—



                Pt = Mt —          + (P ÷ Y)U + (A — 0) (N —
     (4.11)
                            ai[K                               N)   +
                                                                        e1   _e2t] -   e3
The price level is accordingly proportional to perfectly anticipated increases in

the money stock, and is a decreasing function of the stock of inventories since

0 > A.

     It is worth noting that the price equation (4.11), derived from an equili-

brium model, bears a striking resemblance to standard price adjustment equations

in which the price level is reduced below its equilibrium level (which is
                                                                                 Mt aiK)
in response. to excess holdings of inventories.

     In concluding this section, it is worthwhile emphasizing once more the basic

source for the serial correlation of output. An unanticipated increase in the

price level in this model leads firms to sell out of inventories at the same time

as they increase production to take advantage of what is (incorrectly) perceived

as an increase in relative price. Then in subsequent periods production remains

high as stocks of goods are rebuilt. The serial correlation of ourput does not,

however, imply that anticipated monetary policy has real effects.

5. Inventories and Monetary Policy

     We turn now to our second objective: to show that, if desired inventory

holdings are sensitive to the rate of interest, even fully anticipated changes

in money will have real effects.14 Since interest here focusses on fully

pated money, nothing substantive is lost, and considerable simplification of the

model is achieved, if we assume that u and all the e. are always zero.

     The source of the result is fairly transparent, and can hardly be surprising

to anyone familiar with the seminal papers of Tobin (1965) and Mundell (1963).

Fully anticipated changes in money cause changes in the (fully anticipated)




     14By "fully anticipated" we mean that the money changes being discussed have
always been known about. For a more precise definition, see Fischer (1979).
                                            -26—




inflation rate which, under conditions to be spelled out shortly, affect the

real interest rate. Desired inventories then adjust according to equation (4.3),

and output is (transitorily) affected by equation (4.1). We proceed now to the

argument.

     Using the notation L for the lag operator, it can be shown that the level

of inventories, Nti the level of output,               and the real interest rate, ri re-
                                                  ''
spectively, are given by:

                              O Lr
                                      t
     (5.1)
               Nt=N*_       1 — (1—G)L



     (5.2)        =    —
                              ?S (1—L)
                            1 —   (1—O)L
                                           r
                                                              ca(P
                                                               22tt+1—P)
                                                                       t
     (5.3)     r = constant       -


                                                  +   [8(1 — c2a1) + A(c1   — 1   +
                                                                                      c2a1)]6(1—L)
                                      C3 + c2a2
                                                                 1 — (1—O)L


Equation (5.3) displays the basic source of the nonneutrality of anticipated money

in this model: anticipated inflation reduces the real rate of interest.15 By

looking at (5.3), we see that there are two necessary conditions for the non—

neutrality of money in this model, namely that both c2 and a2 be nonzero. The

parameter c2 reflects the role of the real balance effect in the goods market,

and a2 reflects the interest elasticity of the demand for money.




            statement assumes that the denominator is positive. Since (9 > A,
a sufficient condition is c2a1 < 1, which means that a $1 increase in money
supply raises money demand by less than $1.
                                              —27—



     Equation (.5.1) shows that the stock of inventories is negatively related to

past real rates of interest and (5.2) shows that the level of output is related

to the change of the real interest rate. The coefficient 5 that appears in (5.1)

and (5.2) is likely to be small. If it were zero, neither                      nor     would be af-

fected by fully anticipated money.

     The remaining task is to study the determination of the price level and the

rate of inflation, Working with the model (4.1) through (4.7) with the stochastic

terms set to zero, we obtain the following equation for the price level:


                                     +
     (5.4)       Pt = b0 +   biPti       b2   +1 +b3 _1P +          b4Mt
                                                                           +
                                                                               bSMtl

with b1, b2, b4 >
                     0 and b3, b5 <    0.     The coefficients b1 through b5 are defined

in the appendix. They satisfy:

                 5
                 E b. =   1, b2 + b4   =    1, b1 + b3 + b5 =   0



The form in which (.5.4) is written emphasizes that the current price level

is a function of the anticipated price level, tt+l' as well as of the lagged

price level, lagged expectations, and current and lagged money stocks. Since

we are working with the assumptions that all stochastic terms are zero and that

there is perfect foresight about the behavior of the money stock, the expecta-

tions in (5.4) will in fact be equal to the actual values of the price level.

Nonetheless, (5.4) is a convenient form to write the price equation because it

enables us to exploit a solution previously worked out in Fischer (1979).

     As shown   by Blanchard (1979), there are a variety of solutions for equations
of the form of (5.4), some of which make the price level a function only of

lagged money stocks. We choose to work with a solution that makes the current

price level a function of both lagged and future money stocks, since we believe
                                                                  —28—



 it reasonable that individuals will take into account the expected evolution

of the money stock in forming their expectations of future price levels. The

general form of a solution which takes both lagged and future behavior of the

money stock into account was studied in some detail in Fischer (1979). In

the case where there is no uncertainty this solution is:


                 Pt =      constant              +                  +            +


where      is the root that is less than unity to:


        (5.6)    b2i.i2 +
                                (b3
                                        —       1)i.i +        =0

and

        (5.7)          =        1 —
                                            2        H—b1      2
                                                                         >   0
                   0
                                        b1           L       b1



                 ii.   =
                                bi      1

                                                         i   = 1, 2, 3,
                                 1


                       =        b5j.i
                                            <0,
                                 1

and where

                 0< b2
                     —<1
                           b1

      Equipped with the solution for the price level, (5.5), and equations (5.1)

through (5.3), we can now study the effects of monetary changes on the economy.

In particular, we first discuss the effects of a perfectly anticipated one time

change in the level of the money stock, and then discuss the effects of a one

time change in the growth rate of the money stock. In each case we shall assume

that the change takes place in period r, and that it has always been anticipated

that the change would occur.
                                       —29—



     The effects of a permanent change in the stock of, money on the price level

in previous and subsequent periods are described in Fischer (1979). Figure 5.1

shows the dynamic adjustment of the (log of the) price level to a 1 percent

change in the money stock that occurs in period r. The rate of inflation
    -
         P)   accelerates up to period r, and thereafter slows down. Figure 5.1

shows also the implied behavior of the real interest rate, r, which falls as

the inflation rate accelerates up to time -r, and then starts rising as the in-

flation rate slows down.

     The corresponding behavior of the level of inventories and the level of

output   are shown in Figure 5.2. Inventories build up as tlie real interest rate

falls, and then, after the increase in the money stock, start being worked off.

The behavior of output can be understood by combining (4.1) and (4.2), with all

stochastic terms   set   to zero:



                   =       +
                                (Nti - N)
The rate of production is related to the rate of change of inventories. Ac—

cordingly, output is increasing up to the period before the money stock changes;

thereafter output actually decreases below its steady state value as the inven-

tory excess is worked off. In the longest of runs, the one time change in the

money stock is neutral, resulting only in a proportionately higher price level.

But the real economy is affected by the anticipation of the change in the money

stock, and continues to be affected after the change has taken place.

     We turn our attention next tothe effects of a permanent change in the

growth rate of the money stock. Before looking at the details, it is worth

thinking through the consequences of such a change. Ultimately, we expect the
                                         —30—
                             r, P, N

                                     1          I              —




                                 —


Pt       ——
——                                                             — — Time -
rt                                                        ——




                                  .s.     //

Figure 5.1: Dynamic    adjustment of the price level and real interest rate
               to a permanent change in the money stock.




                                N, Y




                                                           —
                                                      —              Time   -




Figure   5.2: Dynamic adjustment of the stock of inventories and level of
               output to a permanent change in the money stock.
                                       —31--




rate of inflation to be equal to the growth rate of money. From (5.3) we

see that the real interest rate is reduced by increases in the expected inflation

rate, and we should therefore expect a permanent increase in the growth rate of

money to reduce the steady state real interest rate. Equation (5.1) shows that,

with the new higher rate of growth of money, the level of inventories in the

steady state will be higher. From (5.2), however, we note that the level of

output is affected only by the first difference of the real interest rate.

Therefore, in the steady state, the level of output will be unaffected by the

change in the growth rate of money.

     Once more, the key to understanding the dynamic adjustment of the economy

to the monetary change is the behavior of the price level. This €ime, we plot

the rate of inflation, rather than the price level, in Figure 5.3. The inflation

rate increases over the entire period; it accelerates up to the time the growth

rate of the money stock changes (between periods t and T+l), and then decelerates

after the change in the growth rate of money)6 Precise details are provided in

the appendix. Given the continuously increasing rate of inflation, the real

rate of interest falls continuously.

     Figure 5.4 shows the behavior of inventories and output. The stock of

inventories builds up steadily to its new higher level, but the rate of in-

crease of inventories is highest between periods T and r—l; thereafter the rate

of increase of inventories slows down. Accordingly, the level of output is at

a maximwn in period -r—l, and gradually slows down thereafter. The change in the

growth rate of money has its maximal effect on output in the period before the

change, but continues to affect output behavior thereafter. Only asymptotically

does output return to its steady state level.




     16Note that the overshooting of the inflation rate above the growth rate
of money occurs before there is any change in monetary growth.
                                        —32—




                                                         —
             money growth rate                      —        Inflation   rate
                       —
                            Mt_i)                                   —




                                    T                                    Time+




                                                             Real interest
                                                                    rate,
Figure 5.3: Dynamic  adjustment of the rate of inflation and real interest
             rate to an increase in the growth rate of the money stock.




                                Y, N




                                    t                                      Time-k




Figure 5.4: Dynamic    adjustment of the stock of inventories and level of
            output    to an increase in the growth rate of the money stock.
                                      —33—



     To sum up, the inclusion of the real interest rate in the demand function

for inventories, coupled with the real balance effect on the demand for goods,

provides a potential route through which anticipated monetary policy can af-

fect the behavior of output. The behavior of output depends on the change in

inventories. In response to a permanent change in the stock of money, inven-

tories build up in anticipation of the change in the money stock, and are then

worked off after the change occurs. The proximate cause of the inventory

changes in this case is the behavior of the real interest rate, which is in

turn fundamentally   determined by the expected rate of inflation. Similarly,
the response   to a permanent increase in the rate of growth of the

money stock, which permanently reduces the real rate of interest, is that in-

ventories are built up slowly to a new permanently higher level. Output corres-

pondingly increases above its steady state level, being at its highest level in

the period before the growth rate of money changes, and thereafter slowly returns

to its steady state level.



6. Conclusions

     This paper has examined the way in which the inclusion of storable output

modifies the aggregate supply function that is normally used in rational ex-

pectations models. The microeconomic foundations examined in Sections 2 and 3

led to a type of "partial adjustment" mechanism for inventories, in which excess

inventories are worked off only slowly over time, rather than all in one period.

They are worked off in part by reducing the level of output.

     Including this sort of inventory behavior changes the dynamics of the macro

model substantially. In particular, in a simple rational-expectations model in
                                     —34—



which output disturbances are otherwise serially uncorrelated, inventory ad-

justments lead to "business cycles," that is, to long—lived effects on output.

This occurs since unanticipated changes in the money stock simultaneously increase

current output and decrease inventories, as some inventories are sold off to

meet the higher demand. Then, in subsequent periods, output is raised to re-

store the depleted inventories. This mechanism, which we examined in Section

4, is the most important of this paper in that it provides a very natural ve-

hicle for the propagation of business cycles. A look at the data suggests that

this vehicle is probably of great empirical importance.

     For example, the data in Table 1 show that a sizeable inventory buildup

in 1973:4 Cthe last quarter before the recession began) preceded three consecu-

tive quarters during which output declined as inventories were being decumulated.

Then, in 1974:4, a large negative shock to final demand led to more (presumably

unwanted) inventory accumulation——which was reversed in the following quarter,

with correspondingly deleterious effects on output.

     Finally, in Section 5, we examined the effects of perfectly anticipated

changes in the money stock on output in a model in which the desired inventory

stock is a function of the real interest rate. In that case, since a permanent

change in the stock of money, while ultimately neutral, alters the time path of

the real interest rate, it also alters the paths of inventories and output. In

particular, inventories and output are raised in anticipation of the change; and

a long period of reduced output follows the monetary change, as the excess in-

ventories are worked off. A permanent increase in the growth rate of money

leads to a permanent increase in the stock of inventories, and to an output level

that remains above the steady state level both before and after the change in

the growth rate of money, as inventories are accumulated.
                                Bib1iograp

Blanchard, Olivier (1979), "Backward and Forward Solutions for Economies
     with Rational Expectations," P,inerican Economic Review, Papers and Pro-
     ceedings (May), 114—18.

Blinder, Alan S. (1978a), "Inventories in the Keynesian Macro Model," mimeo,
     Princeton University.

__________ (1978b), "Inventories and the Demand for Labor," mimeo, Princeton
     University.

Fischer, Stanley (1977 ), "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the
     Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy (February), 191-206.

__________ (1979), "Anticipations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of
     Political Economy (April), 225—52.

Foley, Duncan K. and Martin F. Heliwig (1975), "Asset Management with Trading
     Uncertainty," Review of Economic Studies 42 (July), pp. 327-46.

Friedman, Milton (1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review
    (March), 1—17.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972), "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal
     of Economic Theory (April), 103—24.

__________ (1973), "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
     American Economic Review (June), 326—34.

____________ (1975), "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of
     Political Economy (December), 1113—29.

__________ (1977), "Understanding Business Cycles," in Stabilization of the
     Domestic and International Economy, Carnegie—Rochester Series on Public
     Policy, Volume 5, 7—29.

McCallum, Bennett T. (1977), "Price—Level Stickiness and the Feasibility of
     Monetar7 Stabilization Policy with Rational Expectations," Journal of
     Political Economy (June), 627-34.

Mundell, Robert A. (1963), "Inflation, Saving, and the Real Rate of Interest,"
     Journal of Political Economy (June), 280—83.

Phelps, Edmund S. et al. (1970), Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and
     Inflation Theory, Norton.

____________ and John Taylor (1977), "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy under
     Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy (February), 163-90.

Sargent, Thomas (1979), Macroeconomic Theory (New York:       Academic Press).

__________ and Neil Wallace (1975), "'Rational' Expectations, the Optimal
     Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political
     Economy (April), 241-54.
Taylor, John B., "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of
     Political Economy, forthcoming.

Tobin, James (1965), "Money and Economic Growth," Econometrica (October),
     671—84.
                                                                Appendix


1. In this appendix we briefly indicate some of the calculations underlying

statements in Section 5 of the paper. First, the values of the coefficients

b1 through b5 in (5.4) are:


             = [(1—0)
                             (c3
                                       +
                                           c2a2 ÷ a2c3)
                                                        + (1 +
                                                               a2)
                                                                   6 + a1a2c2 (0—A) ] < o

             = a2[c3         +   13d   + c2a1(0—A)j < 0


             =                             + 13c5 + c2a1(0—A)ô] < 0
    b3           —a2[(l—®)c3

             =          +              +         >0
    b4           [c3         c2a2

             =
                 -[(l-0) (c3 +              c2a2)
                                                        +         <0


                                                                                 1
                 [c3 + c2a2 +                ÷ a2fc3 + + c2a1(9—A) }]                > 0



         E    9(1 — c2a1) + X(c1                 — 1        +
                                                                c2a1)
                                                                        > 0




2. The effects of a fully-anticipated permanent change in the stock of money

on the price level are discussed next. It can be shown that in the periods r,

in which the money supply changes:


                         —
    —=                        b2i)
                                           —<1.
         t         b1        b2i
                                   2


In the earlier periods:

                                   1
    _____ =              2                   r
                                                    ,            1 = 0,   1, 2
         T               1                   T
                                                                    -A2 -




 Thus, up to period t,                  the     inflation rate is given by:


        (A2.l)                                                     b2 i1r              b         3p

                                                                   bjL
                                                i—i—i —                                      p
                          _____                                               I   ,      2            T   ,   1   0, 1,
                          3M
                               T
                                           3M
                                                t                   1                  b1        3M
                                                                                                      T

 The inflation rate therefore increases up to period r.

        In    subsequent periods

                          3P.          —
                                       -        —   p'(b1
                                                               —
                                                                   U) (l—p)
                          3M                                         2
                               T
                                                      b1—b2p

The inflation rate therefore decreases after period

        Finally, we want to show that the maximum inflation rate occurs between

periods (r-]j and r. We accordingly have to show that


                                                      3p             3p
                          3M
                               I
                                       3M
                                          11>         3M
                                                           T+l
                                                                     3M
                                                                          I
                               I           T               I              I

or
                         [1 -                  (p(l   -
                                                          b2p))      > (b         -   p) (1 -



or
                               b—bp l—b2p >1
                         b.b1—p i—p
Since b2 <      1,   and p <
                                       b1 (by the assumption noted in the preceding footnote), it
will suffice to show that


                                   —
                                       b2p)
                                                >1,
                         b1(l—p)

                statement requires b1 >                        p, which is guaranteed if [a2(0—A) (l—c1-c2a1)             +
        —
a20c1        c3a1X
                     —
                         c2a1a2xJ
                                           >    0, a condition we assume. It is satisfied if 0 is suf-
ficiently greater than A, for instance.
                                                      -A3 -




or

Now, from (5.6), we can substitute for -(b1 + b2ii2), so we have to show:


            + (b —           1)+b1 >0
or
            (b1+b3)u>O

Since b1 + b3 =              > 0, the inflation rate has been shown to be at a maximum
                     -b5
between   periods (T - 1) and c.


3. To derive the behavior of Nti r and '' we work from (5.1) and (5.3) to

obtain



(A3.l)      N — N*
             t                    /( p
                                  1 t—i t—i+1
                                                      p
                                                       t—]



                         =      c2a2OS
                                + c2a2 +
                             c3


                               (c3 + c2a2)
                                                (1-0) +
                         —
                     i
                                   c3+c2a2+                   j
                                    i—i


                         =[
                                              -Ca
(A3.2)           t
             r — constant           =
                                        C + c
                                          3
                                                2 2
                                                  a+ S
                                                 22
                                                                  z   .(1 t—i
                                                                          •pt+1—i - pt—i•)
                         = 1


                                    0t5
                     1 —          + c2a2 + i3S
                             C3
                                                           -A4-


                                                                                          i=   2,   .   ..,

                                          ii
                         =    [_b5
                              L b4


We also use


      (A3. 3)       Yt =                       - N)

4. We do not intend giving formulae corresponding to all the figures in Section 5,

but note, using (A2.l)        and (P3.1) that                  it can be shown that, in response to a

fully anticipated change in the stock of money in period T:


                    3(N — N*)                              —
                       T
                                           =b -b
                                               '1i(1
                                                   1       2
                                                               b2)



and
                         T—j

                                 -r
                                       — N*)
                                               —

                                                        [j
                                                        rb211 (N —         N*)
                                                                   ___________
                                                                            -r




                                      — N*)                    —      N*)        a(N — N*)
                         T-4-l
                                                   IL
                                                           t                       T
                                 -C.                               -C.                I

5. Next we move to the effects of an increase in the growth rate of money.

Specifically, we   as suine




                    Mt -     Mti         = 0,       t=    -, . ., r
                    Mt       Mt_i = 1,              t     t+1, ...,
                                                           -A5 -




    Using (5.5) and (.5.7) it is relatively straightforward to show

                          —
     (A5.i)                                —             b22        <       1
                                                b1—b2i2


                      t—i+i
                               —P T1
                                   .)                    bH
                                                         2
                                                            (Pc+i —P                  -r            1 =   1,   2,

                                                         b1

                               —P
                      t+l+i            r+i
                                               .)
                                                    =1—                 1
                                                                                                    i=i,2
                                                                    —
                                                               b1           b2ii2

where g is the change in the growth rate of money described above.

6. Looking at (A3.1), it is clear that inventories build up as the inflation rate

increases; similarly from (A3.2), the real rate of interest falls continuously as

the inflation rate increases. To study the behavior of output, use (A3.3); we

leave it as an exercise to show, based on (A3.l) and (A5.1) that:


     (A6.i)
                N1                     'I'1ib1(l
                                                          —
                                                              b2)
                ag
                              (b1 —         b2p2) b1 — b2p)


                aN+1_ b21i aNT                                                          i =    1,    2,
                     ag
                                  b11               ag




                                                                                b2)        =   1,   2,
                              =                     +
                3g                ag                          b1-b22


Accordingly

                a(N
                  r+2
                      -N c+1 < (N T+l —Nc—i
                                       )
