                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        TIME SERIES CHANGES IN YOUTH JOBLESSNESS



                   Michael L. Wachter
                       Choongsoo Kim


                  Working Paper No. 381i.




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                       August 1979




The underlying research was supported by grants from the
General Electric Foundation and the National Institutes of
Child Health and Human Development. The work draws upon a
soon to be completed book by Michael L. Wachter for the
Twentieth Century Fund and Choongsoo Kiats Ph.D. thesis.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper 384
                                                                August 1979




               Time Series Changes in Youth Joblessness



                              ABSTRACT




      This study presents a time series analysis of the youth unemployment
problem stressing the cohort overcrowding effect, a result of the baby
boom induced imbalance between younger and older workers. Several
techniques are used to study the problem. First, reduced form unemploy-
ment equations are estimated for the disaggregated youth groups. The
results indicate that secular swings in female and white youth unemploy-
ment rates do track well with the cohort imbalance hypothesis. However,
relative increases in black male unemployment remain unexplained by this
model. Second, alternative measures of youth unemployment are developed
by treating school enrollment and military service as equivalent to
employment. In addition, several employment—to—population ratio measures
are explored. Third, equations for employment, unemployment, schooling
and a residual category are estimated together. This allows one to
analyze flows into and out of the four states with respect to changes
in explanatory variables.

      The results suggest that youth unemployment rates, with the excep-
tion of the black male group, peaked in relative terms in the early l970s.
A detailed analysis of the declining labor market position of blacks,
however, uncovers puzzling results. Although black male unemployment
rates are growing, and employment rates are declining, relative wages
and school enrollment rates are increasing. In fact, at least half of
the decline in black employment ratios can be associated with increasing
school enrollment rates.




                                            Professor Michael Wachter
                                            Choongsoo Kim
                                            Department of Economics CR
                                            University of Pennsylvania
                                            Philadelphia, PA 19174
                                            215/243—7719
                                                                       —1W-




Introduction


       Youth unemployment has increased over the past two decades
in both absolute terms and relative to prime—age male workers.

More recently the unemployment rates for most youth groups have
begun to level off and move in parallel with prime—age male

unemployment. This is especially or primarily true for white
males,.

       Explaining these developments in a statistical sense presents

major problems. First, the underlying developments appear to be
due to economic—demographic swings of intermediate—run duration.
}ience, the length of the time series data base is woefully short.

Second, many of the most interesting and potentially important

explanatory variables, such as government policy variablesr have
major measurement problems.
       Our view stresses the role of "cohort overcrowding" which
results from an imbalance between younger and older workers.
The model is based on two central assumptions. The first is that

younger and older workers are imperfect substitutes for each other.
The main difference botween them reflects their relative amounts

of specific training. Given the "putty-clay" nature of physical
and huiaan capital and the transient nature of the cohort bulge,

the economy's adjustment process is slow and may be incomplete.
In the short—run elasticities of substitution are relatively lOW
so   that large relative wage adjustments occur.
       The second is that aspiration levels or desired   standards
of living are   formed when the younger workers are living with
their parents. This is an endogenous taste or habit formation
model where past living standards influence current desired stan-
dards. In addition, young families are assumed to treat the
desired standard of living as a necessity. Hence, in the event of
lower wage levels, families will increase the number of workers

and/or hours worked. The increase in labor force participation
rates of the young workers can thus be traced directly to the
population demographics. In addition, the induced change in

participation rates serves to aggravate the existing oversupply

problem of younger workers, further driving down relative wages.
     As relative wages fall for the oversized cohort, institutional

constraints, such as government transfer programs, minimum wage
levels, etc., become relevant and cause an increase in unemploy-

ment rates as well as or instead of the   increase   in participation

rates. If the unemployment effects are large enough, employment

may actually decline.
     Although some previous studies have appeared to isolate the

effects of government programs, for example minimum wage legis-
lation and manpower programs, we would disagree. On the basis

of the data it is almost impossible to differentiate minimum

wage from transfer program variables.     In addition, attempts to

include a government policy variable invariably yields the wrong
sign. Besides these data problem, there are important conceptual

problems as well. The government's social welfare package,
whether intentionalor not, is an integrated program. The para-

meters of the various programs tend to change together reflecting
common political pressures and the need to complement each other.

An example is the parallel increases in minimum wage coverage     arid
                                                                      —3—




government transfer payments (in relative terms) during the late
1960's. Since almost all studies concentrate on one government

program at a time, they miss these crucial interrelationships and
hence, attribute too much to the single program under study. We
also find that "relative wages" have some explanatory power, but
cannot separte minimum wage from government transfer affects.

     Our empirical work focuses on bwo approaches. The first

attempts to measure unemployment in different ways by altering
the numerator and/or the denominator. For example, we argue that
the variable which is closest to the traditional measure of

unemployment would give in-school equal status with employ—
ment. Hence, the numerator would exclude those who were unemployed.
but whose primary activity was school and the denominator would

include all of those who were in school. The second approach
focuses on disaggregating youth activities into four categories -

unemployment, employment, school, and other (all as a ratio to
the population) for each of the age—sex-race groups. Equations
are then estimated using the same explanatory variables arid adding
the constraint that the four ratios sum to unity.

     Since black males pose a particular problem, we concentrate
somewhat on the deterioration in the unemployment and employment

ratios of this group. Why should this group suffer a deterioration
in labor market position relative to other youth groups, including

black females?

     The paper is organized in the following manner. Section I
presents the basic model of cohort overcrowding. Section ii pro-

vides the basic age-sex-race youth unemployment equation. Section
                                                                     —4—




III analyzes alternative measures of youth unemployment.   Section

IV provides the justification and estimates for our four activity

equation system. Section V analyzes the puzzle of the deteriorating
labor market position of black males, 16—24.
                                                                         —5—




I. The Basic Model of.Cohort Overcrowding
A. The Underlying Workings of the Model

       In some earlier work by the authors and others, the unemploy-
ment problem of youth was explained in the context of a broader
economic-demographic model The basis of the model is a "cohort

overcrowding" effect which results from an imbalance between
younger and older workers. We shall utilize this approach to
explore the mechanism of youth unemployment over the past f if-
teen years. It was during this period that the baby boom cohort

was passing through the 16-24 age category.
      The model is based on two central assumptions. The first is
that younger and older workers are imperfect substitutes or each
other. The main difference between them reflects their relative
amounts   of specific training. The second is that aspiration
levels or desired standards of living are formed when the younger
workers are living with their parents. This is an   endogenous   taste
or   habit formation model where past living standards influence     -



                           2
current desired standards. In addition, young families are
assumed to treat the desired standard of living as a necessity.

In the event of lower wage levels, families will reduce their
completed family size and increase the number of hours worked. The

reduction in fertility increases per capita family income directly
by reducing the number of family members.     However, fewer
children permits secondary workers to work in the labor market
rather than at home.

      This type of model can generate cyclical swings of intermediate

length in. unemployment rates. A fertility increase in.generation t.
                                                                          —6-




causes a large cohort of entry level workers in t.+ 1. Given the
lputty_c1ayII nature of physical and human capital and the transient

nature of the cohort bulge, the econbmy's adjustment process is

slow and may be incomplete. In the short-run, elasticities of
substitution are relatively low so that large relative wage adjust-

ments occur. This deterioration in the income potential of young

people causes a decline in fertility and family formation rates and

an increase in the labor force participation rates of secondary

workers. The increase in labor force participation rates of the
young workers can thus be traced directly to the population demo-

graphics. In adition., the induced change in participation rates
serves to aggravate the existing oversupply problem of younger

workers.
     As relative wages fall for the oversized cohort, institutional
constraints become relevant and cause an increase in unemployment

rates as well asorinsteadof the increase in participation rates.
If the unemployment effects are large enough, employment may actu-

ally decline.
     The institutional constraints which cause unemployment can

exist on both the demand and supply side of the market.    For example,

since minimum wage levels are informally indexed on average economy
wide wages, a decline in the relative wage of youth may cause
the market clearing wage to fall below the minimum wage.    youth,

of course, are a heterogeneous skill group with a wage distribution
rather than a single wage. The decline of relative wages, in this
 case, causes an adverse shift in the distribution of wages. That

 is, the probability of any youth having,a skill and associated wage
                                                                      —7—




 level that falls below the minimum wage is increased by the demo-

graphic overcrowding.

     On the supply side, a different institutional factor is

operating but with a similar potential result. In both the neo-
classical labor supply literature as well as the institutional
literature, workers are viewed as having a reservation wage; such
that when market wages are below that reservation wage, individuals
choose not to work. The neoclassical theory tends to specify a

continuous trade—off between hours of work and wage rates. It is

only at the corner of the indifference map that the wage rate is

sufficiently low so that individuals will offer zero hours of work.
The likelihood of a corner solution is increased by the existence-

of public assistance and government transfers in general. These

programs have high implicit tax rates. Indeed, it is generally

acknowledged that the eligible poverty population for these pro-
grams faces a higher implicit marginal tax rate than do the
wealthiest individuals. The result of these programs is to con-
siderably flatten the budget constraint

     The likelihood of a corner solution is also determined by the

mechanism through which individuals form their reservation wage.
Specifically, individuals' attitudes towards an acceptable wage

are determined by wages paid elsewhere in the economy. Of parti-
cular importance in defining the indifference map, or "taste" for
work is the minimum income level dictated by the government social

welfare programs and minimum wage laws. These programs signal what
constitutes an acceptable minimum wage to the voting public and
policymakers. That is, government programs almost certainly in—
fluence the shape of the indifference map as they.alter the budget
constraint. A liberalization of benefits shifts both the   indif
ference map and the budget constraint toward the corner solution

of zero work.
     In the static equilibrium literature, individuals who are at
the corner solution of zero hours report themselves as out of the
labor force and not employed. In the nonstatic world of institutions
and sequential decision making, these individuals move frequently
between employed, unemployed, and out of the labor force. That is,

the real world individuals change their reservation wage often in
response to a change in family responsibilities, a desire to get out

of the house, health, etc. ioreover, given the manner in which

the BLS unemployment question is phrased, whether individuals
report themselves as unemployed or out of the labor market is partly

fortuitous. The BLS question only asks, of the individuals without

jobs, whether they are actively seeking work.   There is no mention

of a wage rate at which the individual is willing to work.    In

addition, as shall be discussed below, the notion of "actively't

seeking work is an ambiguous notion for many youth.   This is pafti-

cularly true for those whose primary activity is schooling; a iargo

component of the teenage population.4
     In the cohort overcrowding model, a large youth cohort in

period t ÷ 1, by reducing fertility rates creates the potential of
a baby bust cohort which would enter the labor market in t + 2.
For the baby bust cohort all of the above conditions, ceteris paribus,

would he reversed; the younger workers would be in relatively short
supply, their relative income would rise, fertility would increase,

and labor force participation rates of secondary workers would ease.

Finally, unemployment rates for youth would decrease as the market

wages of this cohort would outpace minimum wage and transfer pay-

ment increases. This later conclusion assumes that these govern-
ment policy variables are indexed on overall economy-wide wages.

       It should be noted that the fluctuations in unemployment
discussed in this model, are solely related to changes in the

equilibrium rate of unemployment. Cyclical unemployment may be
positive or negative in the short-run. But the above demographic
cycle is an intermediate swing and averages out the peaks and

troughs of the short—run business cycle.

                                    5
13,   A Simple Expositional Model

      The major factors that we use in our empirical work can be
captured in a simple expositional model. The model is oriented
towards the specific empirical factors involved in the demographic
shift. To start, assume a production function that recognizes two
different categories of labor -         older   workers who have accumulated

specific training (LA) and younger workers who lack such training
(LB). For our purposes we Carl view LA as skilled workers and L13 as

unskilled workers. In the long run, the production function can be
written as:

           (1)     X=     (LAS, LBS,K)
where K is the capital stock, X is the level of output, and the
superscript s refers to supply. In the            short-run,   there appear o
                                                                      —10-




be significant lags in achieving desired absolute and relative
levels of factor inputs. The lags may arise for a number of

reasons including adjustment and expectational factors. The
literature on investment functions indicates that long lags are

especially relevant to the capital input. If the capital stock
is "putty-clay", the input coefficients are fixed as part of the
capital endowment. These coefficients may vary for different

vintages but, to the extent that they are empirically important,

they impart a difficulty in substituting against scarce factors
in the short run. An extreme form of the bottlenecks model is the

Leontief fixed coefficient production function.


                                            ,}
           (2)       =   mm   {


                                  l 23
                                  L
                                      A,
                                           L.,




Equation (2) allows no substitution at all among factors. Output
is   restricted by the single limiting factor. The economy, especi-
ally at the aggregate level, has an important potential to sub-
stitute against the scarce resource. A central thrust of our

argument, however, is that the demographic changes have generated
empirically important bottlenecks and that general expansionary

policies - which increase aggregate demand for outputs and inputs

across the board — are limited in this environment.
       For our purposes, aggregate demand can be viewed as being

controlled by monetary CM) and fiscal (F) policies, subject to
unanticipated changes in demand from the private sector (X0)
                                                                           —li-




             The derived demand for labor is constrained by either the

level of the demand or supply of output. X and by relative factor

prices. For B workers, the relevant own wage is either the mini-
mum wage (NW) or a market wage, whichever is higher.
             The labor supply for both LA and LB is a function of the
population in each cohort and the factors that determined the
labor force participation rates. For A workers, we assume that
the participation rate (rA) is constant in the short run. Abst-
racting from influences such as school enrollment and fertility,

the main forces determining participation for B workers are the
market wage rates for these workers (WE1, the government .transfer

payments for being unemployed (Tg) the effective minimum wage
(NW), and some unspecified trend factors that capture changes

in life—style. That is,
                   (4)     LAS =   LA(rA,   °A'
and

                   (5)      (.LBS) = LBS             TREND, g {WB TgMW})
The relationship between the market wage and Tg determines the

cost of being unemployed. The level of governmental transfers

depends upon unemployment compensation and public assistance.
The supply of labor relevant for the production function, denoted
     S
LB       I   is,
                   (6)    L S=   L S'   -
                                            g(W   Tg, MW ).
That is, we distinguish between an observed labor supply LBS and
an effective labor supply LBS which is available for employment.
The discrepancy, measured by the g function, is a type of structural

unemployment. In Eqs (4) and (5) it is assumed that experience or
                    acquired   with age, The result is that the
skill can only be
numer or A workers only ncreaSeS witi tne      population   ana parti-

        rates of A worers. .n fact, the rate or accumulation
                                                                      of
cptiOfl
                              intensive training. The cost for
skli can be increased by more
                                                             short
training is likei' to be   upward sloping and steeper in the
than in the long run.
                         Consequently the accumulation of human
                                                        to avoid
capital will be slowed as workers spread their training
                            (This factor of increasing short—run
the higher short-run costs.
                                                           behind
supply costs is also a factor .n te lag of actual capital

ts optimal .evel.) Either   the firm or the worker can pay to

                           to cnange B   workers into A workers. In
decrease the time needed
                                     the wage 1fferential is high
any   caSe, t wi.l only be pain wnen
 enough to pay for the higher short-run supply costs.
                    through (6) indicate a number of reasons for
      Equations (1)
                                                          which
 unemployment. The mbst obvious is cyclical unemployment
                                                               with
 results from xS> xd. In addition, unemployment will vary
                                                   A and B workers,
 (a) the distribution of the labor force between
                         unemployed and minimum wage effectiveness,
  (b) the cost of being
                                                     or capital.
 and (c) the bottlenecks of either skilled workers
                                                         are more
                        when coefficients in production
 Over the longer run,
                                   lose their importance as a cause
  flexible, bottlenecks gradually
                        the other hand, traditional wage equations
 of unemploYment. On
                                                  bottlenecks loosen,
  indicate another source of unemployment. As
                                                    workers is to be
  relative wages must adjust if the surplus of B

  absorbed.   The evidence suggests, however, that the adjustment
                                                        from moving
  is very imperfect. MinimuTh wages prevent employers
                                                alter the reser—
  down their demand curve for B workers and/or
                                                                 —l




vation wage of B workers. In addition, government transfer

programs help to maintain a high reservation wage (relative to
their market wage) for the unskilled workers. These latter

workers are in the labor force, but are not willing or able to
work at the market clearing wage.
                                                                             —14—




II. The educed Form unemployment Equation
A.    asic Considerations

       Estmat1ng an unemployment function can be done in several
ways gven tne     asc buldng blocks of labor supply and employ-
ment functions. For       our purposes it is useful to start by

estimating a reduced      form relative unemployment equation. In
section IV below we       shall estimate both   unemployment and employ-

ment functions. In this case the unemployment          equations serves
the   role of a labor supply equation. This approach is compatible

with   the   theory outlined above and the fact that prime—age male

unemployment is     an independent variable. Specifically, it high-
lights our view    that   youth unemployment is largely structural in

nature and dominated by fluctuations on the supply ratrler than

demand   side   of the market. For reasons associated with govern-

ment policy and the dynamics of the overcrowding model, supply

side shifts do not induce adjustments in labor demand.
                                           equati-on can be obtaind
     A reduced form relative unemployment
                                                     that fluctu-
from equation C 6 ). with the additional assumption
                                          aggregate demand variable.
ations in LS are captured by a cyclical
For most of our calculations, we used the prime—age male unemploy-
ment rate. The UGAP variable, developed          in   Wachter Cl976a): yeilded

similar results. The former was used, because UGAP contains the

unemployment rate of youth and secondary workers in general.

       A large number of alternative proxies were attempted for the

government policy variables. None were particularly satisfactory

because of measurement errors; essentially most of the
data are simply not collected, Our various attempts at representing
                                                                    —15—




policy impact are described below. No single policy variables

provided the best fit among the 18 age—sex-race groups. Rather

than use different policy variab.les in each equation we adopted
a compromise variable that performed as well as the others but

could be viewed as representing several affects. The unemploy-
rnent rate equations for the various age—sex groups are estimated

in the general form:

       (7)   U. =     aO   +   a. CSi} + a2 in(UpM) + a3 1n(RPy)+
                      a4 ln(W/MW) +a5(ln(AF/POP)) or TREND

where Si} is a vector of seasonal dummies, RPy is the percentage
of the civilian population a;e 16 to 24 relative to the civilian

population age 16—24 relative to the civilian population age

16÷, AF/POP is the military population ratio (added to the male

equations) r    TREND is a time trend (added to the female equations)
               arLd

      The RPy variable represents the cohort overcrowding referred
to   above. Several different specifications of the RPy variable
were tried, varying the treatment of the military, individuals

over 65 years of age and defining youth over the age span of 16
to 34. The results were largely unchanged. Given this inability
to differentiate empirically, the choice of the RPy variable was
dictated by usage in earlier studies. It is important to note
that this cohort variable assumes that young workers are sub-
stitutes for each other and define a distinct labor input. Need-
less to say, any age division o the labor market into two distinct
components has to he arbitrary. The difference between a 24 and a

25 year old is not large. On the other hand, labor market attach-

ment, mpioyment patterns, unemployment rates, etc. differ con--
slderably for a 20 year old compared with a 30 year old.
      Some recent studies have defined a supply or cohort variable

(denoted RPY) for each of the youth age-sex groups that includes

in the numerator only For example, the black males population
18—19 asa percentage of the 16+ population would be used to

explain unemployment of that age-sex—race group. Our view is
that this is too limiting a view of the degree of substitution
acráss inputs. Labor market behavior over the past two decades

show more similarities than differences across youth age—sex—race
groups. When the RPy1 variable has been successful it is largely

capturing the worsening unemployment position of black relative
to white youth. As shall be discussed bc-low, however, black youth

are not doing worse than comparable white groups by all economic
yardsticks. For example, for school enrollment rates and relative

wages, blacks show significant relative improvement. This suggest.
that RPy will not provide a consistent answer to the changing
white—black differential.


B. The Government Policy Variable

      Although properly specified unemployment equation should
contain separate variables to represent transfer payments, direct

job creation and minimum wages, this cannot he done. If a reason-
able attempt were made to collect data on these variables, perhaps
some progress could be   made. The data, however, are incredibly

scanty given the size of the programs.
     In addition, data problems are complicated by the fact that
the social legislation programs including transfers minimum wages,
and direct job creation are not made independently of each other.

That is, policy innovations in one program are likely to be
reflected in others. Basically, the political and social pres-
sures do not become concentrated in one area. Rather, as was
clearly the case during the 1960's and 1970's, the forces that

can yield changes in one policy are also likely to cause similar
changes in others.

     Welfare payments, especially in—kind such as food stamps,

have shown substantial growth relative to average wages since the

early 1960's. After having declined slightly relative to market
wages between 1948 and the early 1960's, AFDC payments have
increased more rapidly than market wages through the middle 1970's.
For example, with 1965 as the base year, market wages have grown

88 percent through 1975, while AFDC payments have increased by
115 percent. Only in 1976 through 1978, has the relatively faster
growth rate of AFDC payments been reversed. The AFDC figures,

however, understate the actual change in welfare payments. The
largest growth in welfare has been in income—in—kind transfers,
which do not appear in the AFDC data. The growth rate in food
stamp payments has not only been large, but has now reached a

significant proportion of total welfare payments. Consequently,
over the past ten years, there has been a major increase in total

welfare payments relative to market wages. If one defines the
cost of being unemployed as the ratio of the market wage to the
level of transfer payments, then the data indicate that the cost
of being unemployed is considerably lower in 1977 than in the
mid-1960's.7
                                                                              —18—




                                        the supply side of the labor
       Governieflt policy actiViS on
                                             o the demand side.
market has been matched by its policies
                                                 with average
AithOUgn minimum wage levels have just kept pace
                                       of coverage in the Fair
wages in the economy, major extensions
                     particularly in 1967, may have strongly
Labor Standards Act,
affected those areas    retai.L, wholesale, and service sectOrS
                                               of employment for
that have raditiOflaliy been important sources
younger workers. In addition, direct job creation has grown
from a near zero base into a major source 'of employment. Thus,
                                    have acted to reduce the number of
while minimum wage law changes
                                                            the
low    wage jobs, direct job creation has tended to work in
opposite    direction. The overall impact has been to shift employ-
                                                 8
ment from the private to the public sector.
       The effect of these programs on unemployment, employment,
                                                           creation
 and labor force participation is not obvious. Direct job
                                                        positive
 may appear to be the best candidate for an unambiguous
 impact--in terms of sign if not magnitude. But on
                                                    closer inspection,
                                                         direct job
 the effect on unemployment is no clear. For example!
                                  individuals out of the labor force
 creation could draw largely from

 and indeed may be a successful enough t!drawing cardT'
                                                        to increase
           force more than the number of slots that can be
                                                                   filled.
 the labor
                         an   increase in unemployment.   Alternatively,
 The results would b
                                 established with high wage rates, it may
 if direct job creation is
                                                                     (Rules
 attract workers from    those   employed in the private sector.

  such   as those requiring a spell of unemployment irnmediate]-y prior
       receiving a government job are easily satisfied) .
                                                          In this
  to
  case, it is possible that low wage private sector workrS would.
                                                                        —19




queue for jobs in the public job creation programY
      Numerous attempts have been made to include the effect of

government transfer programs, minimum wage laws, and direct job
creation, on unemployment rates. The problems with these studies,
however, are important. The basic problem is one of data; or more
precisely, a lack of data. First, very basic data on how these
programs operate are often lacking. This is especially true of
local-run operations such as AFDC and CETA. It is currently
impossible to construct a measure of government manpower programs

with respect to the number of participants, their length of stay

and their demographic composition. Second, few of these programs
have been subject to a serious evaluation so that their effects on
unemployment behavior can be determined.

      In addition to data problems there are several methodological
and econometric problems in estimating. the effects of government

programs especially where the initiative is a discrete once-and—

for—all change. An example is provided by the minimum wage laws.
Minimum wages as a percentage of average hourly earnings in the

private nonfarm economy changed little between 1947 and 1977. Since
minimum wages are set at discrete intervals, therelativeminirnum wage
moves in a saw—tooth pattern, but the overall secular changes have

been minor. The major event in the story of minimum wages between
1948 and 1977 is the change in coverage that took place in 1967
(and to a lesser extent in 1961) .   The 1967 legislation instituted
a major extension centered on low-wage workers in the retail and

service sectors. Unfortunately, econometric techniques for esti—
mating the impact of a spike (the increase in coverage) in the time
series coverage data are not well developed. The estimation
problems are especially severe, since the effects of the
coverage change are likely to have occurred with a relatively

long distributed lag.      It should be noted that the problem in

isolating the effects of the change in coverage in minimum wages
is aggravated by the BLS change in definition for unemployment in

1967. Given the lack of continuing overlapping data, how is it
possible to separate these two discrete events--the change in

definition of unemployment and the change in minimum wage coverage?
      :ost   of the literature dealing with   federal welfare initi—

atves investigates only one program at a time. There are
studies                          assistance, direct job creation,
          on minimum wages, public
etc., but few of these studies atter-.pt to integrate the direct
labor market impact of that single study into the overall package
of programs. The limited range of individual studies is easily
explainable given the data prcblems for each single study. The
problem, however, in evaluating the overall effect of the various
government programs on unemployment is that the programs interact.
The sum of the impacts of the individual studies does not equal
the overall effect of the variety of   programs evaluated together.
      Since   these programs compose an integrated social welfare
scheme, whether intentional or not, their interelationships are
important. The bLidget constraint facing a young, low wage worker,
for example, is shifted upward by the availability of public
assistance, made steeper by minimum wages. and direct job creation
(of high wage jobs), shifted upward    but tilted somewhat downward
in   the lowest earnings region by food stamps, and made flatter by
                                                                           —21-




the tax increase of the OASDI program. Once the individual

has been employed for a short time, eligibility for unemployment

compensation further alters the budget constraint. And this is

a simplified single—individual, single—period budget constraint.
The effect of other wage earners in the family and the inter-

temporal distribution of work, unemployment and leisure pose formi-
dable problems. Essentially, if the programs are designed to be
interrelated, research efforts directed at specific programs will
not permit reliable conclusions on the effects of any of the
various social welfare programs.

      The impact of government social welfare programs is parti-
cularly important for a study of youth. In     general,   it is prim-

arily the young workers (male 16—24 and female 16—34) who have
undergone a shift in their market constraint and find unemployment

relatively less expensive when compared to their potential market
wage. First, these workers are low wage earners, with relatively

little specific training. Second, they are likely to be searching
for a career or (especially teenagers) moving back and forth between
school and labor force activity. Youths tend to have a relatively
low attachment to a given employer or the labor force. Finally,
they are often a secondary wage earner in a family. As a conse-
quence, these workers are closer to the margin of working and not
working, and the dramatic increases in the levels and coverage of
transfer   payments (relative to   market wages) of the past   ten years
would be expected to increase the duration and frequency       of their
unemployment spells.
     After considerable, but largely unsuccessful experimentation
                                                                     —22—




with various proxies for the various programs, the actual govern-
ment variables utilized in the equations is a "compromise vari-

able" of the form W/MW   where W is the average hourly earnings of
workers 16-24 years of age and MW is the minimum wage. An alter-
native variable, W/MW*C, where C is the coverage rate, did not

perform as well across equations. Especially given the lack of
success of the coverage variable, our W/MW cannot be interpreted

as a straight minimum wage effect. As indicated, it cannot be
empirically differentiated, in most equations, from a supply side

variable that measures changes in government transfer programs.
      As mentioned above, major change in the minimum wage is
the change in coverage in 1967. Until the 1978 law, little other
meaningful variation in that variable is evident. Many of the

increases in coverage did not affect low wage workers and the

staggered catch—up increase in the minimum creaked a sooth—tooth

pattern in the data with, if anything, a slightly declining trend
until 1978 of the MW relative to W. That is, the time series
minimum wage variable is largely a spike in 1967. This, of course,

is difficult enough to represent using time series data. Suppose,
however, as is likely, that, firms adjusted with a lag to this

sweeping change in coverage. One possibility is an exponential
declining distributed lag response. Depending upon the speed of
decay, this would move the mean of the response outward in time,

probably to 1968 or 1969. Alternatively, firms may have responded
 very slowly at first This may have included low levels of com-
 pliance or •incomplete compliance in the year immediately after
 1967. With a compliance lag and an employment response lag con-
                                                                         —2:




ditional on compliance, the distributed lag structure could

resemble a parabola with a mean lag into 1970 or beyond.
        Given these possible time profiles for W/MW, and the diffi-

culty of isolating the best fit in the various equations, it is

possible for W/MW to move in near precision with transfer, supply

side variables. Moreover, as mentioned above, this multicollinea—
ritymaybe a conceptual as well as a data problem. To the extent
that individuals form their reservation wages as a function of MW

and transfer payments are adjusted to conform to the same under-
lying inflation and real income changes effects, the M construct
may he a good approximation to the reservation wage of workers.

To the extent    that the minimum   wage helps to determine the reser-
vation wage of low wage workers, the greater the d.ifficuity in
differentiating supply and demand effects.
C.     Empirical Results for the Reduced Form Unemployment Equation

        Given a lack of agreement or data on the control variables,
especially government policy variables, to be introduced into the
unemployment equation, it is useful to start with the simplest

equation. Shown in Table 1, this equation only includes RPY, U
and the seasonal dummies. As can be seen, the coefficients on RPy

are all positive and, as would be expected, indicate higher elasti-
cities for females and blacks. The Durbin-Watson statistics and
—.)
R     are generally good.
        Since the "cohort overcrowding" effect operates like a trend
variable for half of the sample Deriod, namely between 1958 and

1972, it is useful to see whether RPy is simply picking up a trend
                                                                       —24




effect. Prior to 1958, RPy is either stable or declining and after
1972 it remains largely unchanged. The question is whether youth

unemployment, after controlling for UPM is best approximated by a
trend or a cohort overcrowding variable. Of the 18 age—sex-race
groups, the equation with RPy instead of a trend yields a higher
   in 15 equations. This provides mild support for the RPy van-
able. Given their collinearity, it is not possible to distinguish
RPy and TREND to the desired extent. Beginning in the late 1970's,
however, these two variables diverge sharply. The RPy variable
tends to be strongest in female and white male equations and

weakest in black male equations. This pattern will appear with

consistency regardless of the exact specification and/or the sample
period of the equation.
        These results suggest that secular or intermediate swings in

female and white youth unemployment rates do track well with RPy.
The implication for the. unemployment rates of youth groups is that

they have largely peaked, relative to prime—age male unemployment
rates. That is, the steady deterioration in the relative unemploy-
ment rates of most youth groups should be finished. Needless to
say, we would be more comfortable with this conclusion if the data
period were longer and included several complete intermediate

swing cycles. The unemployment data by race, however, do not pre-
date the 1950's and the unemployment data by age and sex are only

available since the late 1940's.
        The one major exception to the notion that youth unemploy-
ment rates may be peaking are black males. Their unemployment
rates continue to deteriorate in relative terms in the late
1970's. It is for this reason that the trend variable has a
larger t statistic than RPy in the black male equations. A major
problem is to explain this divergence between black male youth
unemployment rates and those of other youth groups.10
                                                                            --26—




III. Other Indicators of the Labor Market Status of Youth

     Youth unemployment is a more complex phenomenon than is

unemployment for other age groups. Essentially, the unemployment
rate construct is not attuned to the unique features of the youth
labor market. Rather, it is based on the type of frictional and
cyciical unemployment which is most relevant to prime-age males

and, in general, to workers with a strong labor market attachment.

     Youth unemployment, on the other hand, is much more difficult

to categorize. The key difference is that,wherea.s prime-age males
tend to be in the labor force year-round, full-time (either employed

or unemployed), youth are frequently noving amonjohs or into and
out of the labor force. For example, of the 4.24 million males
age 18—19, only 2.37 million were in the labor force and not in
school in 1978. Of the 4.23 million males age 16—17, only 1.12
million were in the labor force and not in school. Furthermore,
since these numbers are annual averages, (and thus include the

summer months when many youth are not in school) ,     they overstate
the number that are in the labor market and not in school the

remainder of the year.
      Essentially there are many options open to youth that fit
 into trad.ition.l roles, besides being in   the labor market Young
 people, fo example, can be in school, in the military, or at           home

 beginning to raise their own families. In addition, they can
 combine   these different activities; for example, a disproportionate
 number of youth who are in the labor market are part-time workers.
 An increasing percentage of these   ôornbines being   full-time students

 and part—time workers. Moreover, the choice of activities shiTts
                                                                      —27—




frequently over the years. Relatively few young people       age 16
to 19,work year—round,- full—time. One traditional pattern for
this group is to work full-time only during the summer months.
Even for those who are not in school, changes in status between

being employed, unemployed and out of the labor force can occur
several times over the year.

     Of particular importance for an evaluation of the unemploy-
ment issue is that, from society's perspective, working year

round, full-time is not necessarily the most desirable activity
for a young person. For prime—age males, the social ordering of

activities is clear; working year-round, full-time is the desired
role. For young people, particularly for teenagers, attending
school may be preferable, from society's perspective, to working

To some, serving ones military obligation also ranks above
civilian employment for male youth. For young females, staying
home and raising a family may be viewed more -avorable than
working.

      Given this perspective, the youth unemploymnnt rate has four
major problems. First, since many if not most youth are not in the
labor force at any given point in time, the unemployment rate is
a very incomplete measure of that group's economic position and

well-being. Second, since youth move frequently between employ-
ment, unemployment and various non-labor market activities, and

are disproportionately part-time workers when they work, their
unemployment incidence should be expected to be higher than for
other workers who have stronger attachments to their jobs.

Third, since having a job is not necessarily the preferred activity
                                                                             —28—




and for some youth age groups, is likely to be much inferior to

schooling, changes in the unemployment rate may provide incorrect
information as to the nature and extent of changes in the economic

conditions in youth labor markets. Fourth, since many youth do
not have a firm labor market attachment, the question of whether

they are "actively" seeking work (and thus unemployed by the BLS
definition), is often a judgment call and this leads to a cons ider-

able measurement error.

       Our initial approach is to develop alternative unemployment
rate indicators and analyze how they vary over time. The point is
not that one is better than the other, but rather that they each

provide a different and useful perspective on the prob1em Our
U1 measure simply adds the military to the denominator of the

unemployment rate. Including the military into          is an obvious

addition since that construct is used by the BLS and is referred

to as the total (as distinct from civilian) labor force. Our U2
measure is constructed by adding those in school as well as in the
military to the denominator of the unemployment rate; that is
U/(L÷M÷S-(SflL)). Including individuals in school (but not in
the labor force since they are already included in L) is contro-
versial, but useful. Schooling can be viewed not only as a type         of
employment.,   involving general human capital traiiing, but also as
the   preferred activity for many   of   the youth groups. Including
schooling and military in the denominator, to yield an augumented
labor force (ALF), helps to control for shifts among these acti-

vities which result in fluctuationsin the unemployment rate that
may be related to labor demand conditions. The alternative unem-
ployment rate series for 1978, are shown in Table 2.
                                                                       —2




     The U3 construct, also depicted in Table 2, moves further in

treating schooling on a par with employment. Workers, specifically
those who want to moonlight and work at more than one job, can be

both employed at the first job and unemployed while looking for the
second job. According to the definition of unemployment, however,
such a worker is counted as employed, but not counted as unemployed.

The same issue arises when schooling is included. If an individual
is in school, should they also be counted as unemployed if they.

are looking for a job as well? The U2 measure does count them as
unemployed. It is useful, however, to establish a U3 measure which
excludes this group from the unemployment pool. The U3 variable
is defined as (U-(Urs))/L+M÷s—(srL).

     The justification for this is that individuals whose major

activity is. school are likely to be part-time workers with a

relatively marginal aftachment to a job. The fact that they are in
school indicates that they will soon be locking for a different

kind of job. Moreover, reporting errors for this group are
especially large. What constitutes active job search for full—
time students who are looking for part—time jobs?

     Whether or not one agrees with this argument, tJ3 is still

an interesting measure of unemployment. Correctly interpreted,
it is the unemployment rate of non-enrolled youth as a percentage
of the population that is in school, the military, or the labor

force. The difference between U and U3 is even larger than for U

and U2. First, the unemployment rates are again reduced consider-

ably with the largest reductions affecting the youngest age group.
For example, for white youth 16-17, the unemployment rate for non-
                                                                            —30—




enrollees,as a percentage of the school and total labor force, is

4 percent. If schooling is viewed as a job (an investment in

human capital for future productivity), then this age group is

nearly fully employed. Futhermore, one can make a good argument
that U3 is closer to the meaning of unemployment for nonyouth than

is the regular unemployment rate.

        EssentialLy, whiteyouth age 16-17 are largely in SChOOl.

 Th school enrllment rate for white males l6i7          as an annual

 average    is 63.7 percent in 19.78. But, s mentioned above, teenage
 labor   force statistics need to be inspected     for the nonsummer
 period    as well as an annual average. For example, during the

 first quarter of      1978, the school enrollment rate for   white males

 l6—J7 was 81.4 percent. The J3 rate        in the first quarter of 1978
 was 2.6    percent. That is, most of the ii7 year olds        are in—
 school in the winter and many of these are unemployed during the
 sumrer.     The   unemployed rate   for nonenrollees during th winter
 is    below the unemployment rate for white, prime—age males.

         Even for blaci.s, age 16—17, unemployment while not n—scnool

-is    largely a summertime activity. I'or black males, age 16—17,
 U. s on'y 7. 8 percent ccmpare with a BLS measuree unemployment
 rate 0: '0.7. booking at tne rst quarter of i73, instead of
 the   annual data, the U3 rate falls to 4.0 percenb.
        An important result of table 2 is to show that black unemploy-

ment for 18—24 age group remains a problem even after moving from
 a U2 to a U3 construct. Having riai.rowedthe definil:.ion so that
 it only covers the non-enrolled as a percentage of the school and
work    forces, itis di.strubing that the reuit.ing t33 measure is
                                                                          —31-




 still approximately 15 percent for nonwhites. Moreover, the black
U3 rates for the 18—24 age groups are still more than double the
white U3 rates for comparable groups.

     The resulting basic regression equations for U and        through
U3 are shown in Table 3. Since the schooling data, at the desired

level of disaggregation are only available from 1962, the sample
period is shortened to 1962:4 through 1978:4.     For comparison
purposes, the U equation of Table 1 are reestimated for the shorter

time period. Over the shorter time period, RPy is close to a trend;
the major deviation is that RPy stablizes in the 1970's. One result
is to make RPy insignificant in 7 of the 18 equations. In the
                                                                     U1
equation (the total as distinct from civilian labor force) , RPy

is again significant in all of the male equations. For the tJ2 and
U3 equations, RPy is significant in all but a fow   of   the black
youth equations.
     The notion that the alternative unemployment rate indicators,

and especially U3 may be a better cyclical indicator of youth
unemployment is supported by analyzing the coefficient or. the
term. For all but one male equation, the coefficient on U is
higher when U3 rather than U is the dependent variable. In the
 female equation, the coefficient on UPM is also larger for U3

than U for all the younger groups (where the school population is
a significant percentage of the total) .   Only for the 20—24 female
age groups are the coefficients insignificantly different from
each other.
IV. The  Alternative Activity Equations — Employment, Unemployment,
     School, Other
A.   Background

     Analyzing the labor market and general economic status of

youth by focusing on unemployment has severe problems. Of the

four major activities which span the youth population, employment,
unemployment, schooling, and residual (denoted Pn), the unemploy-

ment category is the smallest. Furthermore, the response error
for unemployment is considerably larger than for employment and
schooling. Especially for youth who may be either in school and
looking for a part-time job or out of school for the summer and

interested in working, the BLS question that refers to t'activeiy"

seeking work is ambiguous. Indeed, for most youth groups arid
particularly for teenagers, the notion of unemployment and hence
labor force is sufficiently flawed as to be a weak statistic for

policy   purposes.
     To avoid concentrating soley on unemployment, we suggest a

strategy of studying employment, unemployment, schooling, and the
residual category together. This allows for the observation of
flows across categories. For example, it is useful to know

whether a change in U   causes   a net increase in the S or Pn
              11
categories.
     One problem with the alternative activity equation approach

is that the residual category, Pn, includes both some of society's
most advantaged and disadvantaged youth. At one extreme, it in-
cludes high school dropouts who have a sufficiently low skill

level that they cannot find a job, youths from welfare families

who would cost their families their eligibility if they accept a
                                                                         —3




job, and youths who are in poor health. On the other hand, it
also includes a large number of young females who are beginning

to raise their family, teenagers who are taking the summer off,
and relatively skilled youth who are pursuing other activities

for a short time between jobs and/or school.
      There is a tendency among some researchers to interpret an

increase in E/P as a positive development, especially if it
does not parailela decrease in S/P. The work ethic aside, there
is little basis for this view. Although it would be an easier
problem if Pn only included problem nonworkers, an inspection of
the data suggests that this is not the case. The bulk of workers

in the Pn category are neither discouraged or disadvantaged.

      In the equations, we disaggregate the youth age-sox-race
population into four mutually exclusive categories The cate-

gories are U/P, (E±M)/P,   (S-(SflL))/P    and   Pn/P. These dependent
variables were regressed on the same set of independent variables,

as indicated in equation (   7 ),   with   the one exception that the

military were included in the male equations and a time trend in

the   famale equations.
       By construction, the sum of the four dependent variables
should be equal to one. The problem when estimating these depen-
dent variables by single equation techniques is that the linear
restriction across equations may not be satisfied. In order to

estimate the coefficients of the explanatory variables for these

four choices, subject to the linear constraint across equations,

we used the logarithm of the pairwise odds as the dependent vari-
ables. To illustrate, denote tiie four youth categories as
                                                                         —34-




                                          The dependent vari-
p, 0< p.<1, i =     1,2,3,4,   and

ables are then in (P/P1)        i= 2,3,4. The regressions determine
the ratios of the probabilities.' The absolute values can then be
estimated using the condition that the sum of probabilities is

equal to unity. The implicit coefficients of the respective
independent variables can be obtained by numerical estimation.

Based on the coefficients from the P/P1 equations, the probabil-

ities were computed by changing one specific right-hand-side
variable by one percent. These computed probabilities were com-
pared with the corresponding original estimates to derive the
implicit elasticities at a given period. These numerically
derived elasticities for the third quarter of 1978 are reported

in Table 4 by each variable..

     For those who prefer to analyze estimated coefficients
directly, the equations for the four activities, unconstrained by
 4
          arc   shown in Table 5.


A The Impact of RPy

     In the unconstrained equations of Table 5, the RPy variable

has a correct and significant coefficient in the U/P equation in

only six of the equations. The difference between the greater

success   of RPy in   Tables 1 and 5 reflects the fact that the depen-

dent variable is different,      the time period is longer, and the
time trend or AF/POP variable is omitted in Table 1..      Both TREI)

and AF/POP are highly collinear with RPy over the short sample
period, 1962 to 1978. It is clear that data from this period are
ccmpatibie dth a number of alternative explanations..       This is
                                                                     —35-




especially the case since our emphasis is on intermediate rather
than short business cycle swings.

     For the constrained U/P equations, 6 of the male and 5 of the
female equations had the anticipated sign on RPy. It is inte-
resting that the incorrect signs were for the black equations in
all but one case. Does this suggest that the labor market for

black youths has improved with demographic overcrowding?
     To analyze this puzzling result, it is necessary to evaluate

the other three activity equations. They indicate that the
negative coefficients on RPy in the U/P equations do not indicate
an improvement in blacks labor market position. Of particular
importance are the E/P equations. For all but three of the eigh-
teen equations, E/P is negatively related to RPy. The only
equation for blacks where the coefficient is positive is females

20—24. Moreover, the implied elasticities on RPy in the E/P
equations are considerably larger for blacks than for whites.

     The public policy debate on youth unemployment invariably
is in terms of the ELS unemployment variable, U/L. It is there-
fore useful to convert the U/P and E/P equations of Table 4 so
that their implications for the more traditional U/L and L/P

variables can be analyzed. The results are shown in Table 6.
Column 1 of Table 6 shows that the elasticity of U/L with respect

to RPy has the anticipated postive sign in all but two equations
(black females 16—17 and 20—24).

     Column 5 shows the elasticity of L/P with respect to RPy.

The anticipated negative elasticity is again found in all but two
equations (total males 16—17 and white males 16—17) .   For L/P,
                                                                         —36—




elasticity is largest for the black groups (in absolute value)
and second largest for the female groups. In all white and
total equations the negative impact is greater for females
than for comparable male groups. In two of the three black
equations, the black males sufferd a larger decrease in L/P

than did females.
       The results of Tables 4 and 6 make   it   clear that both black

and white youth labor market positions are adversely affected by
demographic overcrowding. However, the response pattern of the

two groups differs. For white youth, unemployment increases are
large because of relative stability in the labor force par±iCi--
pation rates. For black youth, the unemployment response to iPy

appears   low but this is mainly because of a sharp negative ad-
justment of L/P.
       Given the linear restriction across equations, an increase
in    one of the Ps requires a reduction in another. What happens
to those workers who are not employed as a result of cohort over—

crowding     The implicit coefficients for RPy in the (S—(SrL))/P

and Pn/P equations provide an answer.
        Essentially, anincrease in RPy, ceteris paribus, leads to
 an increase in U/P, a decrease in E/P, an
                                           increa3e in (3- (.SflL ) /P
 and an increase in Pn,'P. The displaced employed workers larqe].y
 migrate to full—time school and/or to household activities. This
 is   not, however, the complete story of the demographic over-
 crowding because of the ceteris paribus assumpiOfl.       That is,

 RPy does not reflect the full eftect of demographic overcrowding;
 changes in other variables should also be anticipated.
                                                         An obvious
                                                                     —37.




secondary impact of demographic overcrowding will occur by
altering the numerator in W/MW. Indeed, with the endogenous

policy response assumption, discussed above, W/MW should decline
because both MW is rising and U is falling (in relative terms)

Finally, the TREND term poses obvious problems. Since the inter-
mediate-run demographic swings are higly correlated with a trend
variable over the estimation period, it is likely that TREND

will capture some of these affects. But these cannot be identified
since the TREND variable cannot be linked to any hypothesis.

B. The Impact of UPM


     The cyclical variable, UPM,produced the anticipated results.
As illustrated in Tables 4 and 5, increases in tJ4 are associated

with little change in schooling, an increase in U/P, a decrease
in E/P and an increase in Pn/P.

    The elasticities of U/P with respect to UPM are always the
largest for white males. In addition, the elasticites tend to
be larger for whites than for blacks, males than for females,
and older than for younger workers. For all age—sex—race
categories the elasticities are less than unity.

     The overall results suggest a ranking of youth groups in
terms of the cyclical vs. structural sensitivity of their un-

employment rates (U/P). In general, youth are more structurally
than cyclically sensitive in comparison with nonyoutb. Females,
and the youngest youth groups are the most sensitive to structural
rather than cyclical swings in unemployment.
                                                                      —38—




      The ranking is also reflected in industry employment. For

example, the older male groups have a high concentration of

employment on the high wage, cyclically sensitive industries
such as mining, manufacturing and construction. The youngerand
female groups are more heavily represented in the low wage, a
cyclical industries such as retail and service. Industry employ-
ment patterns, however cannot he viewed simply as a causal

factor in the unemployment behavior of these groups. Rather,
the underlying structural features of these groups' labor market

behavior is likely to determine the industry employment. For

example, the 16—17 age group, looking for part-time, after
school work, is most suited for employment in the retail and
service sectors. Training cost and work scheduling in industries

such as manufacturing are not suitable for this group's casual

labor market attachment.
      The ranking of black and white groups, in terms of the

cyclical vs. structural issue, is more difficult than ranking

age—sex groups. Although blacks have a lower elasticity of (3/P
with respect to U1 it is necessary to inspect the E/P as well

as   the U/P equation. Of particular interest is that black youth
have a considerably higher E/P sensitivity to the business cycle
than whites. That is, black youth have a lower U/P, but a
higher E/P elasticity with respect to UPM. Since blacks and
whites     tend to be equally employed, in percentage terms, in the

high and low wage industries, the cyclical nature of different
industries cannot be a factor.

       A   possible interpretation is that the black youth   ibor
                                                                           —39.-.




market response is more closely related to fluctuations in        lay-.

of fs and hires. For white youth, on the other hand, changes in

labor market status, as reflected in reentrant and new entrant

rates, may be relatively more important. In any case, the ranking
across race are more complex than across age and sex.

      Further support for this contention is implicit in the
partial correlation coefficients shown in Table 7. In general,
the partial correlation coefficients for UPM in the white unemploy--

ment and employment equations are generally greater than for com-
parable black equation. Taking account of the lower         for the
black equations, however, alters the picture. In general, the
contribution to R2        UPM is relatively higher in the black
employment equations and th.e white unemployment equations. For
age—sex groups, however, the partial correJation coefficients for
both U/p and E/P with respect to UPM indicate a higher correlation
for older and male workers relative to younger and female workers.

C.   The Impact of W/MW

     Although the relative wage term is only marginally signi-
ficant in the unconstrained equations, ft exihits
                                                        consistent
and anticipated sign in the constrained equations. For all but
one demographic group, changes in schooling, unemployment and
                                                                     the
residual category are inversely related , while changes in employ-
ment are directly related to movements in W/MW. In other words,
an increase in the youth market wage, ceterisparibLis, is related
to a shift into employment and out of all other actjvities.
      Of particular interest isthe reltionship between unemploy—
                                                                       —40—




ment (U/P) and w/Mw. As suggested in the text, the unemployment
rate of youth depends upon the cost of being unemployed. Inter-
preting MW as a proxy for the reservation wage, an increase in
the market wage, W, leads to an increase in the cost of unemploy-
ment and hence a decrease in the unemployment rate. To the extent

that W/MW represents a minimum wage variable, however, the decrease

in U/P, following an increase in W/MW, would be intepreted as a
demand side effect. These two views cannot be separately iso-

lated on the basis of the time series data.    Certainly, the ab-

sence of a significant FLSA coverage effect is a strong factor
against interpreting the coefficient on W/MW as an indication of

displacement due to the minimum wage policy.     On the other hand,

even if MW represents a combined supply—dnmand side government
social policy variable, the result implies that poliCiCS that
increase the skill level and market wage faster than the "social-

economic11 minimum wage are likely to reduce the youth unemploy-

ment rate.
     The one category which shows a mixed pattern with respect

 to W/MW is Pn.. For females, the three black groups and one white

 group are positively related, while two white groups are nega-
 tively related to W/MW. Given the composition of Pn, a priori
 predictions on the signs of coefficients are not obvious. One
 factor, however, is that the female Pn category contains many more

 home—workers that are raising families than the male Pn category.
                                                 with a demographic
 The resulting sign pattern is thus compatible

 overcrowding interpretation.   :[n particular, a deterioration in
                                    size and lead to an exit from Pn
 W/MW may reduce completed family
on the part of females. Since this household behavior response
is not likely to be a factor in the male equations, the cost of

unemployment argument should be dominant and explain the negative

coefficient on W/MW.


D. The Impact of AF/POP

       The armed forces variable has an important role    in the
unemployment rate patterns between whites and blacks. First,. this
variable has a large variance over the estimation period, rising
sharply during the Vietnam War and then declining close to its

pre—war levels during the mid to late 1970's.       Second, the black

and white male groups respond differently to AF/POP. Unfortu-

nately, given the    data period, variation in AF/POP, especia].ly
its sharp increase to a peak value in the early 1970's parallels
RPy. This may reduce the confidence that can be placed in
separately interpreting these two quite different independent
variables.
       In   the constrained unemployment equations, the implicit
coefficient on AF/POP was negative in each of the      nine male
equations. Comparing the white and black equations, however,
indicates a much greater sensitivity of black unemployment to
military employment. This may help to explain the fact L-Jiat
black youth unemployment has deteriorated, relative to white
youth, since the early 1970's. Since both the percentage of the
military that is black and the percentage of black in the military
 ha increased since the change to all volunteer forces, the decline
 in   AF/POPli however, cannot he   blamed for the unemployment trends.
        The major differences in employment response also reflect
                                                                     —42




the greater sensitivity of black labor market conditions to the

level of military employment. For employment, the coefficient
differences between whites and blacks are particularly large.

Indeed, white employment in the 18-19 age group actuallydeclines
with increases in military employment. This is particularly
surprising since E/P includes M as part of employment. In other
words, an increase in the miltary is associated with a decline in
civilian employment for whites 18—19 that is larger than the num-

ber of whites who enter the military.
     The differential white-black response pattern also holds for
schooling. The increase in AF/POP is associated with a much larger

increase in white than in black schooling. This is probably
capturing behavior during the draft period, when increases in
AF/POP encouraged youth to renaii or return to schooL to secure

student deferments.
                                                                     —43—




V. Considerations in the Deterioration of the Black Youth Labor
    Market

A. Unemployment and Labor Force Developments

     Two basic factors have been isolated in the data which sug-

gest a deterioration in the labor market for black youth dunn';
the 1970's. The first is that black youth unemployment deterio—
rates throughout the 1970's whereas white youth unemployment
largely peaks in the early 1970's. The second is that black
youth E/P ratios fall over most of the past decade while white

E/P ratios were increasing. Since unemployment rate increases
may be less of a problem if attributable to increases in partici-
pation rates, it is important to consider these factors together.
For males, the participation rates for blacks decreased sub-
stantially for all age groups, while the rates for whites

increased for all age groups. For females, the situation is some-
what different. Both whites and blacks showed increasing partici-

pation rates during the period. However, the percentage growth
rates in participation rates were much smaller for blacks than
for whites for all female cohorts. In sum, these changes in
unemployment and participation rates translate into a sharp
decline in black male youth E/P relative to white male youth.
(See Table 8.)

     We have generally attributed the youth unemployment develop-
ments of the past decade to supply side factors. In the case of
black males, however, the data on U/L and E/P indicates a possibly

different picture. Presumably, increases in U,'L combined with
decreases in L/p give, at least the impression, of a deterio—
                                                                    —44—




ration in demand conditions. To what extent has the demand for
black males shifted adversely relative to whites and black
females?

B. Trends in Secular Wages

     Whereas the employment situations have worsened £cr black
relative to whites, the relative wages for blacks have increased
continuously during the last decade. The overall white median

usual weekly earnings of full-time, wage and salary workers
increased by 6,7 percent per year between 1967 and 1977. However,

the corresponding wage growth for blacks was 3.0 percent on
average during the same period. The black-white wage ratios in-
creased from 0.692 to 0.776 for males arid from 0.797 to 0.936

for females during   the   period.
    The    full-time usual weekly earnings of youth who;e major
activities are other than school. also show a similar pattern.
This is shown in Table 9. Here again, the gap between black and
white wage differentials has narrowed over time. Except for
females age 16—17, the wage of all black groups rose more than
that of the comparable white groups. The black-white wage
ratios increased from 0.832, 0.735, and. 0.740 to 0.73, 0.799 and

0.868 for males age 16—17, 18—19 and 20—24 qroups, respectively

between 1967 and 1978. For females, the corresponding ratios
changed from 1.125, 0.829 and 0.830 to 0.914, 1.034 and 0.928,
respectively. The puzzling question is that the black male
groups, whose labor market condition measured by unemployment-

employment   indicators was worse than any other youth group,
enjoyed   relatively better earnings growth than other groups.
                                                                     —45—




C. Trends in Industry Employment

     To further explore the issue of deteriorating U/L and E/P
rates for black youth, coupled with increasing relative wages, it

is useful to explore the industry employment of black and white
youth. For ease of analysis we use the percentage of each youth
group who are employed in the retail and service sector, compared
with total employment of each demographic group. The retail and
service sectors are the major employers of youth and are the

lowest wage sectors. The data, presented in Table 10, illustrate
two overall developments. First, the percentage of black employ-
ment that is found in the lowest wage sectors is approximately
equal to the percentage of white employment in these sectors.
There ar slightly more black males but many fewer black females

(as a percentage), in comparison with the comparable white groups,
in the low wage sectors. Second, changes in the percentage of
low wage employment has worsened for black relative to white
males, but improved for black relative to white females.

     What is clear about these statistics is that they are not
of great help in clarifying the puzzle. As a compositional issue,
the improvement in black relative wages cannot be explained by
the nonimprovement in their occupational status. However, there
is also no evidence of a significant deterioration in the employ—
ment status of black males that could explain their declining

E/P and rising U/L rates.
     For   those who believe that each age—sex-race group has its
own RPy. kariable as the proper cohort overcrowding variable,
there is no problem in explaining the   declining   black male
                                                                          —46—




employment ratios. Specifically, the ratio of black youth
employment to white youth employment (where employment includes
the military) has been virtually unchanged since 1965. This is

depicted in Table 11. According to the "RPy" model, the entire
deterioration in E/P ratios for black males can thus be asso-

ciated with their increasing percentage in the youth population.
Since we believe that overcrowding is better defined over youth
as a single group, we do find this result a compelling explanation.

Moreover, the puzzle of declining E/P ratios for black males com-
bined with increasing relative wage rates cannot be attributed to
the. higher growth rate of the black youth population.


D. Trends in School Enrollment

      One of the main distinctive features between whites and
bladks over the lact decade is that the school enrollment rates

for all black groups increased, substantially more than for whites.

Except for females age 20—24, the enrollment rates for whites

decreased for all age—sex groups between 1965 and 1978.. During
the same periods the enrollment rates for blacks consistently
increased. Furthermore, although the enrollment rates for all
black age—sex groups were lower than those for the corresponding
white groups in 1965, the situation was reversed by 1978. That
is,   by 1978,   the enrollment rates for all black age-sex   groups

were higher than the comparable white groups.
       Does the increase in   school   enrollment rates for black males

                          E/P rates? The answer can be Leen by
 equal the decline in their
 comparing Tables 8 and 12. The increase in school enrollment
                                                                     —47-




captures almost all of the decline in E/P for black males 16—17.

For black males 18-19, it picks up 4 of the 10 percentage point
decline. For the 20—24 black male group, a 17 percentage point
decline on E/P is reduced to 10 percentage points when S/P is
added. Perhaps as important, is that the high gap between E/P
rates for whites and blacks becomes a very narrow gap for most
age-sex groups when (E+(S-(SflE))/P is used as an indicator of

labor market position.

     The nature of the problem and the question of which group

does better depends upon how one evaluates schooling vs. employ-
ment for youth. In level terms as of 1978, white youth enjoy an

advantage, in the combined employment plus schooling ratio, over
comparable black youth. The trend is less obvious. The increase
in white employment ratios is, in part, due to their deteriorating
school enrollment and increasing part—time work while in schcoU
The decrease in black employment ratios is, in part, due to
their increasing school enrollments. In addition, black enroll-
ment has gained without a significant increase in after-school
work (comparable to that found for white enrollees).
                                                                        —48-




VI. Summary

        In this paper we have advanced the argument that the deterio-

ration in the absolute and relative unemployment ratio of youth
is due primarily to a cohort overcrowding effect. Other variables
that seem to have a role are the declines in the size of military

service since the Vietnam War, the decline in market wage for
youth relative to some combination of minimum wages and government

transfer programs, and a cyclical variable representing changes
in demand. Since we control for the business cycle, which does
not have a secular trend, the deterioration in the labor market

for youth over the past two decades can be ascribed to labor supply

factors. That is, the increasing unemployment rate of this group
represents an :acrease in their equilibrium unemployment rate
due to overcrowding and the associated decline in market wages

relative    to government program variable.
        The BLS measured unemployment rate usually is the center
piece   of the evidence for the declining labor market position of
youth. Although we agree that an important decline has taken
place, the magnitude of the job decline is overstated by the BLS
statistics. Indeed, we argue that the BLS unemployment rate for
youth is a very weak statistic for policy purposes. Other
measures of unemployment and/or employment ratios show less of a

decline than do the BLS measures. For example, the percentage
of youth who are either employed or in school is only slightly
down from the    1965 levels. We argue that this variable, or an un-
employment    rate construct which treats schooling as equilivalent
in           o employment, re       useful .tndicatozs,c.the labor
                                                                    —49




market position of youth with respect to jobs.
    Whereas the job decline is less serious than the BLS
unemployment rate indicates, the decline in the relative wage

of youth may be more central to the relevant issues. That is,

the labor market problem of youth is more a problem of low
wages than of a lack of jobs.   The increasing employment-PoPu-

lation ratio of most youth groups, in spite of the high increase
in their population, is one source of evidence of the ability of

the economy to create laige numbers of youth jobs.
     Black males are the one age-sex-race youth group that com-

bines steadily deteriorating unemployment and employment ratios.

Thereare problems, however, in determining to what extent the
overall position of this group has declined. First, the relative
                                                     relative to
wage of black yOUth, males and females, has improved
white youth. Second, the decline in employment and increase in
relative wages has not been matched by a significant change in
 the proportion of black. males in the low wage industries. The

 percentage of black male employment remains approximately the

 same as the percentage of white male employment in the low wage
 sectors. Finally, the school enrollment rate has been increasing

 for blacks and decreasing for whites.   As a result: the ratios

 of those employed plus those in school, as a percentage of the
 relevant population, shows less of a difference between black

 and white youth than the employment ratios alone.
        It is difficult to weigh the decline in employment and

 increase in unemployment, against the increase in relaLive wages
 and school enrollment. The increase in the percentage of black
                                                                       —50-




males who are both out of school and not employed implies that a

component of the black male youth population has suffered a signi-..
ficant decline in their relative economic status. This suggests
that the variance of the black male, 16-24, labor market position

may be Increasing, with some gaining and others losing position
relative to white youth.
                                                                         V
                                                                                  —51




                              Table 1

           Unemployment Equations with Demographic
                    Overcrowding Variable:

1954:1 — 1978:4
                      MALE         .                     FEMALE
Age-race
16-17
             RPy         U             R2/DW    RPy       UPM

Total       1.0424       .3347     .796/1.832   1.1466 .2382         .748/1.908
            (14.82)      (12.37)                (11.77) (6.36)

White       .8592        .3528     .760/1.808   1.0103 .2667         .707/2.078
            (11.22)      (11.98)                (9.34)     (6.41)

Black       2.2524       .2879     .728/1.478   2.0174 .1515         .658/1.490
            (16.19)      (5.38)                 (13.37) (2.61)


18-19
Total       .4446        .5576     .843/1.337   1.2097 .2881         .743/1.188
            (6.40)       (20.86)                (14.24) (6.82)

White       .2386        .5862     .836/1.404   1.1605 .3137         .675/1.200
            (3.13)       (19.97)                (11.31) (7.95)

Black       1.4952       .4938     .633/1.140   1.2334 .2403         .617/1.589
            (10.99)      (9.43)                 (11.90) (6.02)


20—24
Total       .5090        .8548     .910/.702    1.1347 .5098         .891/1.360
            (6.68)       (29.16)                (19.67) (22.97)

White       .4733        .8629     .893/.728    1.2004 .5150         .874/1.388
            (5.51)       (26.12)                (18.43) (20.59)

Black       .7793        .8352     .760/.879    .9269      .4782     .652/1.101
            (6.06)       (16.87)                (8.77)     (11.76)
                                                                                  -....) .—




                             Table 2

           Alternative Measures of Unemployment:
                               1978



          U or               U1 or              U2 or                U3 or
          BLS Unemplo —      Unemployment       Unemploy-            Unemp by-
          ment        Rate   Divided by         ment Divided         ment of
                             Labor Force        by Labor Force       NonenroileeS
                             + Military (b)     4-   School    jf-
                                                                     Divided by
                                                Military       n•C   Labor
                                                                     Force +
                                                                     School      (j)
                                                                     Miii Lary



Male
White                                                 10. 1             4.8
                      1          16 . 9
16—17          17 .
                                                       8.0              6.1
lS 19          10 - 9            10.0
                                                       6.4              5.8
20—24           7.6                7.1

Black                                                 15.4              7,8
                                 39 . 9
16—17          40.7
                                                      18.5             14. 2
               30.9              26 . 3
18—19                                                                  13. 6
                                  17 -   3            15. 2
20—24          20.1

Female
White                                                  9. 8              4.8
               17.1               17.1
16—17                                                                    7,6
                                  12.3                 9.5
18—19          12.3
                                                        7.5              6.9
                 8.3                  8.2
20—24
           •


Black                                                                    8.7
 16-17          41.9              41.9                 14. 8
                                                       23. 8            18. 4
 18-19          36.8              36.,4
                                                       18. 6            16.8
 20-24          21.6              21.3


a) Measured as U/L where U is the number of unemployed and L is the
   civilian labor force.
b) Measured as U/(L±M) where M is the number in the military
c) Measured as U/(L+M+S—(Sr\L)) where S is the number in school and
   (St'L) indicates those who are both in school and in the civilian
   labor force.
d) Measured as (U— (UnS) ) / (L+M+S—   (srL))
                                                                                          —53-




                                        Table 3

             Equations for Alternative Measures of Unemployment*
                              1962:4 — 1978:4

                                      Table 3A

                            BLS Unemployment Rate: U or U/L
                 MALE                                       FEMALE
  Age—Race      RPv U_                            RPy
   16—17

   Total        .5407     .3576      .807/2.056    .3550       .274].       .675/2.39].
                (3.37)    (12.08)                  (1.65)    ( 6.90     )


   White       .3541      .3920      .771/1.971    .3506       .3019        .635/2.386
               (1.85)     (11.11)                  (1.42)    ( 6.65 )
   Black       1.6335     .2439     .668/1.314     .5941       .1969        .464/2.114
               (7.48)     (5.40)                   (2.19)    (3.4   )


   18-19

  Total       -.1747      .5740     .886/1.707     .2787      .3222
               (—1.15)    (20.49)                                            729/1907
                                                   (1.72)     (1Q79)
  Whitc       -.3711      .6t21     .847/1.469    .04079      .3528         .653/1.740
              (—1.93)     (17.23)                  (.20)    (9.28
  Black       .7343       .4893     .735/1.505    1.010       .2453         .584/1.650
              (3.15)      (11.39)                 (4.72)    (6.22)
  20-24
  Total       .9831       .8446     .929/.547     .8265
              5.25                                            .5144         .918/1.330
                         (24.45 )                 (6.54)    (22.07 )
  White       .8541      .8449
              (3.89)     (20.86)
                                    .905/.600     .9553
                                                  (6.82)
                                                             .i .905/1.681
                                                            (i9.  )
  Black       1.5129     .8699      .8621.997     .3576
             (5.32.)     16.60)                                             .766/.656
                                                  (1.62)    (13.19.;)

*A1:L tha variables took logarithmic forms. A constant term and
 three seasonal dummies were included in the estimations.
                                                                                          —54-




                                       Table 3B

                        BLS Total Unemployment Rate:

U1 or U/(L+M)


                MALE                                         FEMALE
   Age -                           2                                         2
   Race     RP y         PM            /DW         RPy           Up              / DW
                                              I-



 16-17

 Total      .6598      .3538     .805/2.040        .3550                    675/2.391
            (4.06)     (11.81)                     (1.65)         (6.90)

 White      .4952      .3858     .768/1.954        .3506          .3019     .635/2.386
            (2.56)     (10.80)                     (1.42)         (6.65)

 Black      1.7378     .2523     .649/1.250        .5941          .1969     ,46z./2.l14
                       (5.49)                      (2.19)         (3.94)



  18-19

  Toa1        5333     .6006     .907/1.808         .2716         .32C5     .727/1.906
             (3.92)    (21.88)                     (1.68)         (18.74)

  White      .4972     .6444     .879/1.595        .03547         .3513     .651/1.740
             (2.69)    (18.92)                     (.1721)        (9.25)

  Black      .6820     .4745     .715/1.540        .9902         .2413      .575/1,542
             (2.90)    (10.96)                     (4.62)        (6.10)



  20-24
  Total      1,3263    .9640     .950/.659         .5124         .5109      .918/1.345
             (7.30)    (29,39)                     (6.47)        (22.07)

  White      1.2697    .9945     .939/. 764        .9440         .5051       .904/1.684
              (6.24)   (26.49)                     (6.76)        (19.61)

   B lack    1.3288    .9368     .870/1.034        .3244         .5311       .764/.668
              (4.64)   (17.76)
                                                                                    —55




                                  Table 3C
                      Unemployment as a Percentage of
                       Total Labor Force + Sckoo1ing

U2 or U/(L+M+s.(srL))

                      MALE                                   FEMALE

  Age-                           —2                                   -2
  Race      RPy                  R /DW                      PM        R /DW

  16-17

  Total     1.4692     .3348     .853/1.917 2.2497         .3313       .866/1.929
           .(.7.22)    (8.92)                  (7.79)      (6.22)
  White     1.540      .3818     .809/1.902 2.4678         .3669       .841/1.982
            (6.46)     (8.69)                (769)         (6.20)

  Black     .7970      .1167     .801/1.260   .9339        .1887      .836/2.035
            (2.90)     (2.30)                 (2.75)       (3.02)


  16-19

  Total     .7614      .6433     .908/1.875 .6656         .3673       .868/1.977
            (4.75)     (21.75)                (4.22)      (12.64)

  White     .7535      .6967     .893/1.774 .5650         .4088       .816/1.886
            (4.05)     (20.33)                (2.86)      (11.22)

  Black     .3326      .4524     .705/1.512 .4412         .2172       .665/1.325
            (1.34)     (9.91)                 (1.71)     (4.56)


   20-24

   TotaL    1.2772     .9919     .948/.685    .7772      .5216        .923/1.339
            (6.98)     (29.41)                (6.16)     (22.43)

   Whita    1.2611     1.0070    .938/.794    .9530      .5215      .914/1.740
            (6.19)     (26.80)                (6.86)     (20.36)

   Black    .9702      .9119     .867/1.118 -.0009927    .5033      .754/.651
            (3.51)     (17.91)                (_;ooL7)   (12.86)
                                                                                             -56




                                            Table 3D

             Unemployment of NonenrolleeS as a Percentage of
                     Total Labor Force + Schooling:

U3 or u—(U(S)
      L+M+S—(S(Th)


                      MALE                                             FEMALE

   Age-
   Race       RPy
                             U
                                 PM
                                        2
                                            /Dw     —    RPY       UPM          /DW
   16-17
                                       .965/1.379       .8963      .4196        .955/1.504
   Total     .5121       .4069
                                                        (2.79)     (7.08)
             (2.10)      (9.07)

                                       .954/1.459       1.4595     .4459        .941/1.567
   White     .6618       .4702
                                                        (3.84)     (6.36)
             (2.33)      (8.99)

                                       .89311.534       -1.6290    .3613        .903/2.005
   1ack      -.560       .1589
                         (1.87)                         (-3.40)    (4.09)
             (-1.22)



    18-19
                                        .924/1.574      .3950      .375k        .911/1.840
    'rotal   .7421       .7667
                                                        (2.49)     (12.83)
             (3.95)      (22.15)

              .8106          .8415      .905/1.512      .3729      .4132        .884/1.776
    White
              (3.58)         (20.17)                    (1.99)     (11.96)
                                        .853/1.688      -.j.06     .2395        .748/1.400
    31ak      .02176         .5226
                                                        (-.497)    (4.60)
              (.101)         (13,18)



     20-24

                             1.0330     .9/+9/,683      .7135      .5124        .91/1,i47
     Total    1.2597
                             (29.69)                    (5.37)     (20.90)
              (6.68)

                                         .9421,742       .9430     .5138        .908/1.470
     White    1.3088         1.0605
                             (27.73)                     (6.45)    (19.06)
              (6.31)

              .7221          .9074       .868/1.174 -.2044         .4883        .737/.805
     Black                                                (-.95)   (12.25)
                (2.66)       (18.14)
                                                                                         —5.;




                                         Table 4

                       Implicit Coefficients Derived From
                               Constrained Equations
                                   Table 4A
                    Implicit Coefficients on RPy: 1978:3

                         MALE                                     FEMALE
Age-         S—(S(L)       U         E       Pn        S-(S(\L)    U     E
Race             P         p         p       p              p      p     p         p
_______      P1           P2        P3      P4         P1         P2      P3       P4

16—17
Total      —.5909       .8093       .2441 —.3843       .8157      .0371   —.0525 —. 4431
White      —.9068      1.0256      .4418 —.7449        .7697      .2165   —.0864 —.380
Black     1.0749       —.3633 —1.5747        .7839   1.6187 —.6933        —.3870 —. 755

18—19
Total      .3485        .3224     —.4480 2.5670      1.7067       .3337   —.5336       .448
White      .1132        .4435     —.3748 2.5505      1.5159       .4852   —.4748       .521'
Black     1.5348       —.5643 —1.0509 3.1120         3.5698 —.0459 —1.6399             .319


20—24
Total     1.4642        .7323     —.3295 2.6901      1.0297 —.2925 —.3222              .696
White     1.1024        .8918     —.2889 2.7870        .7907      .5532 —.4256         .837
Black     5.4521       —.1343     —.6818 2.1400      2.8986 —2.3216       .2857        .080
                                                                                 —5




                                   Table 4B

                     Implicit Coefficients on UPM: 1978:3


                     MALE                                        FEMALE

         S-(S1'\L)    U       E        Pn        S-(SAL) U         E        Pn
Age-                                                                        p
Race       P          p       p        p          p         p      p

         P1           P2      P3       P4        P1         P2     P3       P4
______                                                                            -




16-17
Total     .1051       .2411   —.1001 .0254       .0160      .2273 —.0958    .0500

White     .1093       .3160   —.0858 —.0097      .0271      .2710 —.0872    .0370

Black     .0897      —.1031   —.1872 .1631      —.0369      .0528 —.1830    .1201


18—19
Total     .0155       .5534   —.0963 .1544      —.0505      .3350 —.0819    .0809

White    —.0074       .6405   —.0826 .1137      -.0790      .3993 -•.0728   .089
Black     .1227       .2558   —.2043 .3296       .0835      .1556 —.1684    .0545

20—24
Total     .0600       .7820   —.0824 .1745      —.0599      .4918 —.0618    .0178

White     .0415       .8370   —.0736 .1718      —.0905      .5376 —.0440 —.0035

Black     .2345       .5909   —.1527 .2104       .1207      .3387 —.1908    .1391
                                  Table 4C

                   Implicit Coefficients on W/MW: 1978:3

                     MALE                                       FEMALE
Age-      S-(SL)    U        E       Pn      S-(SAL)           U          E      Pri
Race           P    p        p       p                 p       p          p       p
______    P1        P2       P3      p4           P1          P2         P3       P4
16—17
Total    —.4774    —.2136   .2570 —.0707     —.5827        —.4213.       .2002
White    —.4453    —.4525   .2851 —.1431     —.4966        —.4343        .1844    .135b
Black    —.7215     .6640   .2238,   .1209 -1.0165         —.4865        .9728    .389
18—19
Total    —.4771    —.6632   .1911 —.2976     —.6243        —.2121        .1622    —.   Q3
Whit     —.4762    —.7328   .1491 -.1151 -.5837            —.1601        .1303
Black    -.4218    —.3860   .4460 - .7857     .   8797     m2416         .4702
20—24
Total    —.5435    —1.2411. 1825 —.6549       .0539        —.1235        .0831   mjS77
White    —.4791    —1.2367 .1576 --.6283     .0216         —.0401        .1137   -.2911
Black —1.0187       —.9860 .3465 —.6807 —.5657             —.3967    —.1476      .505
                                                        —60




                          Table 4D

        Implicit Coefficients on AF/POP: 1978:3
                          MALE

          S-(SC\L)        U             E         Fri
                                                  P

           P1             P2           P3         P4

16—17
To€al    .1535       —.1499           .0165   —.0944

White    .1979       —.1134           .0129   —.1351

Black   —.0022       —.3133           .1300    .0347


18—19
         .2845       —.1509          —.0441    .1914
Total
         .3158       —.1082          —.0534    .2297
White

Black    .1484       —.   2810        .0060    .1768


20—24
Total    .2354       —.3668           .0185   —.0174

         .2666       —.3181           .0035    .0767
White

Black    .0940       —.4651           .1108   —.2696
                                                                           —61-

                             Table 5A
        Unemployment/Population Equations, Unconstrained


Males                                                      196204—197804

Age-
Race        Constant    RPy                   AF/POP    W/MW      -



16—17
Total       —2.0684     1.0784    .2399       —.2079    .0317     .803/2.039
            (—2.56)     (3.28)    C.3.3       (—1.80)   (.08)

White       —1.6887     1.3574    .3077       —.1640    —.1862    .764/1.960
            (—1.77)     (3.49)    (4.26)      (—1.20)   (—.40)

Black       —4.0387     —.3904    —.0654      —.3799    .8655     .687/1.551
            (—3.92)     (—.93)    C—. 84)     (—2.58)   (1.71)

18-19
Total       —2.4397     .7053     .6229       —.0379    —.2270    .903/1.865
            (—3.75)     (2.66)    (12.64)     (—.41)    (—.71)

White       —1.8242     .9307     .7306       .0837     —.1707     .893/1.325
            (—2.46)     (3.08)    (13.00)     (.79)     (—.47)

Black       —4.5985     —.4065    .2728       —.3705    —.3581    .646/1.694
            (—4.53)     (—.98)    (3.55)      (—2.55)   (—.72)

20—24
Total       —3.4063     1.1341    .8855       —.2249    —.7889     .954/.708
            (—4.93)     (4.02)    (16.90)     (—2.27)   (—2.31)
White       —2.7873     1.3469    .9512       —.1107    -.7606     .942/.804
            (—3.49)     (4.14)    (.15.73).   (—.97)    (—1.93)

Black       —5.1830     .1883     .6743       —.4954    —.7559     .885/1.390
            (—5.18)     (.46)     (8.89)      (—3.45)   (—1.53)




* Numbers in paratheses are t-statistics
                                                                            —G2—

                       Table 5 A (cont'd)

Females


Age-Race   Constant   RPy        TPM        TREND     W/MW

16—17
Total      —5.0026    —.0391      2222      1.0527    —.0751      .845/2.399
           (--3.41)   (—.05)     (3.98)     (3.97)    C-   .15)
White      —4.7544    .1890      .2621      1.0489    —.1056      .821/2.347
           (—2 .85)   (.23)      (4. 14)    (3.49)    (—.19)

Black      —5.9539    —1.0316 .0616         .9803     —.0189      .718/2.239
           (—3.23)    (—1.15)  (.88)        (2.95)    (—.03)

18—19
Total      —3.2652    .2132      .3234      .3702     .0489       .861/2.098
           (—3.68)    (.49)      (9.58)     (2.31)    (.16)

White      —2.9003    .4201      .3812      .2335     .1263       .804/1.943
           (—2.56k     (.76)     (8.85)     (1.14)    (.33)

Black      —3.8504    —.4324     .1499      .5841     —.0490      .573/1.345
           (—2.52)     (—.58)    (2.58)     (2.12)    (—.09)


20—24
Total      —5.2203    —.0675     .4611      ,9.322    .1305       .957/1.441
           (-7.31)     (—.19)    0.6.98)    (.7023)   (.54)

White      —3.8547     .6748     .4984      .7039     .2478       .945/1.639
           (—4.52)     (1.63)    (15,38)    (4. 57)   (.86)

Black      —8.0263    —1.9284 .3308         1.2921    —.2864      .856/.895
           (—7.70)     (-3.80)    (8.34)    (6.86)    (-   .81)



*Numbers in parantheses are t-statistics                                -
                                                                           —63—

                               Table 5B
         Employment/Population Equations, Unconstrained
Males                                                     196204/197804

-Race Constant          RPy        tJpM        AF/POP     W/MW     R2/DW
16—17
Total      —.6337      .3639       —.1464      —.1132     .2779    .968/1.351
           (—2.69)     (3.79)       (—8.21)    (—3.35)    (2.39)

White      —.3985      .5813       —.1432      —.1533     .2777    .964/1.250
           (—1.59)     (5.70)       (—7.56)    (—4.27)    (2.25)

Black      —2.5894     —1.5095     —.1818      .2284      .4458    .899/1.663
           (—3.53)     (—5.06)      (—3.28)    (2.17)     (1.23)

le—19
Total      —1.6731     —.4181      —.1105      —.1777     .1343    .924/1.438
           (—8.98)     (—5.51)      (—7.83)    (—6.65)    (1.46)

White      —1.6220     —.3363      —.1009      —.1993     .1192    .910/1.356
           (—7.87)     (—4.00)      (—6.46)    (.-6.74)   (1.17)
Black      —2.0530     —.9642      —.1959      —.0468     .2566    .796/1.034
           (—4.37)     (—5.04)      (—5.51)    (—.70)     (1.11)

20—24
Total     —.8036       —.3498      —.0875      —.0420     .0640    .950/.904
          (—lO.0O)     (—10.68)     (—14.38)   (—3.64)    (1.61)
White      —.8562      —.3187      —.0835   —.0662        .0443    .937/.984
           (—10.41)    (—9.51)     (—13.40) (—5.61)       (1.09)

Black     —.4749      —.5754       —.1225      .1179      .2109    .895/.575
           (—1.91)     (—5.69)      (—6.52)    (3.31)     (1.72)

*Nuers   in parentheses are t—statistics
                                                                              —64

                       Table 5B (cont'd)
                                                             196204—197804


Females
                                UPM       TREND    W/MW             2/DW
Age-Race   Constant    RPY

16—17
           —2.6303 —.1395 —.08658 .8445           .4145         .957/1.493
Total                                     (10.11) (2.65)
           (—5.69)    (—.620) (—4.92)

           —2.6341 —.08959 —.08128 .9255          .3578         .963/1.546
White
           (—5.90)    (—.412) (—4.79)     (11.47) (2.37)

           —3.2310 —.9.181 —.1775         .3240    1.3390       .747/1.792
Black                                              (2.51)
           (—2.05)    (—1.19) (—2.96)     (1.14)


18—19
           —2.4362 —.6075 —.06950 .5382            .2404        .901/1.281
Total                                              (2. 15)
           (—7. 35)   (—3.77) (—5.51)     (8.99)

           —2.2858 —.4908 —.05758 .5720            .2166        .908/1.313
White                                              (1.82)
           (—6.50)    (—2.87) (—4.30)     (9.0)

           —4.5769 —1.9323 —.1861         .5001    .4784         .654/1.428
Black                                              (1.68)
            (—5.43)   (—4.71) (—5. 81)    (3.28)


 20—24
           -1.6230 -.07553 —.06043 .5799           .07858        .983/1.473
Total                                              (1.54)
            (—10.77) (—1.03) (—10.55) (21.31)
            —1.8547 —.1637 —.04350 .6493           .1333         .982/1.376
 White
            (-11.01) (-2.0)     (—6.79)    (21.34) (2.34)

                                —.1823   .1741     —.2973        .764/1.202
 Black      —.3065      .4245
             —.702     (2.0)    (—10.98) (2.21)     (-2.01)
                                                                          —65—
                             Table 5C
           Schooling/Population Equations, Unconstrained
                                S— (SrL)
                                  POP

Males                                                 196204— 197804


Age-Race   Constant    RPy         PM        AF/Pop w1j          2/DW
16—17
Total      —.3683      —.2194      .0845     .1989    —.2621     .995/1.657
            (—1.50)    (—2.19)     (4.53)    (5.64)   (—2.16)

White      —.5262      —.4369      .0866     .2507    —.2371     .993/1.461
            (—1. 87)   (—3.82)     (4. 07)   (6.23)   (—1. 71)

Black       .9453      .9354       .0844     .0501    —.4003     .982/1.886
            (2.25)     (5.47)      (2.65)    (.83)    (—1.93)


18—19
Total       .7293      .4496       .0182     .3713    —.3467     .972/1.404
            (1.27)     (1.93)      (.42)     (4.52)   (—1.23)

White       .6713      .2745       —.0012    .4211    —.3219     .969/1.463
            (1.08)     (1.08)      (—.03)    (4.73)   (—1.05)

Black      1.5066      1.4336      .1219     .1928    —.3598     .938/1.457
            (2.00)     (4.67)      (2.14)    (1.78)   (—.97)

20—24
Total       .6975      1.3170      .0409     .2782    —.5477     .962/1780
            (1.29)     (6.00)      (1.00)    (3.60)   (—2.06)

White       .5719      1.0237      .0289     .3435    —.4655     .966/1.611
            (1.09)     (4.77)      (.72)     (4.55)   (—1.79)

Black      4.0190      4.6789      .1834     —.0397   —1.0528 .828/.741
            (2.62)     (7.49)      (1.58)    (—.18)   (—1.39)



*Numbers in parentheses are t—statistics
                                                                                —66—
                      Table 5C (cont'd)



                                                              19 6 204—7 80 4




Females
                                UPM       TREND J'/MW                 2/DW
Age-Race   Constant RPy
16-17

           1.3863     .6655     .0133      —.6305 —.3517            .994/1.697
Total
           (3.93)     (3.88)    (.99)      (-9.90) (-2.95)

           1.6331     .6840     .0159   —.7695 —.2986               .993/1.825
White
           (4.06)     (3.50)    (1.04)' (-10.60) (-2.20)

           1.3615     1.0870 —.003010 —.1801 —.6032                 .978/1.969
Black
           (2.04)     (3.35)  (—. 12) (—1.50) (—2.68)


18—19
           1.7732     1.4072 —.05056 -.6273 -.5562                  .977/1/160
Total
           (2.70)     (4.40)     (—2.02) (—5.28) (—2.50)

           1.7731     1.2867 -.0780 -.7207 —.5310                   .976/1.254
White                            (—2.95) (—5.74) (—2.26)
           (2.55)     (3.80)

           3.4727     2.8728 .0785         —.4010 —.7336             .916/1.159
Black
           (2.75)     (4.67)     (1.63)    (—1.76) (—1.72)


20—24
           —1.3020    1.0939 —.0781 .2952            —.0821          .941/1.158
Total
            (—1.51)   (2.60)     (—2.38) (1.89)      (—.28)

           -.1.4030   .9076      —.1081 .2176        —.0118          .930/1.105
White
           (—1.49)    (1.98)     (—3.02) (1.28)      (—.04)

 Black     —.0961     2.5377 .1021          .6627    -.5529          .896/1.070
            (-.06)     (3.53)    (1.82)     (2.49)   (-1.11)
                                                                          —67-
                               Table 5D
           Residual/Population Equations, Unconstrained
                          P-E-U-S+ (Sr\L)  or Pn
                                P             p
ja.les                                              196204— 197804


Age•Race    Constant     RPy        UPM      AF/Pop    W/MW      2/DW
16—17
Total       —4.7535     —.1457     —.0126    —.2257    .0126     .986/1.994
            (—5.68)     (—.43)     (—. 20)   (—1.88)   (.03)

White       —5.7206     —.4487     —.0597    —.3273    —.1327    .983/1.981
            (—6.10)     (—1.17)    (—.84)    (—2.43)   (—.29)

Black       —1.4602     .7344      .1796     .1601     .5585     .944/2.180
            (—.97)      (1.20)     (1.58)    (.74)     (.75)


18—19
Total       1.3361      2.4758     .1847     .2835     —.0544    .931/1.362
            (1.43)      (6.51)     (2.61)    (2.12)    C—. 12)

White       1.6987      2.5365     .1551     .3579     .1465     .906/1.617
            (1.47)      (5.40)     (1.78)    (2.17)    (.26)

Black       1.6855      2.7491     .3196     .2219     —.5759    .643/1.285
            (.77)       (3.09)     (1.93)    (.71)     (—.53)

20—24
Total       —.5918      2.4304     .1741     —.0568    —.6403    .895/1.411
            (—.74)      (7.50)     (2.89)    C—. 50)   (—1.63)

White       .2046       2.5743     .1860     .1180     —.5545    .856/1.498
            (.21)       (6.53)     (2.54)    (.85)     (—1.16)

Black       —2.6455     1.8730     .1865     —.4980    —.8004    .755/1.413
            (—2.09)     (3.63)     (1.94)    (—2.74)   (—1.28)



*Nbers in paretheses are t—statistics
                                                                      —68--
                       Table 5D (cont'd)




Females


Age-Race   Constant   RPy       UPM        TREND      W/MW     2/Dw
16—17
Total      —2.7931    —.5665    .0432      —.3456     .4860    .990/1.624
           (—3.57)    (—1.49)   (1.45)     (—2.44)    (1.84)

White      —2.6885    —.4288     .0272     —.3423     .3695    .988/1.762
           (—3.18)    (—1.04)   (.85)      (—2. 24)   (1.29)

Black      -3.2414    —1.2316 .1255        —.4333     .9144    .968/1.515
           (—2.61)    (—2.03)   (2.65)     (—1.93)    (2.17)

18-19
Total      .1107      .3187     .0971      —8225      .1152    .953/.986
           (.21)      (1.26)    (4.93)     (—8.80)    (.66)

White      .3997      .4414     .1069      —.9293   .1098      .960/1.135
           (.79)       (1.80)   (5.59)     (—10.22) (.64)

Black      —.5456     —.0370    .0575      —.5344     .1196    .785/1.284
           (—.57)      (—.08)   (1.59)     (—3.10)    (.37)


20—24
Total      2.4546      .8662    .0242      —1.3684 —.1167      .993/1.272
           (12.27)     (8.90)    (3.18)     (—37.87) (—1.73)

White      2.7768     1.0100     .0058     -1.4534 —.2471      .993/1.281
           (13.01)     (9.72)    (.72)      (-37.70) (-3.42)

Black      .8399       .1797     .1313     —.9288   .6329      .930/1.731
           (2.15)      (.89)     (8.36)    (—12.44) (4.53)




*Numbers in parantheses are t—statistics
                                           Table 6

           Percent (%) Change in Unemployment and Participation
        Rates* due to One Percent Change in Respective Explanatory
          Variable in 1978:3, Derived From Constrained Equations

                                      Unemployment Rates
                         MALE                                      FEMALE
 Age
 Race       RPy        PM     AF/POP          W/MW       RPy     PM     TREND     W/MW
 16—17
 Total      .4694     .2844 —.1387           —.3916     .0695   .2567           —.5133
 White      .4956     .3430 —.1078           —.6284     .2511   .2879           —.5268
 Black      .8095     .0556 —.2928            .2896 —.1867      .1407           —.8876

 18—19
 Total      .6835     .5744 —.0944           —.7545     .7408   .3638           —.3109
 White      .7403     .6523 —.0495          —.7951      .8408   .4122           —.2473
 Black      .3703     .3472 —.2166           —.6260 1.0294      .2070           —.4498

 20—24
 Total      .9804     .7962 —.3548          —1.3103     .0281   .4964           —.1873
 White    1.1025      .8486 —.2998          —1.3451     .9174   .5505           —.1262
 Black      .4660     .6293 —.4872          —1.1259 —2.0224     .4125           —.1907

                                           Participation
                    MALE                      Rates ___          FEMALE
16—17
Total      .3383 —.0432 —.0112                .1786 —.0372 —.0372                .0900
White      .5274 —.0270 —.0056                .1770 —.0372 —.0298                .0818
Black -1.1634 —.1587 —.0205                   .3733 —.5072 —.0915                .4019
18—19
Total     —.3586 —.0209 —.0565                .0919 —.4031 —.0177                .1078
White     —.2947 —.0118 —.0587                .0628 —.3585 —.0157                .0957
Black     —.9313 —.0912 —.0645                .2415 1.0620 —.0505                .2128
20—24
Total     —.2456    —.0141 —.0119             .0701 —.3196 —.0029                .0613
White     —.2084 —.0115 —.0134                .0591 —.3397      .0070            .1015
Black     -.576     —.0383         .0221     .1414 -.3021 -.0717                -.2029


        *Unemployment      Rates     U/(E+U+M)
         Participation Rates          (E+U+M)/(POP+M)
                                  Table 7: Males

        Partial Correlation Coefficients from Unconstrained Equations


        Unemployment/Population Equations     Employment/Population

            Seasonal              All other    Seasonal   Cyclical    All other
Age-Race               Cyclical                                       Variables
            Dummies    Variable   Variables    Dummies    Variables


16—17                                            .9659      .5323       .7542
            .5600         .2108     .5178
Total
            .4358         .2383     .4534        .9589      .5000       .8416
White
                          .0106     .2791        .8611      .1509       .6342
Black       .6667


18—19
            .3008         .7378     .2456        .9236      .5177       .4887
Total
            .2400         .7480     .2083        .9089      .4214       .5061
White
                          .1792     .1073        .6403      .3477       .4365
Black       .2668


20—24                                                                   .7368
Total       .5729         .8333     .5060        .8968      .7826

            .5398         .8116     .4157        .9011      .7607       .6500
White
            .3290         .5820     .2917        .3562      .4268       .7194
Black
                                                                                    —71--




                                       Table 7:Females

            Partial Correlation Coefficients from Unconstrained Equations


            Unemployment/Population Equations      Employment/Population Equations

    Age—Race Seasonal       Cyclical All other    Seasonal Cyclical     All other
                 Dummies    Variable Variables    Dummies    Variable   Variables

    16—17
P   Total    -
                 .6933         .2159     .6659      .8965      .2963        .9355

    White        .6187         .2319     .6403      .8862      .2826        .9490

    Black        .6815         .0118     .3216      .7530      .1346        .1758


    18—19
    Total        .6374         .6173     .5194      .8167      .3482        .8409

    White        .5308         .5783     .3470      .7914      .2407        .8658

    Black        .6199         .1059     .2430       .5262     .3714        .3094


    20—24
    Total        .5529         .8362     .8750       .4445     .6739        .9835

    White        .5051         .8063     .8478       .3044     .4286        .9817

    Black        .3044         .5493     .5975       .3204     .6789        .6283
                               Table 8

        Unemployment Rates and Employment/Population Ratio:
                        by Age—Race-Sex
                                  MALE

              Unemployment Ratesa           Employment Ratiosb
             1965      1972       1978    1965     1972       1978
White
16—17        14.84     16.55        17.08 38.91    42.44      46.31

18—19        11.53     12.54        10.92 63.53    65.17      69.18
20—24         5.95      8.55         7.65 83.36    79.93      82.00

Black
16—17        27.78     36.66        40.71 28.97    22.52      20.47
18—19        20.13     26.40        30.90 56.87    48.61      46.59
20—24         9.29     14.79        20.13 83.38    72.81      66.29



                                 FEMALE

White
16—17        15.17     16.90        17.08 24.47   32.57       40.64
18—19        13.63     12.27        12.34 43.76   50.48       56.81
20—24         6.31      8.16         8.27 46.16   54.61       63.79

Black
16—17        39.67     35.56        41.87 12.55   13.23       16.03
18—19        28.01     38.64        36.81 28.88   27.01       31.41
20—24        13.79     17.44        21.56 47.71   47.04       49.81


a)The unemployment rates are defined as U /L

b)The employment ratios are defined as E/P where both E and P
  include the military.
                                                                     —73—


                              Table 9
                                           *
                      Earnings of Youth


                                    MALE
            1967       1972         1978        72/67    78/72
White
16—17       61.05     77.23       119.48        26.5     54.7

18—19       78.98     96.82       147.76        22.6     52.6

20—24      107.48    131.44       203.41        22.3     54.7


Black
16—17       50.81     54.71       116.25         7.7    112.5

18—19       58.05     82.37       118.00        41.9     43.3

20—24       79.55    110.71       176.56        39.2     59.5

                                 FEMALE

White
16—17       51.00     68.34       106.11        34.0     55.3
18—19       66.29     79.86       121.00        20.5     51.5
20—24       81.17    105.43       152.29        29.9     44.5


Black
16—17      57.40     48.36         97.00       —15.8    100.6

18—19      54.96     78.78        125.06        43.3     58.7
20—24      67.40     96.77        141.33        43.6     46.0


*Earnings data represent median usual weekly earnings of full—time
 wage and salary workers whose major activities are other than
 school.
                                                                       _.74..




                                 Table 10

        Proportion of Each Group's Employment that is in
          Low Wage Industries (i.e. Service and Retail)


                       MALE                         FEMALE


        ____   1968      1972       1978    1968       1972     1978

White

16—17          .7270     .7392     .7290    .8239     .8422   .8706
18—19          .4763     .5298     .5105    .5440     .6554   .6810
20—24          .3232     .3787     .3804    .5287     .5975   .6148

16—21 (out
of school)     .3650     .4657     .4446    .4914     .6129   .6399

16—21 (in—
school)        .7765     .7833     .792     .8881     .8967   .9051

16+            .3037     .3317     .3449    .5755     .6124   .6200

Black

16—17          .6617     .7013     .7435    .8291     .7655   .8315
18—19          .4583     .4393     .5429    .5738     .6126   .6514
20—24          .3012     .3500     .3816    .5453     .5267   .5536

16—21 (out
of school)     .3519     .4220     .4583    .5277     .5519   .6150

16—21 (in—
school)        .7603     .7831     .8167    .8537     .8511   .8513

16+            .3256     .3307     .3457    .6429     .6350   .6121
                                                               —75




                           Table 11
                                                           *
  Ratios of Black Youth Employment to White Youth Employment


                          1965         1972        1978
Male
16—17                     .106         .087         .081

18—19                     .115         .117         .117

20—24                     .129         .128         .130


Female

16—17                     .077         .070         .076

18—19                      .091        .088         .102

20—24                      .144        .133         .140



*Employnlent includes the military.
                                                    —76-




                             Table 12
                                        a)
                   Employment + School
                         Population
                        1965 and 1978



                              l965           1978

Males, White
16—17                        88.0            87.6

18—19                        91.0            90.0

20—24                        94.0            91.1

Males, Black
16—17                        83.2            82.0

18—19                        83.0            77.0

20—24                        88.9            78.5

Females, White
16—17                        80.0            83.1

18—19                        71.0            77.6

20—24                        52.7            71.2

Females, Black
16—17                        74.0            77.0

18—19                        56.9            61.4

20—24                        52.5            59.5

a) The specific measure is     E+M+S—(SAE)
                                    P
                                                                     —77—



Sources of Data:

(1) The employment, unemployment, and population data by age-
    race-sex were obtained from the unpublished BLS tabulations.

(2) The military data by age-sex were obtained from Employment
     and Earnings, various issues. The age—race—sex breakdown
    was available only after 1966:1. The racial breakdown was
    extrapolated back to 1962 utilizing military accession
    data by race which was obtained from the Department of
      Defense.

(3)   The Wage, W, data were obtained from Table 1, News Release,
      tJSDL-77-955 for the period of 1967 to 1977. The data was
      extrapolated back to 1960, utilizing the full-time year-
      round workers' median total money income as a link variable.
      The source of the latter variable is the Current Population
      Reports, Series P-60, various issues, Bureau of the Census.
(4) The minimum wage, MW, data were obtained from Minimum Wage
    and Maximum Hours Standards under the Fair Labor Standards
    Act, various issues. The W and MW data were linearly inter-
    polated to get quarterly data.
(5) The AF, POP,      data were   obtained   from Wharton E.F.A.
    quarterly data    bank.

(6) The earnings data in Table 9 and the industry employment data
     in Table 10 were also obtained from the unpublished BLS
     tabulations.
                                                                            —78—




                                  Footnotes



1See, for example, Wachter (1972) , (1976b) ,
                                              (1977), Kim (1979)
This work builds UOfl Easterlin   (1968). Several relevantandstudies
                                                               Serow,
                             are contained in Espenshade
and a detailed bibliography
eds. (1978). More recent work which develops     this approach
                                            and Reubens (1979)
includes Ehrenberg (1979) , Welch  (1979) ,

                                              taste model for
2For a detailed discussion of the endogefloUs
                                 variables, see Easterlin, pollak
explaiflhiiy 0omic_demographic
and Wachter (forthcoming)

3See, for example, Cain and Watts, eds. (1973).
                                                 the youth labor force is
4The statistical problems of measuring
stressed by Clark and Summers (1979)

5mis model is drawn from Wachter and Wachter (1978)

 6See, for example, Ragan (1977).
                                                  relatively limited
 7The impact of welfare programs has received
 attention until recently. See,    Levitan  et.al.  (1972), Garfinkel
 and Orr (1974) , Saks (1975) , Williams (1975) ,
                                                   Levy  (1979) and
 the Studies in public Welfare   of  the Joint Economic   Committee
 (1973).

 8Major studies of minimum wage laws include Moore  (1971), Kosters
                                              (1976), Mincer (1976)
 and Welch (1972), Goldfarb (1974) , Gramlich         and U.S.
 Welch (1976) ,   (1977)   ,   Ashenfelter   and Smith (1979) ,
 Department of Labor (1970).

 9For several relevant models on this problem, see Perry, et.al.,
                       Killingsworth (1978) and palmer (1979)
 see KillingswOrth and
                                                          framework
 10Some of the relevant papers that provide an empirical      and
                          include Kalachek (1969) , Doeringer
 for unemployment problem          R.J. Gordon (1977) , and Adams
 Piore (1971) ,   R.A. Gordon (1973) ,
 and Mangum (1978).
                                                     which address
 11Recent time series studies of youth unemployment
                                      and Medoff (1979) , Ragan
 this same phenomenon include Freeman
                                conference on youth unemployment
 (1977), Thurow (1977), and the
  (1978)
                                                                         —79—




                         Footnotes cont'd



12Relevant studies on schooling include Freeman (1976) and the
recent comment by Smith and Welch (1978). Kim (1979) investigates
the complexities of the military and schooling relationship with
the youth labor market. A very useful collection of essays is
found in the NCMP Volume, From School to Work: Improving the
Transition.

13Conceptual problems with the definition of the unemployment
rate for youth are stressed by fl.A. Gordon (1973), Levitan and
Taggart (1974), and Clark and Summers (1979)

 140ne of the major questions concerning the Pn    category involves
 the issue of discouraged workers. The view that   the number of
disadvantaged potential workers in the Pn group    is significant is
 stressed by, among others, Doeringer and Piori    (1971) and Harrison
(1972)

15Studies which focus on minority unemployment include Doeringer
and Piori (1971) , Harrison (1972) ,Wallace (1974) , the Congressional
Budget Office (1976), Adams and Mangum (1978), and Osterman (1978)
                                                                      —80-




                        Bibliography



Adams, Arvil V. and Mangum, Garth. 1978. The Lingering
     Crisis of Youth Unemployment, 1alamazoo, Michigan, W.E.
     Upjohn Institute.
Ashenfeiter, Orley, and Smith, Robert S. April 1979.
     "Compliance with the Minimum Wage Law", Journal of
     Political Economy, 333-350.
Cain, Glen G. and Watts, Harold W. eds. 1973. Income Maintenance
     and Labor Supply, Institute for Research on Poverty Mono—
     graph Series.
Clark, Kim and Summers, Lawrence. 1:1979, forthcoming.
     "Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment: A Reconsideration,'
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Congressional Budget Office 1976. The Teenage Unemployment
     Problem: What are the Options? Washington, D.C. U.S.
     Government Printing Office.

Doeringer, Peter B., and Piore, Michael. 1971. Mass.:
                                                 Internal Labor
                                                        D.C. Heath.
     Markets and Manpower Analysis. Lexington,
Easterlin; Richard A. 1968. PopulatiOfl      r        and Long
     Swings in Economic Growth:  The American  Experience,  Columbia
     University Press for the National  Bureau  of Economic  Research.

________  pollak, Robert A. and Wachter,MiChael
                                    Fertility
                                                L. "Toward a
                                              Determination:
    More General Economic Model of
     EndogeflOuS Preferences and Natural Fertility," Population
                                            Countries, New York:
     and conomic Change in Less Developed
     National Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming.
 Ehrenberg, Ronald G. 1979. "The Demographic Structure of Unemploy-
      ment Rates and Labor Market Transition Probabilities," paper
      prepared for the National CommissiOn for Manpower policy.
 Espenshade, Thomas J. and Serow, William J., eds. 1978. The
      Economic Consequences of Slowing Population Growth, Academic
      Press.
                                                       Academic
 Freeman, Richard B. 1976. The Overeducated American,
      Press.

          April  1978. "The Effects of Demographic Factors on
 _______
      the Age-EarfliflgS profile in the U.S."
                                                                      —81


                    Bibliography cont'd



Freeman, Richard B.,, and Medoff, J.L. May 16—17, 1979. "The
     Youth Labor Market Problem in the United States: An Over-
     view," paper prepared for a National Bureau of Economic
     Research Conference on Youth Unemployment.

Garfinkel, Irwin, and Orr, Larry L. July 1974. "Welfare Policy
     and the Employment Rate of AFDC Mothers," National Tax
     Journal 27, 275—284.
Goldfarb, Robert S. "The Policy Content of Qualitative Minimum
     Wage Research," IRRA 27th Annual Winter Proceedings, 261-268.

Gordon, R.A. 1973. "Some Macroeconomic Aspects of Manpower Policy."
     In Ulman, Lloyd, ed., Manpower Programs in the Policy Mix.
     Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Gordon, Robert J. 1977. "Structural Unemployment and the Pro-
     ductivity of Women", Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series
     on Public Policy: Stabilization of the Domestic and Inter-
     national Economy, Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer, eds.,
     181—229.

Gramlich, Edward M. 1976. "Impact of Minimum Wages on Other
     Wages, Employment, and Family Income," Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 2. 4A9461.
Harrison, Bennett. 1972. Education, Training,, and the Urban
     Ghetto. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Kalachek, Edward. 1969. "Determinants of Teen Age Unemployment."
     Journal of Human Resources. 3-21.

Killingsworth, Charles C., and Killingsworth, Mark R. 1978.
     "Direct Effects of Employment and Training Programs on
     Employment and Unemployment: New Estimates and Implications
     for Employment Policy," In Conference Report on Youth
     Unemployment: Its Measurement and Meaning, Washington: U.S.
     Government Printing Office, 249-286.
Kim, Choongsoo. 1979. unpublished manuscript. "A Study of the
     Military Labor Market," University of Pennsylvania.

_____ 1979. unpublished manuscript. "A Study of the School
     Enrollment Rate: An Empirical and Theoretical Investigation,"
     University of Pennsylvania.
Kosters, Marvin and Welch, Firiis. June 1972. "The Effects of
     Minimum Wages on the Distribution of Changes in Aggregate
     Employment," American Economic Review, 323—334.
Levitan, Sar A; Rein, Martin: and Marwich, David. 1972.
     Work and Welfare Go Together. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins
     University Press.
                                                                          —82-.




                         Bibliography cont'd



Levitan, Sar A. and Taggart, Robert III. 1974. Employment
                              A New Social Indicator. Baltimore,

Levy, Frank. Winter 1979. "The Labor Supply of Female Household
     Heads, or AFDC Work Incentives Don't Work Too Well," journal
     of Human Resources.
                                         Effects of Minimum
Mincer, jacobAuguSt 1976. "Unemployment
     Wages" journal of Political Economy, Part 2, S87-Sl04.

Moore, Thomas G. july/August 1971. "The Effect of Minimum Wages
                                     journal of political Economy,
     on Teenage Unemployment Rates,"
        897—903.

National Commission for Manpower policy, 1976. FromU.S.
                                                       School to
                                                         Government
     Work: Improving the Transition, Washington:
     Printing Office.
                                              in Male Youth Unemploy-
Osterman, paul. 1978. "Racial Differentials
                                  Youth Unemployraeflt: Its
     ment", Conference Report on
     ment andTheaniflg. Washington: u.s.  Government  Printing
•
        Office.

    Palmer, John L. 1978. Creating jobs: public Employment Programs
         and Wage Subsidies, The Brookings InstitutiOn.

    Perry, Charles R., Anderson, Bernard B., Rowan, Richard L. and
         Northrup, Herbert R. 1975. The Impact of Government Manpower
                                  Industrial Relations Unit. University
         Programs. Philadelphia.
         of Pennsylvania.
                                   "Minimum Wages and the youth Labor
    Ragan, James F. Jr. May 1977.
         Market", Review of Economics and Statistics, 129—136.

    Reubens, Beatrice G. February 1978. The Measurement and
         pretation of Teenage Unemployment in the United States and
         Other Countries, u.s. Department of Labor, ASPER, NTIS
         PB28416 1/AS.
    Saks, Daniel H. 1975. Public Assistance for Mothers in Urban
         Labor Market, Industrial Relations Section, Princeton
         University.
    Smith, James P. and Welch, Finis. November 1978. "The Over-
         educated AmeriCafl? A Review Article", The Rand Paper Series.
                                                                       —83-




                          Bibliography cont' d



Studies in Public Welfare: Staff Studies Prepared for the Use of
     the Subcommittee on Fiscal Policy of the Joint Economic
     Committee Congress of the United States, Washington: U.S.
     Government   P±nting Office.
Thurow, Lester C. Fall 1977. "Youth Unemployment," Rockefeller
     Foundation Working Paper.
U.S. Department of Labor, 1970. Youth Unemployment and Minimum
     Wages, Bulletin 1657, Washington: U.S. Government Printing
     Office.

Wachter, Michael L. May 1972. "A Labor Supply Model for Secondary
     Workers," Review of Economics and Statistics, 141—151.


_____ L:1976. "The Changing Cyclical Responsiveness of Wage In-
     flation Over the Postwar Period" Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 115—159 (a)

______, December  1976. "The Demographic Impact on Unemployment:
     Past Experience and the Outlook for the Future," Demographic
     Trends and Full Employment, National Commission for Manpower
     Policy, Special Report No. 12, 27_9g(b)
_____, 2:1977. "Intermediate Swings in Labor-Force Participation",
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 545-576.

_____ and Wachter Susan M. 1978. "The Fiscal Policy Dilemma:
     Cyclical Swings Dominated by Supply-Side Constraints,"
     In The Economic Consequences of Slowing Population Growth,
     edited by Thomas J. Espenshade and William J. Serow, Academic
     Press, Inc., 71—99.
Wallace, Phyllis A. 1974. Pathways to Work-Unemployment Among
     Black Teenage Females. Lexington, Mass.: Heath Lexington Books.

Welch, Finis. 1977. "Minimum Wage LegislaLion in the United States,"
     In Evaluating the Labor—Market Effects of Social Programs,
     edited by Orley Ashenfelter and James Blum, Industrial
     Relations Section, Princeton University.

______ January 1979. "Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The
     Baby Boom Babies' Financial Bust", University of California,
     Los Angeles, Working Paper.
Williams, Robert G. 1975. Public Assistance and Work Effort: The
     Labor Supply of Low-Income Female Heads of Household,
     Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University.
