NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR SUPPLY AND AGGREGATE FLUCTUATIONS

Robert E. Hall

Working Paper No. 385

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
August 1979

This paper was prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester.
Conference, April 20 and 21, 1979. The research was supported by the National Science Foundation through a grant
to the NBER and is part of the NBER's research program on
Economic Fluctuations.
I am grateful to members of the
program and to Levis Kochin for helpful comments. Stanley
Fischer pointed our a major defect in the original draft,
for which I am especially grateful. Sean Becketti provided able research assistance. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 385
August 1979

Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations

ABSTRACT

One view of aggregate fluctuations interprets changes in employment
as movements along a reasonably elastic labor supply schedule.

Observed

levels of employment represent equality of supply and demand.

An opposing

view interprets fluctuations as movements away from an inelastic labor
supply function.

The

p~per

examines the behavior of employment, wages,

and interest rates to determine if the market-clearing view can account
for joint movements of the key variables.

Specifically, it asks if the

labor supply function iI'lp1icit in the aggregate data is consistent with
microeconomicevidence about labor supply.

The verdict here is favorable.

IJowever, one of the implications of the market-clearing view, that the
labor supply function is insensitive to the money stock, is clearly
refuted.

Some modifications of the market-clearing model are discussed.

The weak theoretical grounding of non-market-clearing models is also
noted.

Neither model combines a convincing economic analysis and a full

explanation of the facts.

Robert E. Hall
Herbert Hoover Memorial Bldg.
Stanford University
Stanford, CA. 94305

4i5/497-22l5

Revised July 1979

1.

Introduction
Issues of labor supply are at the heart of macroeconomic explanations of

the large cyclical fluctuations of output observed in modern economies.
Plainly, people work harder in booms than in slumps.

Economists' explanations

of this phenomenon range from a pure market clearing supply-and-demand view at
·one extreme to a dismissal of almost any role of supply and of market clearing
at the other extreme.

Disagreement is intense because failure of labor markets

to clear may create a strong case favoring activist macroeconomic policy.
This paper starts with a serious empirical examination of the view that the
labor market is always in balance--that every observed combination of employment
and compensation is a point of intersection of the relevant supply and demand
curves.

I will call this the "intertemporal substitution" model of fluctuations.

Ac~ording

to it, workers are willing to shift their hours of work from one year

to another in response to modest shifts in relative wages.
reasonably well on its own ground.

This model stands up

The elasticity of labor supply inferred from

the response of employment and relative wages to exogenous shifts in demand is
around one half.

Ibis figure is quite consistent with microeconomic evidence

about the response of individual workers to temporary increases in their own
wages; this evidence is available from longitudinal panel studies and from the
various negative income tax experiments.
The paper goes on to point out a strong implication of the pure intertemporal substitution model, namely, the irrelevance of changes in the money
supply in the labor supply function.

A model where markets clear instantly

ought to obey full monetary neutrality.
absolutely unambiguously.

The data refute this implication

The money stock unambiguously shifts the labor

-2-

supply function.
this evidence.

The pure substitution model seems untenable in the light of
The paper then turns to explanations of the nonneutrality of

money in the short run.

The most carefully worked out line of thought proposes

that monetary shocks cause workers to make inappropriate intertemporal shifts in
labor supply because they lack complete information about the source of aggregate
shocks and are forced to respond in the same way to real and nominal disturbances.
The paper is skeptical about the relevance of these models in view of the extensive, timely information that is available to modern economies about a wide
variety of economic aggregates.

The paper is equally skeptical about the ex-

planatory value of the line of thought based on contracts in the labor market-if contracts are efficient, they should generate virtually the same level of
employment as a labor market that clears instantaneously.

If contracts are

inhibited by lack of information, then employment should behave in the way described by the theory of markets with incomplete information, a theory which has
already .been found wanting.

Contract theory does not seem to make any indepen-

dent contribution to the explanation of the sensitivity of employment to movements
in the money supply.
Finally, the paper turns to the view that, in the short run, labor supply
is largely irrelevant to the determination of aggregate employment.

According

to a view prevailing among the majority of practical economists and well sumirized in a textbook IS-LM model with an empirical Phillips curve, employers
"termine employment unilaterally by equating the marginal value product of
abor to a predetermined nominal wage.

Short-run movements in labor demand push

workers above or below their microeconomic labor supply functions.

Only very

gradually, as wages adjust sluggishly, does the level of employment come to

-3-

respect labor supply.

The evidence does not refute this view.

But supporters

of this line of thought have not so far been very successful in explaining why
large movements

~way

from the labor supply function are consistent with basic

economic principles.

2.

The Pure Intertempora1 Substitution Hypothesis
According to the intertempora1 substitution model of fluctuations, people

work harder in some years than in others because the market rewards them for
this pattern.

People are not tricked into extra work in a boom; they find the

work desirable because the return, in the relevant intertempora1 sense, is
unusually high.

Slumps are just periods when a lower level of effort is

economically efficient.
Before expounding the intertempora1 substitution model itself, I think it may
be helpful to clear up some potential sources of confusion.

The history of the

model has been bound up with the hypothesis of rational expectations.

The dean

of the raLiona1 expectations school, Robert Lucas, was one of the authors of the
most famous exposition of the intertempora1 model.

1

That paper is probably even

more famous for introducing one of the first formalizations of the role of expectation errors in macroeconomics.

Much criticism of the intertempora1 sub-

stitution model has been directed at Lucas and Rappingis formulation of it, and
specifically at the large role it assigns to errors in perceiving the current real.
wage.

2

Many economists have received the impression that intertempora1 substitution

takes place only because of workers' misunderstanding of movements in relative
prices in the intertempora1 substitution model.

However, in fact, the issues of

l"Rea1 Wages, Employment, and Inflation" (1969), with Leonard Rapping.
2For example, in Tobin (1972).

-4-

substitution and expectation or perception errors can be completely divorced.
For now, I want to concentrate on substitution that is induced by genuine and
appropriate changes in relative prices.
Another source of misunderstanding of the intertemporal substitution model
is the claim that it makes all movements in employment and unemployment voluntary.

A recurrent theme in the discussion of the model is the criticism that

it makes employment fall by raising quits, when in fact quits are low during a
downturn.

3

This criticism has not been taken very seriously by the proponents

of the theory of intertemporal substitution.

An attempt is made in this paper

to reconcile the apparent unilateral determination of employment by employers
with the hypothesis that the consequent changes in employment represent intertemporal substitution of work at one time for work at another in line with
changes in relative wages.
Probably the most serious misunderstanding of the substitution model is the
claim that it rests on movements of real wages that do not in fact take place.

4

This paper shows that the role of real wages in intertemporal substitution depends on the source of the disturbance.

Fluctuations of real interest rates

are equally important--the most general version of the intertemporal substitution
model rests on variations in the relative prices of current labor against future
labor.
b~t

This point was clearly spelled out in Lucas and Rapping's original paper,

was not fully incorporated in their empirical results.

Recently Barro (1978)

has developed a more complete theoretical model of intertempora1 substitution in
general equilibrium.

3See , for example, Tobin (1972) and Modig1iani (1977).
4Again, see Tobin (1972) and Modig1iani (1977).

-5-

My purpose here is to set forth a simple empirical version of the intertemporal substitution model, to estimate its key parameter, and then to inquire
at length whether the story told by the model about aggregate fluctuations makes
sense in view of other evidence about intertemporal substitution.

In particular,

I will draw on recent microeconomic evidence on labor supply based on panel data
and the negative income tax experiments.
Within a formal model, the common-sense view--that people work more when
there is more work to do--requires that aggregate supply be reasonably elastic
with respect to the relative wage and that aggregate demand be reasonably inelastic.

Then a temporary exogenous burst of demand, say, from the government's

decision to pursue a costly war, brings about an increase in the current wage
compared to the discounted future wage, so people work harder and labor input
rises.

The evidence presented here suggests that an increase of one percent in

the relative price raises labor supply by about 0.6 percent.
interte~poral

The amount of

substitution of labor implied by these results is roughly consistent

with the f5.ndings of microeconomic research.
Viewed on its own grounds, the intertemporal substitution model has to be
judged a success.

Its two central implications--that exogenous demand drives up

employment and drives up the current real wage compared to the discounted future
real wage--are clearly confirmed by the data.
supply is not implausibly high.

The apparent elasticity of labor

However, this evidence does not confirm the

model in any strong sense, or distinguish it from competing hypotheses.

As a

later section of the paper will demonstrate, the intertemporal substitution model
in its pure form seems quite unambiguously refuted by other data.

-6-

(a)

Microeconomic theory of intertemporal labor supply

It is useful to review the standard theory as developed in Lucas and Rapping
and in several other places.

Individuals have preferences over present and

future work and present and future consumption of goods.

They have endowments

of time available in the present and future, valued by wage rates that, for now,
will be considered known with certainty.

They may also hold some wealth.

Con-

sumption goods are available at known prices, and consumers may borrow or lend
at a given real interest rate to move resources from present to future or the
reverse.

Formally, with

cl ' c 2 :

present and future consumption of goods

L , L :
l
2

present and future work

r:
wI' w2 :

A:

real interest rate
present and future real wages
real assets other than the value of time,

there are goods demand and labor supply equations for year 1:
. (1)

and a similar pair for year 2.

The substitution effects of changes in the relative

prices are as follows:
Effect of higher real interest rates on present consumption:
negative
Effect of higher current real wage on present consumption:
presumably positive

-7-

Effect of higher future real wage on present consumption:
ambiguous
Effect of higher real interest rate on present labor supply:
presumably positive
Effect of higher present real wage on present labor supply:
positive
Effect of higher future real wage on present labor supply:
presumably negative
The basic logic of the intertemporal substitution model holds that the
observed responses to cyclical movements in relative prices should be essentially
pure substitution effects, as cyclical variations have little effect on lifetime
well-being, which is the relevant concept of income.

Thus the central question

treated in this section is whether the set of changes in relative prices that
~~company

a boom or a recession are compatible with the increase or decrease in

labor supply that takes place.

Possible changes that might explain, say, the

rise in employment in a boom are:
1.

The present real wage rises,

2.

The future real wage falls,

3.

The real interest rate

ris~s.

Of these, the second seems highly unlikely and has not received any attention.
Most discussion of cyclical labor supply has focused on the role of temporary
changes

in the real wage.

But the third suggestion, a rise in the real in-

terest rate, is clearly pointed out by Lucas and Rapping and deserves an
examination as well.
The transplantation of the two-period analysis to the real world where people
work and consume for many years requires some additional comment.

Of course, the

-8-

complete intertemporal model has the relative prices for all future years as
arguments of the demand and supply functions for this year.

Condensation to

the two-period version requires the hypothesis that all future years can be
combined into a Hicksian composite good.

If any departure of the real wage and

the real interest rate this year from their normal values is expected to be corrected

~y

next year and all succeeding years, then the composite good theorem

applies, and the demand and supply functions can be written just as functions
of the current real wage and real interest rates and real wealth.

More generally,

if the current values of the real wage and interest rate provide all the information that is needed to predict the path by which they will return to normal
over the future, then it will still be true that the demand functions can be
written as functions of contemporaneous variables alone.

The latter explanation

of the role of the variables will be relied upon in the empirical work presented
here, as it turns out that movements in the variables persist for well over a year.
Under a general specification of preferences, changes in real wages and in
real inteLest rates have distinct substitution effects and so should enter
separately in econometric work.

This observation led Lucas and Rapping to include

both variables in their regressions, though the interest rate was eventually
omitted from their final equations.
~J

I am not aware of any successful attempts

measure the independent contribution of interest rates in intertemporal labor
pply; certainly microeconomic research has nothing to say on this point because
ere is no usable cross-sectional variation in interest rates.

There is an ad-

'itional assumption about preferences whose implication is that the effects of
real wages and interest rates combine in a certain way:
~tility

The intertemporal

function is assumed to be separable in goods and work.

The marginal

-9-

rate of substitution between present work and future consumption then depends
on the amount of work today

~ut

not on the amount of consumption today) and

on the level of future consumption, which is independent of r and wI owing to
the assumption of no wealth effects of transitory fluctuations.

The return to

labor in the current period relative to the price of future consumption is
(1 + r)w .
l

Thus a composite substitution variable with the same form,

indexes the effects of both variables in time series work under the assumptions
set forth earlier about the information content of current wages and interest
rates and the separability of preferences.

Reasonably general specifications

of preferences, such as the CES, obey separability.
~)

Econometric evidence on the joint movements of the relevant variables

One potential empirical weakness of the intertemporal substitution model is
the higo elasticity of labor supply it seems to require:

Aggregate fluctuations

involve lJrge movements in employment and small movements in the substitution
variable.

If the ~hanges in employment are movements along a labor supply curve,

it must be quite elastic, or so the argument goes.

The first step in examining

this line of attack on the intertemporal substitution model is to find out how
elastic the labor supply curve implicit in the aggregate data actually is.

Now,

any rGodel has a right to some residuals, so it is not adequate just to look at
the plot of employment against the substitution variable.

Nothing less than a

full econometric untangling of the supply function from the demand function will
answer the question.
only issue.

Of course, the elasticity of the supply function is not the

If it turns out that the supply function is plausibly inelastic, but

-10-

that almost all fluctuations in employment are attributed to unexplained shifts
of the supply curve rather than to movements along the curve, then the intertemporal substitution model has little that is interesting or new about it.
Separation of demand curves from supply curves is a very well understood
econometric problem.

If the model hypothesizes random shifts of both curves,

then identification requires that there be some exogenous variable that has
predictable effects on one curve and not the other.

The obvious candidate in

aggregate supply and demand is government purchases of goods and services (I
will call this government expenditures for short, but it should be understood
to exclude transfers).

Periodically the government absorbs an abnormal fraction

of employment and output, mainly to pursue wars.

Provided these contributions to

demand are unrelated to the random shifts in the schedules (in other words, intertp.mporal substitution is not a major factor in the determination of government
expenditure), then the relation between government expenditure on the one hand
and employment and the substitution variable on the other, provides information
about the slope of the supply curve.

From the econometric point of view, all

that is involved is the use of government or military expenditures as an instrumental variable in the estimation of the aggregate labor supply schedule.
However, the issue of how to measure the supply schedule is much more than just
a technical econometric one.

It may be helpful at this stage to sketch a

g20eral equilibrium analysis of the effects of military expenditures on the
e~onomy

as a whole.

5

Consider an economy with one produced good, called output, and labor.
Suppose, for simplicity, that the capital stock is given, so that production

5The discussion owes a great deal to suggestions by Stanley Fischer.

-11-

takes place with labor alone, subject to diminishing returns.

Suppose further

that changes in military expenditures have negligible effects on consumers' wealth,
either because the changes are brief or because the government cuts the permanent
level of other expenditures to finance temporary military activities.

Suppose

finally that the current values of the real interest rate and the real wage provide complete information about the future paths of relative prices, as proposed
earlier.

Then it is reasonable to assume that the demand for output depends only

on the real interest rate (of course, it also depends on real wealth, but that
is taken as given).

The supply of output depends only on the price of

output relative to labor, namely the real wage, as in the standard theory of the
firm.

In the labor market, the demand for labor is just a re-writing of the

supply of output and also depends just on the real wage.
i~

Finally, labor supply

a function of the substitution variable, which depends on both the real interest

rate and the real wage.
Fo~

a given real wage, w, and level of government expenditures, g, there is

a real interest rate, r, which clears the market for output.
real interest

rat~

The market-clearing

is an increasing function of the real wage (a higher real wage

depresses supply and leaves demand unchanged) and is an increasing function of
government demand for goods.

Similarly, for a given real interest rate and level

of direct government employment,
market.

~,

there is a real wage which clears the labor

The market clearing real wage is a decreasing function of the real

interest rate (a higher real interest rate stimulates labor supply but leaves
labor demand unaffected) and is an increasing function of direct government employment.

All this leads to the following diagram describing general equilibrium:

-12-

real
interest
rate
L

Q

L
real wage

w·

The QQ curve describes clearing of the output market and the LL curve clearing of
the labor market.

An increase in government purchases of output shifts the QQ

curve upward and leaves the LL curve unaffected:
real
interest
rate
L

Q

r

Q

L

w'

w

real wage

-13-

Output and employment rise.

The real wage falls, but labor supply rises because

the rise in the real interest rate more than offsets the fall in the real wage;
the substitution variable rises.

When the government stimulates employment by

purchasing output, more than all of the intertemporal substitution effect operates
through the real interest rate.

The effect from the real wage is in the opposite

direction.
An increase in direct government employment shifts the LL curve to the
right and leaves the QQ curve unaffected:

real
interest
rate

Q

L
w

w'

Again, both output and employment rise.

real wage

In this case, however, both real interest

rates and real wages contribute to the intertemporal substitution toward higher
current labor supply.

-14-

Since the typical military buildup involves a combination of purchases of
output and direct employment, the model does not make an unambiguous prediction
about the relation between real wages and military expenditures.

It is unam-

biguous, however, that military expenditures will cause workers to substitute
toward higher current labor supply and that the inducement will be evident as
a higher value of the composite substitution variable.

This general equilibrium

analysis establishes the relevance of military expenditures as instrumental
variables in the estimation of the aggregate labor supply schedule.

It points

out the difference between the effects of purchases of output and of direct
employment.

Accordingly, both variables will be used as instruments.

The value of military expenditures as econometric instruments depends on
the transitory nature of wars.

A permanent change in government expenditures

should simply displace an equal amount of private consumption, for the following
reasop:

Sooner or later an increase in the government's diversion of resources

must be financed with higher taxes.
in

consum~tion

Consumers should make permanent adjustments

levels in response to any information they receive about present

or future taxes.

A permanent increase in government expenditures should bring

about an immediate permanent decline in consumption of about the same magnitude.
A transitory increase in government expenditure--say, for a war--should bring
dDout a much smaller, but still permanent, decrease in consumption.
Ie

Consequently,

overall response of employment or output to a measure of exogenous demand

.ould be stronger for those measures with large transitory elements--the mili3ry component, for example--than for measures that are close to random walks.
It is also important that the measure of exogenous demand not be one that simply
.~isplaces

private demand.

Government expenditures on standard consumption goods

-15-

distributed to the populace would not be a satisfactory variable for the purposes
of this study.

On the other hand, diversion of resources to an expensive war in

another part of the world is very close to the ideal for these purposes.
The labor supply equation to be estimated within this framework is
L

t

=a +

I3s

t

+

u

t'

where L is total labor supply (including government employment), St is the
t
substitution variable, approximated henceforth as r
random unexplained component of labor supply.

t

+ log w ' and u is the
t
t

Because the labor supply equation

has a central role in the general equilibrium of the economy, there is every
reason to think that u

t

feeds back into the determination of St' so they are

statistically correlated.

For this reason, a two-stage least squares estimator

will be used with military expenditures and military employment as instrumental
v8Liables.
Estimation of the labor supply equation in this form is not directly feasible
because the real interest rate, one of the components of St' is not observed.
Instead,

t~e

inflation.

real rate must be inferred from the nominal rate and the rate of

Restating the substitution variable in nominal terms gives

St
where r

r

N
+ log Pt - log Pt+d + log w - log Pt
t
t

N
is the nominal interest rate and d is the number of time periods over
t

which the interest rate applies.

Now actual behavior at time t responds not to

St' but to St + Et,where E is the error made in time t in forecasting the future
t
price, log Pt+d'

In terms of observed variables, the labor supply function is

-16-

Under the assumption that expectations about future prices made in period t
make use of information about military expenditures in period t, the expectation
error,

E

t

, is uncorrelated with military expenditures and they remain eligible

as instrumental variables when St is measured from nominal quantities.
In the results presented here, L
total

u.s.

t

is measured as employee-hours in the

economy with an exponential trend removed.

The price in the sub-

stitution variable is measured by the GNP deflator, the wage by hourly compensation in the private non-farm sector, and the nominal interest rate by the rate
on one-year commercial paper.

The future price in St is thus four quarters ahead.

The instruments are military purchases of goods and services, again with trend
removed, and de trended total military employment.

The latter is an annual variable

and is given its annual value in all four quarters of each year; this does not
affect its eligibility as an instrument.
1948 through 1978, third quarter.
year

The other data are quarterly and span

Employee-hours are measured in billions per

(a representative value is 142 billion in 1972, first quarter).

stitution variable is measured in percentage points (137 in 72:1).

The sub-

As a cor-

rection for serial correlation in the residuals from the labor supply equation,
all data, including the instruments, were transformed autoregressively with
p

=

0.86.
The two-stage least squares estimate of the labor supply equation is
L

t

=

7.0

( 5.4)

+

.66 St

a = 1. 59

(.28)

(standard errors are in parentheses)
According to the point estimate of the slope, an increase of one percentage point
in the substitution variable raises labor supply by 0.66 billion hours per year.

-17-

The corresponding elasticity of the labor supply function with respect to, say,
the real wage, is 0.46 (computed as 100 x 0.66/142).

But the slope parameter

and elasticity are estimated with a certain amount of sampling error.

Elas-

ticities much above one are pretty clearly ruled out, but elasticities as low
as 0.3 are apparently compatible with the data.
The two-stage least squares estimator is not invariant to normalization;
that is, different choices

about which jointly dependent variable is on the

left-hand side yield different estimates of the parameters.

Running the labor

supply equation in the opposite direction gives
s

t

=

-10.5

(12.7)

+ 1.51 L t

o

2.40

(.65)

The reciprocal of 1.51 is 0.63, very close to the earlier estimate of the slope,
0.66.

The low estimate of the slope of the labor supply schedule is not just an

artifact of the normalization.
To summarize, real military expenditures can reasonably be taken as one of
the major exogenous influences on the demand for output in the U.S. economy, and
hence on the derived demand for labor.

Statistical evidence shows that military

expenditures push the economy along a well-defined upward-sloping labor supply
schedule whose elasticity is around a half.

There have been sufficiently many

large movements in real military expenditures so that the sampling variation in
the estimates of the slope of the labor supply function is adequately small.
The next step is to decide if an elasticity of around a half is reasonable in
the light of other evidence about labor supply.
(c)

Microeconomic evidence on intertemporal labor supply

The elasticity of labor supply with respect to transitory variations in effective wages can be measured econometrically using data collected from individuals

-18-

over time in panel studies.

The variation found in micro data is less balanced

than that found in the aggregate data examined in the previous section:
is little observable variation in interest
rates.

rates~

There

but a great deal in real wage

This part of the paper will look at evidence from surveys of individual

workers and from various negative income tax experiments.
Thomas MaCurdy (1978) has recently completed a study of the evidence in the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics for adult men.
least part of each
of hours of

Everyone in his sample works at

so the relevant margin of substitution is the number

year~

not the discrete decision about whether to work at all.

work~

MaCurdy

assumes that workers' perceptions of lifetime well-being do not change from year
to year~ but rather can be treated as unobserved permanent individual characteristics.
a~

Then the observed response of hours to changes in wages is interpreted

a pure substitution effect.

He estimates the elasticity directly by regres-

sing the log of hours of work on the log of the wage.
range

f~om

.23~

.09 to

The resulting elasticities

depending on the details of the specification.

This re-

search teads to confirm the general view that adult males do not vary their hours
of work ina way Lhat is sensitive to wages.
A similar study has been carried out by James Heckman and MaCurdy (1977)
for adult women.

They

find~

again in accord with earlier

are much more sensitive to changes in wages.

research~

that women

For women whose wages are beyond

the reservation point that draws them into the labor

market~

the estimated

elasticity of hours of work with respect to the wage is 6.6.
So far as I
supply among
As it

know~

teenagers~

stands~

there are no comparable studies of intertemporal labor
who are probably similar to adult women.

this body of evidence suggests an aggregate wage elasticity

of labor supply of around

2~

but virtually all of that comes from women and teenagers.

-19-

Observed cyclical fluctuations in employment are disproportionately concentrated
among women and teenagers, but are noticeable among men as well.
Another highly relevant body of evidence has been collected by the various
negative income tax experiments.

I cannot do justice to all of the findings of

the experiments, but will offer the following broad summary:

The typical ex-

periment offered a three-year period of increased income to its subjects, along
with a tax of about 50 percent on earnings.

The typical adult male subject

reduced his labor supply by three hours per week and the typical adult female
subject by about two hours per week.

However, only about half of the subjects

were actually influenced by the tax and transfer provisions of the experiment;
the rest had total incomes in excess of the critical point where payments reached
zero under the benefit formula.

Putting all this together gives a rough estimate

pf the wage elasticities of 0.26 for men and 0.66 for women.

This is somewhat

higher than MaCurdy's estimates for men and very much lower than Heckman and
MaCurdy's estimates for women.

Part of the difference may be attributable to

the ratheL different compositions of the two samples.

For aggregate labor sup-

ply, the evidence from the negative income tax experiments suggests an overall
wage elasticity of about 0.40.
Except possibly for Heckman and MaCurdy's rather extreme estimate for adult
women, the microeconomic evidence on the labor supply response to temporary
movements of wages seems quite consistent with aggregate evidence.

The long-

standing criticism of the intertemporal substitution model accusing it of resting
on implausibly high elasticities of labor supply is not sustained by the evidence.
On

its own grounds, the model seems to work out quite well.

-20-

3.

The Irrelevance of Money in the Pure Intertemporal Substitution Model
Money has no explicit role in a simple version of the intertemporal sub-

stitution model of labor supply.

Whatever influence money has on labor supply

ought to operate through the substitution variable.

There is no mechanism

within the model by which the money stock can shift the supply curve.

6

Nothing

in the pure theory of intertemporal substitution suggests that labor supply is
the source of the apparent influence of the nominal money stock on real output
and employment.

Of course, several authors, including Lucas and Rapping at the

outset, have coupled the intertemporal substitution model t9 models of shortrun limitations in the diffusion of information.
neutrality fails in the short run.

In these hybrids, monetary

An unexpected monetary expansion can create

the impression of high real interest rates (or higher real wages) because of
limited information among employers and workers.
long as the lag in the arrival of information.

The effect can last only as
As Lucas (1975) has argued, the

transitory real effect of a monetary disturbance could set in motion a longer
response within the real economy.

For example, costs of adjusting the level of

output will make inventories fall in response to a monetary expansion, and then
gradually output will rise to restore the stock of inventories.
As a simple test of the irrelevance of money, I re-estimated the equation
~f

the earlier equation with the addition of the log of the money supply (M

I

finition) lagged one quarter:
-2.0
(6.7)

+ .70s t

+ . 25m t _ l

(.28)

'Jere lagged money is treated as exogenous.

A

a

1.40

(.06)
Contemporaneous money is excluded

because of the possibility of feedback from the current state of the economy

rhe supply function could be augmented by real balance effect, in which case
in the real stock of money might have a small influence.

,~[langes

-21-

to monetary policy.

The t-statistic for the exclusion of money from this

equation is in excess of four. which is statistically overwhelming evidence
that the money stock shifts the labor supply function.

A neutral response

of labor supply to the money stock is not a plausible hypothesis with respect
to the postwar American economy.

This finding invites a closer look at theo-

ries of labor supply which attempt to explain the vulnerability of the real
economy to nominal shocks.

4.

Theories of Labor Supply under Limited Information and Uncertainty
Robert Lucas (1972) presents a completely worked out theory of the non-

neutrality of money based upon an explicit intertemporal theory of labor supply.
Barro and Fischer (1976) give a similar but more general and less rigorous
d~velopment

of the same ideas.

In essence. this line of thought relies on the

strength of intertemporal substitution in labor supply. but suggests that workers
sometimes make adjustments that they would find inappropriate in general equilibrium where they and all the other agents in the economy had better information
about the current slate of the economy.

In the simplest models. the economy is

subject to two kinds of shocks. one rea] and one nominal.

In general equilibrium

with full information. labor supply would respond only to the real shock.
nominal shock would simply change all prices and wages in equal proportion.

The
How-

ever. workers have access to only a single indicator of the current state of the
economy. say. the wage level (or. in Lucas' model. the local price level).

Then,

as Lucas and various other authors have shown, labor supply over-reacts to the
nominal disturbance and under-reacts to the real disturbance.
One line of attack on this theory as applied to the contemporary U.S. economy
claims that the elasticity of labor supply is too small to explain the observed

-22-

movements in employment.

To put it another way, workers never see, or think

they see, large enough movements in real wages for them to make sufficiently
large adjustments in hours of work, whether the adjustments are appropriate or
not.

It seems to me that this criticism is untenable in view of the evidence

presented earlier in this paper.

Real wages and interest rates do move enough

to accord with observed movements in employment, given microeconomic evidence
about labor supply.
Another line of attack questions the relevance of the critical assumption
about limitations in information for labor supply in the modern U.S. economy.7
Within the general class of models pioneered by Lucas, monetary neutrality fails
only when workers do not observe enough different aggregate variables to figure
out the nature of the aggregate shock (Barro and Fischer (1976) give a particularly
rlear exposition of this point).

A large amount of information about prices,

wages, employment, unemployment, and other aggregate variables is available virtually instantaneously and essentially for free.

It is hard to see how the hy-

potheses of the theory of monetary nonneutrality on account of limited information
can apply when such a wealth of information is available.

It is clear, for example,

that permitting the participants in Lucas' 1972 model to know the average price
level in the economy would restore complete monetary neutrality in the short run.
The criticism is not that workers actually do know what is happening in the U.S.
e2onomy, but rather to question the success of this type of model in capturing
t~e

important source of nonneutrality.

At this stage there seems good reason to

doubt the relevance of the existing models of limited information.

7Tobin (1972), for example.

-23-

A second body of thought has developed with objectives similar to those
of the theory of limited information.

Its point of departure is the observation

that many workers have formal contracts which predetermine wages and let employers
choose employment so as to maximize profit once they observe demand.

It is clear

that this kind of contract will generate monetary nonneutra1ity (Fischer (1977),
Gray (1976), and Phelps and Taylor (1977)).

It is much less clear why such

contracts would ever come into being in the first place.

Barro (1977) has pointed

out the inefficiency of contracts in which nominal shocks have real consequences.
Imposition of the hypothesis of efficiency (marginal product of labor equal to
marginal value of workers' time) within labor contracts has the simple implication that the level of employment in a contract economy is essentially the same
as in an economy with an open labor market.

Contract economies can have monetary

nnnneutrality, but for the same reasons discussed earlier in this section:

If

limitations on the availability of current information make it impossible to distinguish real from monetary shocks, then contracts that are contingent on whatever
information is available will be vulnerable to purely nominal shocks.

But this is

just a restatement of the conclusions of Lucas' theory of incomplete information.
Contract theory has not so far made any independent contribution to the explanation
of the large shifts in employment and output. in response to movements of the money
supply that are revealed in aggregate U.S. data.

Contract theory has contributed

a good deal to the understanding of a variety of phenomena in the labor market, most
notably temporary layoffs, but has not so far fulfilled its original promise of
explaining the cyclical behavior of employment.

5.

Wage Rigidity and the Denial of the Labor Supply Function
Economists have not yet produced a theory of the transmission of monetary

-24-

shocks to employment and output which is based on realistic hypotheses of the
optimal behavior of individuals.

The result is a dramatic split between those

who conclude that we know almost nothing about business cycles and what to do
about them (Barro (1979) and Lucas and Sargent (1978»

against the proponents

of the view that nominal wages are rigid and employment is frequently off the
labor supply functions of workers (Gordon (1976».

The debate is all the more

intense because wage rigidity leads directly to activist policy--if the labor
market won't clear by itself, it can be kept in balance by adroit manipulation
of the money supply.
It is unnecessary to elaborate upon the point that wage rigidity and the
denial of labor supply are sufficient to explain the phenomena that concern this
paper.

The textbook IS-LM model together with any sensible empirical Phillips

cur.ve easily rationalizes all of the empirical findings reported here:

Exogenous

demand drives up output and interest rates because the LM curve slopes upward and
the IS curve shifts upward.

Money has a strong influence on real output and em-

ployment Lecause it shifts the LM curve horizontally.

The great majority of

practical economists will continue to use this.model to understand the operation
of the economy.

No econometric test has so far shown them to be wrong.

What is troublesome about this second positiDn is the utter irrationality
it seems to attribute to employment arrangements.
than a revocation of the law of supply and demand.

It ronounts to nothing less
In the short run, preferences

about work and time away from work are- ignored in the determination of employment-only the concerns of employers matter.

In a recession or a boom, workers are

pushed far off their labor supply functions.

Labor supply influences the economy

only in the rather long run established by the very flat empirical Phillips curve.

-25-

The central problem is not the explanation of wage rigidity per se, but of the
unilateral determination of employment by employers who are free to maximize
profit subject to the given nominal wage.

The rational worker or group of wor-

kers who granted an employer the right to unilateral employment determination
would be careful to set up an agreement that respected its labor supply function
(Hall and Lilien (1980)).

Such an arrangement should not be vulnerable in any

serious way to nominal shocks.

Some further aspects 6f this issue are treated

in the next section.
Arthur Okun (1975) has written one of the most thoughtful discussions of
wage and price rigidity.

It gives a convincing rationale for long-term relations

between buyers and sellers in a variety of markets.

In these markets, the al-

ternative of repetitive auctions or spot negotiation of the terms of sales or
employment would be more costly than long-term arrangements.

But Okun and the

authors who have argued in this vein are less convincing as to why the upshot
of these arrangements is to predetermine wages or prices and let the buyer determine qaantity unilarerally.
with these proviBions.
price and quantity.

I am aware of no important commercial contracts

Rather, the typical formal contract predetermines both

Such contracts cannot explain the mystery of large fluctu-

ations of output in response to nominal influences.

In more informal arrangements

where prices are apparently stabilized (as, for example, in the copper market),
sellers are actively involved in determining quantity, and the arrangements
stabilize output as well as price.

In the labor market, long-term relations tend

to convert labor into a fixed factor, as suggested by Oi (1962).
ment as much as wages is stabilized by this influence.

Again, employ-

The theory of long-term

relations or implicit contracts has some important implications for interpreting

-26-

aggregate data, but does not seem to provide a coherent explanation of the
hypothesis that the level of employment frequently departs from the labor supply
function because of the rigidity of wages.

6.

Unilateral Determination of Employment by Employers
Though the simple hypothesis of unilateral employment determination by

employers subject to a rigid nominal wage has escaped successful rationalization,
it does seem to be a fact that employers have more to say in the short run about
employment than do workers.

Instead of consulting the relevant prices, wages,

and interest rates to decide how much time to spend in the labor market, workers
simply show up for their jobs every day and do whatever work is available.

When

business is strong, employers ask for and receive extra effort from their workers;
lu

some cases they pay for it through overtime hours and sometimes it is just part

of the job.

In times of slack, employers unilaterally depress hours of work

through temporary layoffs, reduced work weeks, and so on.
~lue-colla~

Even outside the

industrial sector where provisions for varying annual hours of work

are highly formalized, it is clear that employers expect more from workers in
times of brisk demand than in times of slack.

By and large, it is employers,

not workers, who actually make decisions about the volume of work.
Under an employment contract, a worker may grant to the employer the right
determine the level of employment, subject to limitations spelled out in the
ntract.

Herbert Simon (1957) was one of the first to investigate such contracts.

voluminous recent literature examines contracts where employers bear the risk

;£ temporary fluctuations in demand; under these contracts, efficiency generally
:..equires that employers vary the level of employment even though compensation is
rtain or nearly certain (see Calvo and Phelps (1977».

Part of the original

-27-

motivation for this line of research was the belief that contracts could provide
an explanation for wage rigidity--put most precisely, an explanation for the
apparent ability of purely nominal shocks to affect the level of employment and
output.

Though there is still a serious question whether this explanation is

successful, the idea of contracts where workers grant the power of employment
determination to employers is an important one and is not at all linked to wagerigidity theory.
Within theories based on intertemporal substitution, employment contracts
could arise because employers have better information about the value of work at
different points in the business cycle than do workers.

Though markets with

sensitively varying wages and interest rates could induce the efficient pattern
of work, it is better from the point of view of managing information for employers

tP determine the pattern of work unilaterally.

When there is more work to do,

employers will ask their workers to work harder and longer, and the workers will
cooperate even though it costs them foregone time at home because their long-term
contract is attractive.

If employers act properly, they will

simulate the market

by equating the lnarginal product of labor to the marginal value of time.

Of course,

all the standard problems in the theory of labor contracts interfere with this
process--employers can cheat workers by asking them to work long hours too frequently, workers can default by quitting, and so on.
This line of thought may also help explain cyclical fluctuations in labor
productivity.

It is a notorious contradiction of the theory of production functions

that the same factors produce more output when demand is strong than when it is
weak.
Unilateral determination of employment by employers and the consequent
"involuntary" nature of employment reductions do not by themselves tell us that

-28-

only demand matters in determining employment.

One of the important contri-

butions of contract theory is to help understand how unilateral actions by
employers can respect the labor supply functions of workers.

7.

Unemployment
Many critics of theories where employment is always on the labor supply

function find them at odds with the facts about unemployment.

If a recession

is just a period when people recognize that lower levels of work are appropriate,
why is it accompanied by a bulge in the number of people who are looking for work?
Part of the answer comes immediately from what is known about temporary layoffs.

About a third of the increase in the unemployed during a recession have

not lost their jobs, but are on furlough as part of the process of diminished
total work effort.

A reduction in effort has three components:

less intensive

work each hour, short hours of work each week, and fewer weeks each year.

Those

on layof.f as part of the last component are counted as unemployed even though
they sti11 have jobs, a fact pointed out by Martin Feldstein (1975).

However,

the remaining two-thirds of the increase during a recession are truly jobless.
The great majority of them have lost jobs through permanent layoff; the rest of
the increase consists of people who have just entered the labor force and are
taking longer than usual to find work.

None of the increase in the unemployed

cJrnes from job-quitters.
Labor contracts can explain the narrow issue of the active role of employers
and the passive role of workers in the process of reducing total labor supply,
it seems to me.

A contract that provides for unilateral action by employers in

terminating the employment relationship when the marginal value of workers' time
threatens to exceed the marginal product of labor makes good sense.

We are not

-29-

surprised that a shift in the composition of demand away from one sector causes
employers in that sector to lay workers off, and the same principle ought to apply
in the aggregate.
The harder issue is the explanation of the strong tendency for the population
to spend a larger fraction of its time looking for work in times of slack.

Why

does the duration of the typical spell of unemployment lengthen from six weeks
in normal times to eight weeks in a recession?

This question may have an answer

somewhere in the micro economic theory of job search--indeed, I have made one attempt in this direction by looking at the widening of wage differentials that
occurs during a recession (Hall (1975)).

Still, the lack of a convincing, complete

account of the cyclical behavior of unemployment is a serious weakness of existing
theories which respect labor supply.

8.

Concluding Remarks
We have made important bits of progress in understanding the effects of

economic fluctuations within the labor market, without really solving the central
problem.

The pure jntertemporal substitution theory establishes the principle

that employment can fluctuate even in an ideal economy--there is not necessarily
a "natural" level of employment.

An attempt to understand the movements of

employment in the postwar U.S. economy in terms of the pure model yields sensible
results.

However, very strong results contradicting monetary neutrality reveal

the inadequacy of the pure substitution model.

A consistent theory of monetary

nonneutrality has been advocated by Robert Lucas and others, but there are questions about the informational assumptions that underlie it.

The long-standing

theory of wage rigidity and determination of employment by demand alone is fully
capable of explaining observed movements of the economy.

But it amounts to a

-30-

denial of labor supply in the short run.

No good rationalization for this gross

departure from standard economic postulates has yet been offered.
In view of our lack of a complete account of fluctuations in the labor
market, it is no surprise that major disagreements persist within the profession.
The intellectual case for wage rigidity and the irrelevance of labor supply is
an uneasy one, but most practical economists are more persuaded by the evidence
of the disproportionate role of demand in short-run fluctuations than they are
by existing theories that respect the labor supply function.

They will continue

to believe in the efficacy, and perhaps in the desirability, of active countercyclical policy until a much more convincing theory based on labor supply is
developed and tested.

References
Robert Barra, "Long-term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3, pp. 305-316, July 1977.
- - - - - - - , "A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model,"
unpublished, July 1978.
- - - - - - - , "Second Thoughts on Keynesian Economics," forthcoming in the
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 1979.
- - - - - - - and Stanley Fischer, "Recent Developments in Monetary Theory,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 2, pp. 133-167, April 1976.
Guillermo A. Calvo and Edmund S. Phelps, "Employment Contingent Wage Contracts,"
,
in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds.), Stabilization of the Domestic and
International Economy, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
Vol. 5, pp. 160-168, 1977.
Martin S. Feldstein, "The Importance of Temporary Layoffs: An Empirical Analysis,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3:1975, pp. 725-744.
Stanley Fischer, "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, pp. 191-205,
February 1977.
Robert J. Gordon, "Recent Developments in the Theory of Inflation and Unemployment,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 2, pp. 185-219, April 1976.
Jo Anna

~ray,

"Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach,"
Vol. 2, pp. 221-236, April 1976.

Journal of Monetary

EconG~ics,

Robert E. Hall, "The Rigidity of Wages and the Persistence of Unemployment,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1975, pp. 301-335.
_______ and David Lilien, "Efficient Wage Bargains under Uncertain Supply
and Demand," American Economic Review, March 1980 (forthcoming). NBER
Working Paper No. 251.
James Heckman and Tom MaCurdy, "A Dynamic Model of Female Labor Supply,"
March 1977, processed.
Robert Lucas, "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
Theory, Vol. 4, pp. 103-124, April 1972.
_ _ _ _ _ _, "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of Political
Economy, VQl. 83, pp. 1113-1144, December 1975.

and Leonard Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment, and Inflation,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 77, pp. 721-754, September-October
1969.
- - - - - - - and Thomas Sargent, "After Keynesian Macroeconomics," July 1978,
processed.
Tom MaCurdy, "An Econometric Model of Labor Supply in a Life Cycle Setting,"
Stanford University, July 1978, processed.
Franco Modigliani, "The Monetarist Controversy, or, Should We Forsake
Stabilization Policies?" American Economic Review, Vol. 67, pp. 1-19,
March 1977.
Walter Oi, "Labor as a Quasi-fixed Factor," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 70, December 1962.
Arthur Okun, "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs,"
on Economic Activity, 2:1975, pp. 351-390.

Brookings Papers

Edmund S. Phelps and John B. Taylor, "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy
under Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85,
pp. 163-190, February 1977.
Herbert Simon, Models of Man, New York, 1957.
James Tobin, "Inflation and Unemployment," American Economic Review, Vol. 62,
pp. 1-18, March 1972.

