NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ESTIMATION OF LABOR SUPPLY
OVER KINKED BUD&ET CONSTRAINTS:
SOME NEW ECONOMETRIC METHODOLOGY

Anthony 3. Pellechio

Working Paper No. 387

NATIONAL BUREAU OP ONOMIC RESEARCH

1059 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02133
August 1979

The research reported here is part of the NBERTS research
program in Social Insurance. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. There is an enormous debt to Gary
Chamberlain throughout this study. Shortcomings are ray
own.

1Th!R Working Paper 137

"The Estimation of Labor Supply Over

itinked

Budget

Constraints: Some New Econometric Methodology"

ABSTRACT

Most

programs

of taxation

and

income maintenance imply that

the

tax

rate faced by an individual changes at different levels of laborsupply. As a
result, the individual's budget constraint is kinked which presents problems

for the empirical study of labor supply. This paper developes econometric
methodology for estimating labor supply in the presence of taxes. Equations
for

market wage and shadow price are used to describe labor supply choices

over a kinked

budget coastraint This approach makes

a distinction between

the discrete choice of which segment or corner of the kinked constraint to work
on and the selection of the actual number of hours of work along linear segments.

A consistent procedure is derived that uses all the tax rates faced by the mdi—
vidual and relies on no more structure thanhas been used in the previous literature on labor force participation. This procedure summarizes the individual's
kinked

budget

constraint by calculating the expected value of variables that

assume different valueson thesections of the constraint. Techniques for Estimating the model based on a pxobit analysis of the decision to work above or below

certain corners of the budget constraint are presented. Maximum likelihood
estimation is also discussed.

Anthony J. Pellechio
Research Associate
National Bureau of Economic
Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, NA 02140
6l7/36s—39l9

1

The purpose of this study is to develop econometric methodology for

estimating labor supply inthe presence of taxes. Government programs' of income
maintenance and taxation imply'that the net wage faced.by an individual changes

at different levels of labor supply. Consequently, to the extent that 'an individual chooses his labor supply, he also chooses his tax rate. This selection
of taxes by the individual presents problems for empirical tax analysis. It is
incorrect to use the selected. tax rate as àn'explanato'ry variable for

measuring

tax effects in a labor supply model. This specification is subject to simultane.ity bias because labor supply and the tax rate are jointly' determined. The

problem is that labor supply is a function of all the tax rates faced by the
individual. Although some: progress has been"mad'e'in implementing such a function

empirically, it has been made by bringing a considerable amount of structure
into the model.1

This study developes a consistent method for estimating labor supply that uses
all the tax rates faced by'an individual and relies on no more structure than
has

been used in. the previous. literature on the subject. Other methods of

estimation are presented as steps in this development. These methods constitute

an empirical examination of labor, supply in which it is possible to test whether
individuals respond to taxes and achieve an equilibrium. It is also possible
to examine whether models based on strong assumptions and a considerable amount
of structure are justified. Such an examination is an. important part of
empirical tax analysis.
-

This study is based on the realization of a connection between two different
areas of research on labor supply. One area has to do with tax analysis and
the other with sample selection. The first is best represented in a study'by
Rosen (1976) which examined the

effect

of income taxes on the labor supply of

married woemn. The budget constraint of these women is kinked because their

2

net

wage makes abrupt changes as they move into different tax brackets. Rosen

summarized the kinked budget constraint by computing the effect of taxes on

earnings at a standard number of hours of wOrk. Essentially the constraint was
summarized by the average tax rate at a point. Other studies2 of labor supply
and taxes have taken similar approaches by focusing on different points or

constructing linear approximations of the budget constraint. These studies did
not represent the entire budget constraint in any detail. Nonetheless, Rosen
does

and

remark that "ideally we want to represent the whole opportunity locus"

this task is taken up here.
Another

group of labor supply studies that is not concerned about taxes

particular corner of the, budget constraint.
work - the participation decision - 'is used. in

focuses on decisions made at a
choice of whether or not to

The'.

these

studies to analyze issues of bias in wage comparisons and sample selection. The
analysis takes place at the corner of the budget constraint where hours of
work equal zero. The comparison, of market wage and reservation wage at this
corner has important implications for the, estimation of wages and labor supply'.

This analysis is extended in this study by carrying out the same comparison at
other corners along the taxed budget. constraint in order to develop methods

for estimating labor supply'in the presence of taxes. Thus, the analysis of
sample selection is used to address the tax selection problem discussed in the

first paragraph. Also, it is the basis for finding a way "to represent the whole
opportunity locus" as Rosen suggested..

Section II sets up a two-equation model of labor supply that serves as the

foundation for the methodology developed in this study. This section presents
techniques for estimating the model based on a probit analysis of the decision

to work above or below certain corners of the budget constraint. This section also

3

spells out. under what condition these techni4ues can be applied to a nonconvex

budget constraint. While showing that the model can be estimated by looking
at discrete choices, the 'probit'results are also needed It the methodology
developed later on.

Section III brings hours of work into the estimation of the model and
develops a consistent procedure for kinked budget constraints using ordinary

least squares. The procedure summarizes the budget constraint in an intuitively
appealing way by calculating the expected value of variables that assume

different values on the sections of the constraint. The weights in this expected
value equal the probabilities of choosing to work on these sections; the probit

results of Section II are used to compute these probabilities. Because these
probabilities depend on the parameters of thle tax program, it is. possible to

simulate behavioral responses to tax changes. Maximum, likelihood estimation fol.
lows naturally from the consistent procedure 'and is presented in Section IV.

Likelihood

maximization can be used to examine the source of information in model

estimates. Section V discusses the problem posed by the nonconvex budget constraint for the consistent and 'maximum likelihood methods and proposes adjustments

for each. The methodology presented here describes a process of defining
a labor supply model for empirical study that brings in as much structure as is'

justified by the data. A summary and conclusion are given in Section vi.

TI. A Two-Equation Model of Labor Supply and Its Estimation Based' on
Probit Analysis

A person decides to work based on the value of his time in market and

nonmarket activities. In the
Outside

market,

his time is valued at his market

wage.

the market the price that an individual attaches to his time is his shadow

4

price. A person's shadow price when. he does not work is defined to be his

reservation wage. By definition, the reservation wage of a nOnworker exceeds
his market wage. When a person's reservation wage is less than his wage, he will
work, i.e., he supplies labor in the market at his wage. rate. As he increases.

his labor supply, a rise in his shadow price is predicted on the usual assumption

that leisure is a normal good. A person supplies labor to the point where his
shadow price equals his market wage. However, in the presence of income taxes or
other income related programs, labor supply is no longer determined by equating

shadow price and market wage. The process by which a labor supply equilibrium.
is achieved underlies the methods for estimating labor supply that are developed
in this study.

.

The discussion turns to a formal description of this
process.

The traditional analysis. of labor force participation4 is the foundation of
the methodology for .eflimatiñg labor supply developed, here. The analysis. uses

equations to estimate an individual's market wage and shadow price. A person's
potential wage, w; is related to a set of variables, X, and an error term
e1.

This relationship is specified in the following semi-logarithmic form5:

(1)

.

lnw=

Xct+

The X variables consist of schooling and age as well as other determinants of

wage. The error term, e1, is assumed to be random and uncorrelated with the X's.
The decision to work also depends on an individual's shadow price, denoted

s. This is influenced by: time spent working, h; a set of observed variables,
Y; and an error term, e2. The general form of the shadow price equation is adopted
from the wage equation as follows:

S

ln5Y+Xh÷e

(2)

The Y vector includes, schooling and age, as does X, and other variables that

influence shadow price alone. Labor supply is assumed to have a single time
dimension measured by the scalar variable h.6 The error term is a random
variable distributed independently, of h and Y by assumption:

A person will work when his reservation wage, i.e., s at h0, is less
than h.is wage. Using. eqs. (1) and (2) this means;

(3)

e2

-

e1.<

X—

Let DP be a binary variable that indicates whether a person works (DP=l) or

is

not working (DPO). The probability of'working P(DP=l), equals the

probability that eq. (3) holds. Letting.F denote the distribution function
of e2-e1 and a denote the standard deviation of e2-e1, the probability of
working becomes:

P(DP = 1)

The argument

F[(X - Y)/a]

of P will be called the "participation index" because it determine's

labor force participation; it is denoted J.

6

The discussion turns to an analysis of labor force participation because

it illustrates some points of technique that will be used again. The participa—

tion decision is thenatural starting point for estimating labor supply. Estimates
of a and S up to the scale factor a are obtained from a participation analysis.

This is done by dividing the sample into subsamples of individuals who are working,
DP=l, and those who are not working, DP=O, and then maximizing the likelihood of
observing this behavior in the

sample.

The likelihood function following from

eq. (4) to be maximized is:

L=

(S)

II

ic{DN1}

=

where

for

F(J )

lt[l—F(J0)
i

0i ic{DP=O}

the value of the participation index based on individual i's values
-

1

the variables. Maximum likelihood estimates of a/a and /a follow from the

maximization of I...

If a variable appears in both X and Y, thenonly the difference

between its coefficients in equations (1) and (2) relative to

can be identified.

When F is the normal distribution function then eq. (5) is the standard

probit model. Although the analysis is amenable to whatever distribution function
is assumed for F,the.probit specification is adopted because this has been the
-

choice

in the labor force participation literature.

A two-step procedure permits estimating all coefficients separately without

any scale factor. In the first step, an estimate of a is obtained directly by
estimating the wage equation alone. These results are used to impute the log
of an individual's market wage based on X.

In the second step, this imputed log

of wage is used in a probit analysis of participation. The inverse of the estimated

7

coefficient on the imputed log of wage is an estiniateof the standard deviation

in the denominator of the participation indey. Multiplying the coefficient estimates for Y variables by this estimate of the standard deviation yields maximum

likelihood estimates of the s.
This two-step procedure will be described explicitly. The first step produces
an estimate of eq. (1) which is given as follows7:

(6)

lnw=X;+e1 = lnw÷e1

The decision to work now implies:

(7)

Let e' equal e2 e1
becomes:

(8)

Let

(9)

< 1nw -

e2 -

-

.

and have standard deviation a'. The probability of working

P(DP = 1) =

F[(lnw- YS)Ja']

denote the argument of F; the likelihood function based on eq. (8) is8;

L=

Ii

F(J0i)

ie{DP=l}

It [1 ic(L1P=O}

F(J'0 iI

8

This is the same as eq. (5) except that mw, the imputed log of wage, replaces
Ltand a' replaces a.

An important feature of the two-step procedure is that a.single wage effect

on participation is conveniently summarized by the coefficient estimate of lnw.
An estimate of a' is given by the inverse of the estimated coefficient of lnw.
An estimate of 5 is obtained by multiplying the estimated coefficients of the Y

variables

by the estimte of a'.

It is possible

9

to estimate S using

the probit analysis based on X and Y'

:

(eq. (5)) and the wage regression without carrying out the second probit step.
•

Poing this require that a variable be in N but npt in Y; let x, denote such a
variable. The wage regression provides an estimate of x1's coefficient iii
eq. (1) -

a1.

The probit analysis yields an estimate of x11s coefficient in the

participation index -

(a1/a)

.

Thus, an estimate of a is given by

If there are two (or more) variables in X but not in Y, there would be two (or mOre)

such estimates and a would be overidentified. A solution to this problem of overidentification is embedded in the two-step procedure. The inverse of coefficient
estimate of 1n'w in this procedure can be interpreted as a weighted average of the
estimates

of a in the overidéntified casej°

Once a person has decided to work, the decision on how much labor to supply

-

over a kinked budget constraint follows from a comparison of market wage and shadow

price at points other than the corner of zero hours. The details of tins approach
are presented using..the
ings are

further
a person
(l-t)w,

budget constraint illustrated in Figure 1. As shown,, earn-

untaxed up to the level M at which point a tax rate of t is applied to
earnings. Hours

of work at this kink point will be denoted by k. Thus,

earns his full wage, w, for hours worked up to k and earns his taxed wage,

for hours worked above k.

9
Figure 1

ThE CONVEX KINKED BUDGET CONSTRAINT

Income -

-.

segment (b)
slope =

(1-t)w

M

segment (a)

N

slope

w

-N

Hours of
No nina rk et

Activity

>

k

C

Hours of
Work

10

A person works when e2 -

e1

< Xa

-

YS but the amount •of labor supplied

depends on other wage and shadow price comparisons. Working below k implies
that the shadow price of time atk exceeds the market wage so that:

(10)

e2-e1>Xcx-Y-yk

Using the same notation to describe the distribution of e2 -

e1

as before,

the probability that a person works less than k hours is given by:

(11).

P(h

k) =

1 -

F[(X -

- yk)/a]

The argument of F will be called the "index for working up k' and is denoted

The participation analysis described above did not yield an estimate of
y

because the analysis was applied where htO. However, it is possible to estimate
along with the other parameters by applying probit analysis at the kink point.

A binary variable OK is used to indicate whether a person works less than
k(DK

1).

0) or at least k hours (DK =

The sample is divided intO the two

subsamples corresponding to this classification and the likelihood function for
observing this behavior is given by:

(12)

L=

11

ie{DK1}

i

[l_F(Jk)]
i

ic{DK=O}

11

=

where

the value of the index for working up to k based on'individual' its

values for the variables. Maxtmuni likelihood, estimates of a/a, /a and now
Va are obtained by maximizing L with respect to thes.e parameters.. The Same

problem in estimating the separate coefficients of variables in both X and 1

arises as it did before. The same two-step procedure can be applied as before
in order to estimate a, S and y

separately.

The probit analysis at the corner of zero hours and at the kink point
may yield different estimates of the same coefficient and as a result provide.

a.richer description of labor supply. For example, children can have opposite
effects on the labor supply of women at. these points)1 The presence of young
children is expected to lower the probability of. working. However, having decided
to work, a woman's labor might be increased by the presence of children. in order

to cover the cost of childcare. In other words, children become a fixed cost in.
labor supply decisions. Consequently, the coefficient of a variable, measuring
the effect of children can have a different sign in estimates of the model. at zero

hours and the kink point. The probit methods described above provide a direct
examination of whether labor supply is influenced by fixed costs or other factors.
Although the above methods for estimating the models using prob'it analysis
were constructed based on a convex budget, they can. also be'applied when the budget constraint is' noncorivex subject to a certain condition. This condition is best

illustrated with the aid of Figure 2. Three kinked nonconvex 'budget constraints,
ABCD1, ABCD2 and ABCD.,, are shown in tins figure. 1'he extension of the common
initial

segment of all of these constraints is given by the dashed line BE.

The probit methods for estimating the' model presented in this section are valid

on the condition that BE lies above the rest of the constraint. This condition

12

Figure 2
NONCONVEX KINIKED BUDGET CONSTRAINTS

Income

£

N

N--

N_ '-'

--

-

N

'-N
Hours

of

Nonmarket

Activity

k

Hours of
Work

13

is satisfied by ABCD1 and ABCD2. Even when the slope of a segment of the budget
constraint exceeds the slope of its initial segment, as in the case of

ABCD2,

this condition is still sufficient for the validity of the above methods.

If the above condition is not met, an individual could havehis shadow
price equal the slope of the budget constraint when. it is above the extension of

its initial segment and also satisfy the equilibrium condition for working
below k.

In other words, equilibrium conditions for working above and below k can

be met. This situation is illustrated by the, budget constraint ABCD3 in Figure 2.
When such budget constraints prevail, a utility function must be employed for
estimating labor supply. As iHeckman (1974b) says "the essence of the problem
involyes utility comparisons between two or more discrete alternatives."
Individuals •face kinked nonconvex budget constraints under programs •of

income maintenance such as welfare assistance, negative income tax plans' and the

social security earnings test. The essential idea of these programs is to offer.
a grant as income support and reduce (tax). it as a person's earnings go up. The
nonconvexity arises because an individual's wage is taxed in the range where'his
earnings reduce the grant (segment (b) in Fig. 2) and then is not taxed when the
grant is reduced to,zero (segment (c) in Fig. 2).

If there is an initial range

over which an individual can work without reducing his grant then the methods pre-

sented above can probably be applied. The condition for using these methods
is likely to hold because the net wage after the grant is reduced. to zero is not

likely to exceed the slope of the initial segment. The examination of whether
this condition holds is important because it determines whether a labor supply
model can be estimated using the methods developed here for which computational
procedures already exist or the model requires more complicated analysis.

14

This section applied the analysis of discrete chOices to estimate the

labor supply model. The following sections bring hours of wdrk into the estimation
of the model.

III. Consistent Estimation Using Ordinary Least Squares
A technique for obtaining cOnsistent estimates of the labor supply model

using ordinary least squares is derived in this section. The technique is based
on using the distribution of the disturbances in eqs. (1) and (2) for computing
the probabilities of working on each segment and corner of the budget constraint.
Therefore, the discussion on how choices are Eade on the kinked convex budget
constraint must be taken up again.

The probability that a person works at a level less than k, be., along
segment (a) in Figure 1, is given by eqs. (3) and (10) toije:

P(Q < h c k) = P(X1

(13)

-

(14)

Y -•-k <

e2

-

e1

c

—

Ys)

the same notation from the last section to.describe the distribution of

Using

e2

—

e1, this probability is expressed as follows:

P(0 < Ii <

k)

F[(X - YB)/a]

—

F[(X -

The wage that a person faces at k is taxed at the rate t.

—

A person may

be willing to work more than Ic at his full wage but not at his taxed wage. In

15

other

words, the market wage can exceed his shadow price at kbut his taxed

wage does

not.

For this reason there is a nonzero probability that an individual

works k exactly. Working at least k requires that:

(15)

e2- e1<Xa—Y8-yk

A person works no more than k when (1 -

t)w

<

s

at

k

By taking the log of this

inequality, it is expressed using eqs. (1) and (2) as follows:

e2 — e1 >

(l6)

ln(1

—

t)

+

Xa-

YS —

yk

Based on eqs. (15) and (16) the probability of working at the corner on the

budget constraint where h = k becomes:

(17)

This

(18)

P(h = k)

probability

+

P(ln(l

-

t)

+

Xcz -

Y5 -

yk Ce2 - e1

< Xci

-,

Y5 -

yk)

is further expressed as follows:

P(h = k)

F[(Xa

-

-

- F[(ln(l

-

t)

+ Xci - Y5

-

yk)/a]

if,

A concentration of individuals working k may

appear

because some individuals

work as much as possible at their full wage but will not work any more at their
H

taxed wage.12

Finally,

a person will work along the taxed segment of the budget constraint

when his net wage exceeds his shadow price at k so that:

(19)

The probability of working more than k is given by:

(20)

P(h>lc) =

F[(ln(l

—

t)+ Xa —

— yk)/a]

The labor supply choices over the budget constraint illustrated inFigure 1
and the probabilities ofinaking these choices are suinniarizedin Table 1. The

indexes derived in this section to describe these choices are given in the table
also.

The technique for consistently estimating the model is based on the probabilities in Table 1 and an equation for the specific amount of labor supplied.
Consequently, the focus of attention turns to the labor supply equation that

follows from eqs. (1) and (2). This equation is derived by equating shadow price
and market wage and solving for h. Far the moment, the problems posed by the
kinked budget constraint are ignored so that this equation is:

17

Table 1
THEIR PROBABILITIES

LABOR SUPPLY CHOICES AND

Labor Supply Choice

Probability of Choice*

Nonparticipation, h = 0

1 -

Along segment (a), 0 <h < k

F(J0)

F(J0)- F(Jk)

At corner, h = k

-

k

Along segment (b), h >

*

F(J)

F(J)

The indexes used in the probabilities of choices are:

(Xa - Y)/a,

J0

(Xct

=

- Y

(ln(l

-

-

t)

the participation index;

yk)/cx

+ Xa

-

working beyond k.

,

the

Y

-

index for working up to k;

yk)/a , the

index for

18

(21)

h =

X(a/y)

-

Y(/y)

+

-

(e2

e1)/y

This equation shows that labor supply is a linear multiple (1/',') of the difference

between market wage and reservation wage. Therefore, this difference determines
whethera person works and how much time he spends working. Even without the
complication of a kinked budget constraint, the participatioh and labor supply

decisions may not be so strictly related. The coefficients of some of the K
and Y variables in the participation step may differ from the corresponding

coefficients in the labor supply equation. The point made in the discussion on
the fixed cost of children in the last section applies here as well. To allow
for this possibility and to simplify the expressions in subsequent calculations,
the labor supply equation will be specified in the following general way:

(22)

hWd+u
N is just the set of all variables in X andY; it is doubtful that a

variable in either the wage or shadow price equation would not appear in the

labor supply equation and vice versa. The difference between eqs. (21) and (22)
is in the vector of coefficients. The essential point is that the strict derivation of labor supply from the market wage and shadow price equations can be
examined empirically by testing whether the coefficients in eq. (22) are different

from those in eq. (21). This point is made by Haitoch (1976, p. 13). To estimate
eq. (22) the problems posed by the kinked budget constraint must be handled.

'9

The technique for consistent estimation of eq. (22) using OLS follows
from calculating the expected value of h over the kinked budget constraint.

To illustrate this, let q index the types of labor supply choices where.q equals
1 for not working, 2 for working along segment (a), 3 for working at k, and
4 for working along segment (b). The expected. value of h conditional on W is:

4

P(q

E(hW)' =

(23)

in

where P(q =

i)

=

i)[W+
q

E(uSV, q)]

equals the, probability of making choice q =

1; these prob3bili-

ties are .given.in Table 1. Estimates of these probabilities fellow from the
probit analysis of OK presented in Section II.
The q subscript for W indicates that the value of some variables in IV

depend on the labor supply choice. For example, the value of the tax rate
depends on labor supply.' The problem posed by this' dependency was referred

to in the introduction as the tax selection problem. The source of this problem
is shown explicitly, in eq. (23): the error term depends on q and hence is

potentially correlated with the choice-dependent value of a variables However,
thi.s problem does not arise with the specification given by eq. (23) because

the

variables are not defined by the value of q that is chosen. Instead, the

value of a variable equals the probability weighted average of its values for
all possible choices.
An important result of the above expected value calculation is that the
expected

value of the error ten equals zero. This can be shown by writing out

the summation in eq. (23) in full. The values of the probability weights,

P(q = i), are given in Table 1. The expected value of u for a given value of

20

q,

E(uW, q)J, is nonzero because u is potentially correlated with

e -

and e2 has been shown to be truncated for any particular choice. Letting
e1
0ue denote this potential correlation and f denote the.standard normal density
function, and using the formulas for the means of truncated normal variables13,

the expansion ofeq. (23) becomes:

a

EU]W) = [1 F(J0)J[Wjd

(24)

-

at
a

+ [F(Jç)

-

F(Jk)Ii[W2d

+ [F(Jk) -

+

It

F(J1ç)] [w3d

[F(Jk)][W4

-

—

J0) -

F(J0)

af(Jk) -

-

F(Jk)]

t

t

a

d

t

-

-

ue f(Jt)
k

—

-

follows immediately that:

4

(25)

E(hIW)

= [ P(q
i=l

The

probability

zero. There is
was

weighted
no

=

i)

N jd•

q

average of the expected value of u, as

selection problem because

shown,

equals

the actual labor supply choice

not used to calculate the conditioned mean of h. Therefore, neither

the expected value of the error nor an explanatory variable depend on this choice.

21

The only conditioning variables in eq. (24) are the exogenous variables

given by W. The fact that some variables, in partiéular the tax rate, differ
in value over the budget constraint is handled by taking their expected value

over the constraint. In other words, the kinked budget constraint is summarized
in an expected-value calculation. This summary of the budget constraint answers
Rosen!s (1976) request for away to represent the wole opportunity locus.
An important variable in N is the net wage and the way it is treated in

eq. (25) illustrates some important features of the procedure. The coefficient

For the moment, eachindividual's market

of this variable will be denoted d-1 .

wage, w, is assumed to be constant and observed. The net wage varies over- the
budget constraint because the tax rate changes; for example, in Fig. 1, •the

tax rate for 4 =
tq

1

and 2 is zero and for q = 3 and 4 it is t In general, lOt

be the tax rate that individuals face for choice q. Letting 1 be the variables

in N other than the net wage andd. be the vector of their coefficien-ts eq. (25)
-

becomes;

(26)

d1[P(q

E(hIW)

=

d1[P(q

=

=

i)ln(1

i)ln

-

tq)WI

w +

[P(q

+

d1[P(q=

i)Zqldz

i)ln(1 -

t)]
-

+ P(q
= d11i

w +

d1[P(q

-

=

-

iDZqIdz
=

i)ln(l

-

-

t)]

+

[P(q

=

i)Zqldz

22

where

expresses summation over q.

The first ten shows that a variable which is constant over the budget
constraint assumes its constant value in the specification given by eq. (25)

since the probabilities sum to- one. The second term shows that labor supply
is a function of all tile tax rates as mentioned in the introduction, and eq. (26)

offers a convenient way to express this. A further ithplication is that the coef—

ficients of ln w and the expected tax rate should be equal. This equality -

/
suggests a simple test of tax perception of the type carried out by Rosen-(1976).
-

An important feature of eq. (26) is- that it is po.sible to- simulate responses

to changes in the tax program based on the specification of- the equation-. The

breakpoints and tax rates of the program are used to define the J indexes and
the probability weights follow directly from estimates: of these indexes-. Con-

sequently, when the breakpoints or tax rates are changed, the probability weights

change which results in a potential change in the expected value of hours of
work for each individual as Eiven by eq. (26).
If each individual's wage rate is not observed then there are alternative

ways to estimate eq. (25). One way is to substitute the equation for w intO

-

eq. (26) so that the X's appear as explanatory variables with d1a as the vector
of their coefficients. The estimate of eq-. (26) based on the X's and the-wage

regression can be used to estimate d1. This procedure is identical to what was
done in Section II to estimate

based on a probit analysis and the wage regression.

Again, Let x1 denote a variable in X and not in '1.

The wage regression yields

an estimate of x1's coefficient in the wage equation-;1 .

The estimate of eq. (26)

gives an estimate of x1Ts coefficient in the labor supply equation —

estimate of d1 is given by d1u1/1 .

Overidentification

d1

l

An

of d1 follows when more

than one variable appears in X but not in Y. Another way to- estimate eq. (26)

23

solves this problem of overidentification. The solution is analogous to what
was done before: the wage regression is used to impute a log of wage to everyone
based on their X values and the imputed log of wage is used in eq. (26) as an

explanatory variable. The coefficient of the imputed log of wage provides an
estimate of d1. Again, the equality of the wage and tax coefficient can be
tested as a way to test tax perception.

The main result of this section is expressed byleq. (26). Ordinary least
squares estimation of the labor supply model based on this specification yields
a consistent estimate of the model in the presence of a convex kinked budget
constraint. The way in which this specification sunurarizes the budget constraint

in an expçcted value has a certain intuitive appeal. Although the procedure for
implementing this specification re4uires probit analysis as a first step and the
calculation of estimates •of the probabilities given in Table 1 from the probit

results, it is not computationally burdensome. More importantly, the steps in the
procedure build on themselves and constitute a thorough empirical examination

of labor supply. In the process it is possible to test tax perception as well
as measure tax effects.

The model is developed to the point where maximum likelihood estimation is

easy to discuss. The value of this discussion lies in presenting a way to test
the source of information in the estimates of the model.

IV. Maximum Likelihood Estimation
This section will describe ways to estimate the labor supply model based
on

likelihood

maximization. Most of the derivations and formulas needed to

define the likelihood function have been presented in the previous sections.

However, the specific amount of labor supplied by individuals who work on a linear

24

segment of the budget constraint gives additional information on the

probability of their choice, which is put to use here. To be specific, a
person

is

who chooses to work an amount h* along segment (a), i.e. 0 <

h

<

considered. Based on the assumptions that individuals can work

any amount they want and that they choose their labor supply so as tO equate
shadow price and net wage, it follows that:

(27)

e2_e1=XaYS_?h*

Based on this equality and eq. (14) and lettingfdenote the density function
for e2 -

(28)

This

e1, the probability of working along segment (a) at h* becomes:

P(h :h*I0 < h

<

k) =

probability and the probability for working along segment (b) will be

expressed more conveniently by defining the following 3 indexes:

- yh*)/ci

= (Xa -

for choices along segment (a),
i.e., 0 <

h

< k

or,

=

(ln(l

-

t)

+ Xa

-

- yh*)/a

,

for

choices along

segment (b), i.e., h* >

k

25

In order to define the likelihood of observing the behavior in a sample,

individuals are grouped by the labor supply choice they actually make. Thus,
the sample is partitioned as follows: D0 for ndnworkers.;

for persons workin.g

along segment (a); P2 for persons working at the kink point; and D3. for per-

sons working more than k. Given this partition and the probabilities, of making.
these choices, the likelihood of observing this behavior is given by:

L.=

(29)

11 [1 —

iD0

F(J0I)]

H [F(J) 1

ieD2

Asympotically

f(.)/[(0 ) - F(J1 )]
i
j

II

leD

F(Jkt)]
'1 .

1-'

.
.

ieD3

"J*)/F(Jkt?
i
1.

efficient, consisteflt estimates of the coefficients in the model

are obtained by maximizing the likelihood function with respect to these
coefficients.14

The above likelihood function was based, in part, on the assumption that
individuals equate shadow price and net wage in determining their labor supply.
However,

individuals may

not be able to choose their hours of work..freely because

employers offer jobs for specific amounts of work. As a result, work choices
along linear segments do not follow
budget

constraints. By dropping

from tangencies of indifference curves with

this tangency assumption the likelihood function

becomes:

(30)

L= IT [l—F(J0) H [F(Jo)_F(Jk)}
i
i
i id)1
iD3
ii

ieD

[F(J )
i

-

II
F(J i )3 icfl

F(J )
i

26

This adjustment for dropping the tangency assumption is identical to what
Rosett and Nelson (1975) do in the two-limit probit model when nonliinit values

of the dependent variable are not known.

The maximization of the likelihood functions given by eqs. (29) and (30)

permits testing the source of information in the coefficient estimates. If
the value of the likelihood function given by eq. (29) is significantly higher
than that based on eq. (30) than additional information is gaIned by assuming

that individuals equate shadow price and net wage. This result would support
the usual description of labor supply as an equilibrium that follows from a
tangency of an indifference curve with the budget line.
If the maximum likelihood estimates from eqs. (29) and (30) are not signi-

ficantly different then the assumption that shadow price equals net wage along
linear segments of the budget constraint does not add much information empirically.
In other words, most of the information for labor supply estimation is captured
by the comparison of shadow price and net wage that determines which linear seg-

ment or corner of the budget constraint is chosen; variation in labor supply
along linear segments does not add much precision to the estimate of the model.

This section presented maximum likelihood methods estimation that followed

naturally from the consistent methods developed in the previous section. A
test of the source of information in model estimates was also presented. Both
the consistent and maximum likelihood methods were given for a convex budget
constraint. The probleim posed by a nonconvex constraint and the accompanying
adjustments to each method are presented in the next section.

27

V.

Adjustments

for the Nonconvex Budget Constraints

The purpose of this section is to point out precisely what problem arises
for the estimation procedures giveft in Sections III and I'! when they are

applied to a nonconvex kinked budget constraint, and what adjustments have to

be made. For maximum likelihood methods the adjustment is one of interpreta.tion; the likelihood function is. defined in the sane way as before but the

predictive power of the estimates is limited. An adjustment in the probability
weights used in the consistent procedure is suggested as a practical solution
to the nonconvexity problem.

The nonconvexity problem is best illustrated with thebudget constraint

shown in Figure 3. This budget constraint describes a program of inëome suppot
in which individuals receive a grantor benefit that is reduced by $t for every

dollar of earnings above a certain amount (bc on the vertical axis). Th budget
constraint becomes nonconvex at point D where the grant is reduced to zero and

earnings can no longer be taxed. At this point, where labor supply equals n,
net wage rises from its taxed value, (1 -

t)w,

to the market wage rate, w.

The shadow price at n can exceed the taxed wage implying that labor supply is

less than n. At the same time, this shadow price can be less than the market
wage implying. that labor supply is greater than n.

The following indexes are used to express the nonconvexity problem explicitly:

=

((
(Xci -

-

Y

t)
-

+ Xci

-

- yn)/a

yn)/o , the

,

the

index for working up to n

index for working beyond n.

28

Figure 3

THE NONCONVEX KINKED BUDGET CONSTRAINT THAT
FOLLOWS FROM AN INCOME SUPPORT PROGRAM

Income

E

segment (c)
slope = w

segment (b)
slope

(l-t)w
__%___ C

C

N
segment (a)

slope = -w
b

Hours of
Nonmarket

Activity

>

II

k

Hours of
Work

29

Since ln(l <

(e2

-

t)

e1)

0, then

C
<

J

<

J

.

Therefore,

it is possible that

where e1 and e2 are the error terms in the wage and shadow

price equations respectively. The first inequality says that the shadow price
at n exceeds the taxed wage and the second inequality, that this shadow price

is less than the market wage. Thus, conditions fOr working below and above
n are both satisfied implying that there are two potential equilibrium points.

One solution to this problem would be to introduce a utility function into
the model either by prior specification or through a derivation based on the

labor supply equation. With this function, the ambiguity posed by two potential
equilibrium points can be resolved by choosing the one yielding higher utility.

This solution is based on the assumption that labor supply is determined by
tangencies between indifference curves and budget constraints, i.e., individuals
adjust their hours of work freely in order to equate shadow price and net wage.
HOwever, individual.s may not be able to choose their hours so freely. A
utility function based on an assumption that is not.suppQrted empirically will
not describe labor supply choices accurately.

The tangency assumption is not used in the procedures developed here for
estimating labor supply based on probit analysis and likelihood maximization.

It is not important for theconsistent method because the coefficients in the
labor supply equation are allowed to differ from those in the indexes for the

probabilities of choices. More importantly, the methodology developed here relies on the data to indicate what steps in the labor supply decision convey

the most information for estimation purposes. The methods will be adjusted for
the nonconvexity problem in ways that should not cause significant problems

empirically. The limitations of these adjustments must be weighted against the
potential inaccuracies o a more complicated functional analysis.

30

The likelihood function based on the nonconvex budget constraint in
Figure 3 would simply add another term to eq. (28) for the subsample of individuals. working on segment (c). The probabilities for choosing zero hours,

segment (a), and the kink point remain as given jn Table 1. The subgroup
of individuals working along segment (b) is again denoted by

and the proba-

bility of this choice is F(4) _F(Jt). The subgroup working along segment ()
is denoted by 04. and the probability of this choice is F.(J). The likelihood
function is given as follows:

(31)

L =

ii

[1 -

F(J0

icD0
•11 [.F@k) 1

iED2

It

)]

n {F(J0

i

i ieD0.

F(Jk i

F(J4]xr [F(J)
1
iD3

-

(Jt)]
.1

F(J)

icD4

i

.

This function does not take into account the possibility that individuals on
segment (b) could have chosen segment (c) and vice versa. Consequently, the
model cannot be used to predict jumps between segments (b) and (c) in response

to tax changes. This limitation in the predictive power of the model may be
less problematic than the restrictions imposed by a utility function.
The probabilities used for the consistent procedure can be adjusted for the
problem posed by the n.onconvexity. The
point, D in Figure 3 where h =

n,

probability

equals .F(Jn) -

for working at the nonconvexity

F(Jt) which

is negative. Since

all the probabiities sum to one, this negative probability at 0 implies that the

sum of the probabilities for the other choices exceeds one by the magnitude of

31

this negative amount which is F(Jt) -

This

should be interpreted as

showing that the comparison of shadow price and net wage gives the expected
result that an equilibrium should not occur around the nonconvexity point.

The proposed adjustment conforms with this result. The adjustment is to sub-

tract [F(J) -

F(J)]/2

from the probabilities for working along segments (b)

arid (c). As a result, the probability of working in an interval around the

nonconvexity point equalszero as expected)5
In this section, the maximum likelihood and consistent methods were adjusted

for the problem posed by a noncanvex budget constraint. The belief is that these
adjustments are empirically sound and are superior to making additional assumptions that may only constrain the data to fit a particular functional form.

VI. Summary and Conclusion
This study develops econometric techniques for estimating labor sujply when
individuals face a net wage that varies as a result of a program of income
maintenance or taxation. The methodology is. based on the traditional a.halysis of

labor force participation. Equations for market wage and shadow price are used
to describe labor supply choices over a kinked budget constraint. This approach
makes a distinction between the discrete choice of which segment or corner of the
kinked constraint to work on and the selection of the actual number of hours of

work along linear segments. As a result, the methodology can be used to test
whether information in an estimate of the model comes from discrete chOices or

the selection of a specific number of hours. Such an examination of the source
of information in model estimates is important because it determines what assumptions about labor supply are appropriate empirically.

32

Methods of estimating all the coefficients in the model by the application
of probit analysis at certain corners of the budget constraint have been
presented. Under a certain condition these methods can be applied to rionconvex
constraints.

Comparisons of net wage and shadow price along the budget constraint are
used to derive a procedure for consistently estimating the model based on- ordi-

nary least squares. An expected value calculation summarizes a variable that
changes- value over the convex kinked constraint in an intuitively appealing way.

Such a variable equals a weighted average of its values on the corners and seg-

ments of the constraint. The weights equal the probabilities of choosing to

work on each corner and-segment. Theseprobabilities vary with thevalües of the
exogenous variables for each individual and with the parameters of the tax

program under study. Consequently, an estimate of the model can be used to
simulate individual responses to changes in the tax program. An- important step

in this procedure that precedes the measurement of tax effects is a test of
tax perception.

Maximum likelihood estimation of the model follows naturally from consistent
procedure. The likelihood approach makes it possible to test -the assumption that
shadow price and net wage are equal along linear segments of the-budget constraint.
Adjustments to the maximum likelihood and consistent methods for nonconvex budget
constraints were also presented.

There

are two points to be made in conclusion that serve as both caveats

and defenses for this study. First, individuals may not know exactly-what their
budget

constraints look like, especially when these constraints are complicated.

Consequently, they may make their labor supply decisions based on considering only
-

a few discrete choices as being relevant. 16

-

.

Alternatively, they may make their

33

decisions basedon a subjective expectation of theirtreatment under a tax system.
The methods presented here may go too far because they rely on modelling the entire
budget

constraint.

However, behavioral responses based on subj ective expectations

may be suitably captured by the way in which the budget constraint is summarized

here in an expected value calculation. A Second point is that variables

that are

crucial for the classification of individual choices over kinked budget constraints
e.g. hours and earnings -

are

subject to errors in measurement.17 As a result,.

this study may assume too much precision in the. enipiridalmeasurement of the

budget constraint. However, the development from probit to consistent to maximum
likelihood estimation follows a. progression in the use of the budget constraint.

How much of the budget constraint is needed for estimation is left to the actual
empirical analysis.

I believe this study is useful because it emphasizes an empirical development

of a labor supply model, The potential gains from this approach are a realistic
description of labor supply decisions,. an insight into the amount of information

in a dataset, and a robust specification of a labor supply model based on this
desription and information.

34

Notes
1.

Burtless and Hausman (1978) and Hausman (1979) develop a labor supply model
in which they use Roy's identity to derive a utility function from a labor

supply equation. The problem presented by double tangencies between indifference curves and nonconvex budget constraints is resolved by bringing individual

tastes into the model. The coefficient.for nonlabor income is assumed to vary
with individual tastes. These unobservable tastes are related to observed
variables that appear elsewhere in the model. Whenever the same variables are
used to serve more than one purpose, misspecification is a serious potential
probieth. A more fundamental problem is raised in an excellent study by Hall
(1975) in which the approach of deriving a utility function from Roy's identity

first taken. Hall shows that empirical results are sensitive to the way
in which individual tastes are brought into a labor supply model. This issue
of robustness in the specification of individual tastes poses serious questions
was

about Burtless and Hausnian's assumption of a random coefficients model applied

to one particular coefficient in a model already based on strong assumptions.

The motivation of this study is that the empirical development of a labor
supply model wil,l yield a robust specification.

2. See Hall (1973); Brown, Levin, and Ulph (1974); Robins and West (1978); Keely,
Robins, Spiegelman, and West (1978); and Moffitt (1979).

3. Gronau (1974), Hanoch (1976), Heckman (1974a, b; 1979), and Griliches, Hall,
and Hausman (1977).
4. References in addition to those mentioned in n. 3 are Gronau (1973) and 1-lall
(1973, 1975)
5.

This specification of the wage equation is generally accepted in the labor
supply literature; see I-{eckman and Polachek (1974), Griliches
Chamberlain

(1977).

(1977) and

6. Hanoch (1976) develops a model in which labor supply is measured by two
distinct variables that are jointly determined. Although this description
of. labor supply has an important bearing on the issues raised hdre the main
points of this, study can be made using 'a single time dimension.
7.

If the wage equation can only be estimated over a sample of workers, then
the regression must be corrected for potential sample selection bias. Hano'ch
(1976) and Heckman (1979) have analyzed this problem and show. that' potential

sample selection bias can be eliminated by adding a variable to the wage regres-

sion. 'This variable is the'inverse'of Mill'à ratio and equal
f(J0)/F.(J0)

where f and F are, respectively, the density and distribution functions of
e2 -.

The probit analysis based ,on eq. (5) yields an estimate of this

e1.

variable.

8. Because

='(I -

X(X'X) 1X')e1, the validity of.the'. specification in e. (9)
-

depends on theasymptotic normality of e.

9.

There is an important statistical requirement in this two-step proc'edure. The
requirement is that Y.be included in the wage regression so that it will be

orthogonal to e'. Otherwise, the estimate of

in the second step is

potentially biased.

10. This interpretation is not entirely accurate because the standard deviation

(&)

of

the error term is not the same as that (a) in the probit analysis based

on eq. (5)

11. This example was first discussed by Gronau (1973).
12. An example of such a concentration appears in my study (1979) of the social
security earnings test..
13. See Hanoch (1976,. p. 15)

36

14. A two-step procedure idential to those described above can be used to

estimate all the coefficients separately. As before the procedure is based
on using an imputed log of wage from the wage regression. Further, the hypothesis that individuals perceive taxes dan be tested by testing theequality
of the coefficients for the wage and tax variables.

15. A utility function may imply that this interval is slightly different, but this
is spurious accuracy given the informational limits of data.

16. Moffit (1979) and Zabaiza, Pisarides, Piacháud and Barton (1979) present
studies based on two and three choices respectively.

17. Lillard (1978) reports that 6.6 percent of the observed variation in annual
earnings and 17.4 percent. of the observed variation in annual hours of work

are accounted for by measurement error.

37

REFERENCES

Brown, C.V.; E. Levin; and D.T. Ulph.. "On Estimating Labor Supply." University
of Stirling, Discussion Paper No. 31, December 1974.
Burtless, Gary and Jerry A. Hausman. "The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply:
Evaluating the Gary Negative Income Tax Experiment." Journal of.Political
Economy, vol. 86, no. 4, December 1978, pp. 1103-1130.

Chamberlain, Gary. "Education, Income and Abi1it' Revisited." Journal of
Econometrics, vol. 5, No. 2, 1977, Pp. 241-257.
Griliches, Zvi. "Estimating the Returns.to Schboling: SomeEconometric Problems."
Econometrica,.vol. 45, no. 1, January1977,.pp. 1-22.
Griliches, Z.; B.H. Hall; and J.A. Hausman. "Missing Data and Self-Selection.In
Large Panels." Annales de I'INSEE; "The Econometrics of Panel Data."
No. 30-31, April-September 1978, pp. 137-176.
Gronau, Reuben.. "The Effect of Children on the Housewife's Value of Time:.
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81, no.. 2, part 2, March/April 1973,
.

pp. S16.8—S199.

___________ "Wage comparisons - A Selectivity Bias." Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 82, no. 6, November-December 1974, pp. 1119-43.

"Leisure, Home Production, and Work--The Theory of the Allocation.
of Time Revisited." Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85, no. 6,
December 1977, pp. lO99-l125.

_________

Hall, Robert E. "Wages, Income, and Hours of Work in the iJ.S..Labor Force."
In Cain and Watts, eds., Income Maintenance and Labor Supply, Chicago:
Markham, 1973, pp. 102-162.

"Effects of the Experimental Negative Income Tax on Labor Supply."
__________
In Pechman and Timpane, eds., Work Incentives and Income Guarantees,
Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1975, pp. 115-147.
Hanoch, Giora. "A Multivariate Model of Labor Supply: Methodology for
Estimation." The Rand Corporation, R-1869-HEW, SepteSber 1976.
.

Hanoch, Giora and Marjorie Honig. "The Effect of Social Security Benefits on
Labor Supply." The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Research Report No. 88,
May 1976.
Hausman, Jerry A. "The Effect of Wages, Taxes, and Fixed Costs on Women's Labor
Force Participation." Massachusetts Institute of Technology, draft March
1979.

38

Heckman, James. "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply." Econometrica,
vol. 42, no. 4, July l974a, pp. 679—694.

"Effects of Child-Care Programs on Woinan'w Work Effort." Journal.
__________
of Political Economy, vol. 82, no. 2, part 2, March/April l974b,
pp. S136-S163.

.

_________

"Sample Selection Bias as a. Specification Error." Econometrica,
vol. 47, no. 1, January 1979, pp. 153-161.

Heckman, James and Solomon Polachek. "Empirical Evidence, on the Punctional Form
of the Earnings - Schooling Relationship." Journal of the Amerièan
Statistical Association, vol. 69, no. 346, June 1974, pp. 350-354.
Keely, Michael C.; Philip K. Robins; Robert G. Spiegelman;. and Richard W. West.
"The Estimation of Labor Supply Models Using Experimental Data." American
Economic Review, vol. .68, no. 5, December 19Th, pp. 87.3-895:

Liliard, Lee A "Estimation of Permanent and Transitory Response Functions in
Panel Data: A Dynamic Labor Supply Model." Annales de l'INSEE, "The
Econometrics of Panel Data." no. 30-31, April-September 1978, pp. 367-394.
Maddala,' G.S. "Identification and Estimation Problems in Limited Dependent
Variable Models." University of FlOrida Working Paper No. 76-77-12.,.
November 1976.
Moffitt,

Robert A. "A Note on the Effect of Taxes and Transfers on Labor Supply."
Economic Journal, vol. 45, no. 4, April .1979, pp. 1266-1273.

Southern

Pellechio,

A.J. "The Effect of the Social Security Earnings Test on Labo.r Supply."
National Bureau of Economic Research, draft, August 1979.

Robins, Philip K. and Richard IV. West. "Participation in the Seattle and Denver
Income Maintenance Experiments and Its Effect on Labor Supply.." Center for
the Study of Welfare Policy, SRI International, Research Memorandum 53,
March 1978. .

Rosen, harvey S. "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage-Hours Determinants."
Econometrica, vol. 44, no. 3, May 1976, pp.485-507.
Rosett, Richard N. and Forrest D. Nelson. "Estimation. of the Two-Limit Probit
Regression Model." Econometrica, vol. 43, no. 1, January 1975, pp. 141—146.

Zabalia, A.; C. Pissarides; D. Piachaud; and M. Barton. "Social Security and the
Choice Between Full-time Work, 'Part-time Work and Retirement." London School
of Economics, draft, 1979.

