NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPECIFIC INFORMATION, GENERAL INFORMATION,
AND EMPLOYMENT MATCHES UNDER UNCERTAINITY

W. Kip Viscusi

Working Paper No. 39)4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
September 1979

This paper is an outgrowth of a larger research project on
youth unemployment supported by the Rockefeller
Foundation. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 394
September 1979

Specific Information, General Information,
and Employment Matches under Uncertainty

ABSTRACT

Employment matches under uncertainty are typically accompanied by

opportunities for information acquisition. Workers can acquire specific
information about productivity lotteries at the firm

or

general informa-

tion affecting their probabilistic beliefs about work elsewhere, Enter—
arises can acquire specific information concerning the productivity of a
particular worker or general information about different groups of work-

ers in a production process. In all cases, the market equilibrium with
flexible wages is efficient. Moreover, there is no opportunity for
strategic behavior that would alter this result. Both forms

of

informa-

tion are associated with rising earnings profiles over time, hut the

steepness is greater in the general case. The negative turnover—wage
relation is attributable in part to the lower match termination rate
of workers with productive lob histories, who earn higher wages than

their less productive counterparts. General information is associated
with more termination of employment matches by employers and employees

than is specific information. The implications of specific/general
information for matching processes in many respects aralle1 the role
of that distinction in human capital theory, strengthening the link
between matching theories and earlier human canital analyses,

W. ICip Viscusi

Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60201
312/492—5140

I. INTRODUCTION
The major post—school investment in individuals' productivity is

through worker training. Specific training affects the worker's firm—specific
skills, while general training also alters his productivity elsewhere.
As the human capital literature of the past two decades has shown,
many important employment patterns are consistent with the theory's
predictions

Both forms of training are associated with higher post—training

wages, but the extent of the wage increase is greater for general
training since these workers are paid their post—training marginal

product. The age—earnings profile for generally trained workers is
also steepened by the foregone earnings during the initial training

period. Training also influences worker turnover, as a larger specific
training component will diminish such job changing.
Although this theory has been largely developed in terms of
explicit training programs involving direct training costs, the possibility of learning—by—doing as part of a general production process is

not ruled out.2 What Is essential is that worker productivity actually
increase as a result of some activity at the firm.

he rather voluminous literature dealing with these patterns
includes: Becker (1964), Ben—Porath (1970) Lazear (1976), Mincer (1974),
Mincer and Jovanovic (1979), 01 (1962), Parsons (1972), Pencavel (1972),
Reder (1962), and Rosen (1972a,b).
2The notion of learning—by—doing, which was first analyzed by Arrow
(1962), is considered for the training case by Rosen (1972a,b).

—2—

A considerable, more recent literature has addressed the properties
of marriage and other economic matches in general3, employment matches
with worlar search4, and employment matches with joint learning by firms

and workers.5 The focus here will be on those economic matches formed
with imperfect information, about the attractiveness of the match, but

in which there is the opportunity for resolving this

uncertainty through

one's experiences. Matches that turn out to be successful have a higher
total value, where the rent associated with the relationship may be
referred to as the specific capital of the match.
Despite the similarity in terminology., quite different economic

processes may be at work in the specific training and general matching

problems. Specific human capital Investment involves a change in
worker productivity that typically takes place in a known environment.
In the stochastic matching problem, one can view the worker's productivity at the firm as a lottery on n states of the world, each of

which has an associated productivity.6 The matching process consists
of forming judgments about the true state of the world and continuing

only employment relationships that are believed to be productive. The
worker's state—specific productivity remains unaltered.

3See, particularly, Becker (1974) and Becker, Landes, and Michael
(1977).

4Analyses by Mortensen (1978,1979),. Jovanovic (1979a), and Viscusi
(1979c) are primarily of this type.

5Studies in this vein include those by Jovanovic (1979b) and
Viscusi (1979a,b and forthcoming a,b).
6Although I focus on the pure matching model, the mixed case in
which better matched workers receive more training is also quite important.

—3-.

The focus of this paper will be on pure matching models
under

uncertainty. Within the context of this
the Possibility of specific

information and general information that

may alter the probabilistic beliefs of
the differences in the

and pure learning

framework, I will introduce

firms and workers. Despite

substantive aspects of human capital investments

processes, there are striking parallels in the theories.

Specific and general information
wages and turnover that are in

acquisition. implications for worker

many respects quite similar to the role

of specific and general training. These findings
suggest that the most
fundamental,. generalizabl aspect of the human capital training

involves the specific/general
of the Productivity_enhancing

theory

distinction rather than the actual nature
process.

The analysis presented here will consider specific information
acquisition by firms and workers in

workers with specific information
general learning by firms with
In Section IV.

Section II, general learning by

acquisition firms in Section III, and

specific and general worker Information

The role of general information

perhaps most novel, since it has
capital theory. and has not been

acquisition by firms is

no counterpart In traditional human
considered by analysts of employment

matches under uncertainty.7 For each of these types of
employment
relationships, I will assess the
efficiency of competitive outcomes,
the wage structures that will result, and the turnover properties

associated with the match. Section

V outlines the broader ramifications

of the theory.

7A less complete analysis of general
learning by workers appears in
Chapter 4 of Viscusj (l979a).

—4—

II. SPECIFIC INFORMATION ACQUISITION

A. Wage Determination
Consider the following two—period situation.8 In each period,
there is a lottery on whether the worker will be productive, with out-

put of y, or unproductive, with output y — x.

The employer's prior

probability that the worker will be productive in the first period is

q. Firms and workers do not begin with perfect information but instead
learn about the properties of the match based on the initial period out-

comes. I will assume that the productivity lotteries can be viewed as
independent Bernoulli trials where these probabilities are updated in

Bayesian fashion. The firm's posterior probabilities of successful
*
outcomes (output y) are q following a success in period 1, and
q
following an unsuccessful outcome, where
*

—

q >q>q

9

8lssues explicitly related to models with more than two periods,
such as the tenure—turnover relation, are excluded. I consider those
issues using models akin to those presented here in Viscusi, (1979a,b,c).
Also see Jovanovic (l979b) and Mincer and Jovanovic (1979) for analysis
along these lines.

9Thus, prior probability distributions with one—point measure are
ruled out as uninteresting. Workers may acquire either partial or perfect
information in period 1. The updating process is considered with
illustrative examples in Sections lID and IVA. Botb firms and workers
are engaged in a two—armed bandit problem. See Ber.y (1972) for an
extensive treatment of the underlying mathematics.

—5—

The judgments of a representative worker are defined analogously and
*
indicated by p, p , and p , where

*

p

>p>p

Although p and q values will often be assumed to be equal so as to
abstract from complications arising from worker misperceptions, many

of the findings are unaffected by differences in probabilistic beliefs
so no restrictions will be imposed at the outset.

Workers also have an interest in the job lottery outcome since
they suffer a wage loss (or foregone bonus) of c, where

O<c<x.
Nonzero values of c are utilized to promote some worker sorting, but c
cannot exceed x or the company could potentially profit from unproductive

job outcomes, creating an adverse incentives problem. Alternatively, the
analysis below could be developed assuming fixed output (x = 0) but differences in productive effort (c > 0) when the unproductive state

occurs. Such an analysis could also include nonpecuniary rewards in
general. The broad implications of the theory would be unaffected by
this modification.

The representative worker has a reservation wage rate w0. The
interest rate r leads to a discount factor b for firms and workers given

by l/(l+r). Let w1 be the wage required if the firm does not terminate
the employment relationship after a successful period 1 outcome. Then
must satisfy

—6—

w0(l+b) = w1—(l—p)c + bp Max[w1_(l_p*)c,w0]

+ b(l—p) Max[w1—(l—p)c,w0j
For this class of job choice problems, it can be shown (see Viscusi
(].979a)) that the lowest reservation wage is associated with the

employment strategy of staying with the job after a successful outcome and leaving after an unsuccessful outcome since the job is less

attractive in the latter instance. An offer by the firm to let the
worker remain after an unfavorable period 1 outcome consequently does
not affect w1.

The discounted reservation wage is now equal to

w0 + bw0 = w1-(l—p)c + bp[w1_(l_p*)c] ÷ b(l—p)w0,

(1)

w =
1

w
0

+ [(lP)+

bp(l_p*)j

Let w2 indicate the wage the company must pay if it fires the worker

after a successful period 1 outcome.1° Then the employment choice is
analogous to a single period decision where
(2)

w2 = w0 + c(l—p)

The expected wage net of incentive pay is w0. Since

p > p,

the firm

benefits by offering workers the opportunity to continue successful

matches since
(3)

w1<w2,

as one can verify. For the remainder of Section II, equation 3

10The enterprise's policy after an unfavorable outcome is irrelevant
in analyzing the reservation wage since the worker will never wish to
remain on the job in this instance.

—7—

summarizes most of what we need to know about the wage structure.

B. Worker Preferences
Once a match is formed, each party has four possible choices at the
start of period 2:

1. Continue the match regardless,
2. Terminate the match regardless,
3. Continue the match only if the period 1 outcome is
successful, and
4. Continue the match only if the period 1 outcome is unsuccessful.

The worker views the wage rate as independent of his own actions. For
enterprise employment policies 1 and 3 above, the wage is w1 from
equation 1, while employment policies 2 and 4 are associated with w2

from equation 2. Using these wage rates and the other characteristics
of the employment problem, the worker calculates the value u.of
different choices by himself and the firm, where i indexes the worker's
decision, j indexes the firm's decision, and i and j range from 1 to 4, as above.

For enterprise employment possibilities 1 and 3, there are four

possible outcomes. First, the worker could remain at the firm for both
periods, yielding

u11 =

(l+b)[w1—(l—p)cj.11

111t is well known that the mean value of the prior is all that
is of consequence if there is no change in the lottery in which the
individual is engaged. Only if there Is some job changing are
and p consequential.

—8—

Second, the worker could leave the job after period 1, regardless of

the job outcome. This behavior characterizes
u21, U23, and U43, which

consequently have identical values, where

u21 = w1 — (1—p)c + bw0
Third, the worker could remain on the job only following a productive
period 1 outcome as with u31, u33, and u13. Each of these values equal

u31 w1 — (l—p)c + bp[w1 — (l_p*)c] + b(l-p)w0
Finally, the worker could remain

on

the job only after an unfavorable

period 1 outcome, yielding

—

=
w1

(l-p)c ÷

b(1—p)[w1

—

(i-p)c]

+ bpw0

Upon substituting for the value of w from equation 1, one can determine
that

U31 > U21 > U11 > U41
The relative rank of these outcomes will be indicated by 1,2,3, and 4,

where lower—numbered values are preferred. The optimal behavior involves
continuation after the job only after a successful period 1 outcome.
Let u'. Indicate the value associated with u.. except that w is
1

replaced by w2. Then the utility values associated with employment
policies 2 and 4 are analogous to earlier values, where
(4)

=

u12

=

u22

and
(5)

ul = u14

=

u44

=

u32

=

u42

=

u24

=

u34

—9—

Since

> u1, the relative ranking of the values given in equation 4

will be indicated by 2', while those in equation 5 will be 4'. The
utility values ranked 2' and 4' are preferred to those ranked 2 and 4,
respectively, since in each case the primed terms are associated with

the same employment path and a higher wage rate. There will be no need
in the subsequent analysis, however, to compare the primed and unprimed
rankings.

C. Profit Values
The discounted expected profits ii.. associated with action i by

the worker and policy j for the firm can be determined similarly. For
simplicity, ij will be calculated per discounted expected employee at
the firm, facilitating comparison of the profit values.12 Enterprise
policies 1 and 3 can have three possible values. If the employment
match always continues in period 2 or always terminates after the initial
period, then the profit/worker is given by
11J•j• =

where

y

—

(l—q)x — [w1 — (l—q)cj

2l p23' and 43 are identical. Matches that continue

following a successful period 1 outcome (ir31,ir33, and ir13) have a value

31

=

—

—

1

(1—q)(x—c) + bq(1_q*)(xc)
l+bq

Ca1culation of two—period profit levels is somewhat sensitive
to the assumption made about the wage paid to new workers in period 2
(w1 or w2), but the equilibrium outcome is not. The procedure followed
here seemed best suited to putting the alternative 71.
comparable basis.

values on a

—10—

Continuation of only matches with an unfavorable outcome have a value

4l given by

=

—

—

4l Y w1

(x—c)(1—g)[l+b(l—qy
l+b(l—q)

The relative ranking of the profit levels depends only on the
expected output levels since the wage costs are identical, so that one
obtains

3l > ll > 4l
which will be indicated by the rank 1,2, and 3, respectively. The
highest profit level is associated with retention of workers with
successful period 1 outcomes.

Employment policies 2 and 4 impose wage costs w2 but otherwise
are analogous to earlier profit values since they share the same turn-

over properties. Following the same notational convention as with
utility functions, one has that
ir

11

12

ir

22

=w 32=ir42

=ir

24

=ir

34

and

=
Since 'n1 >

l4

7144

the relative value of the 711j terms in equation 6 will

be indicated by 2', while those in equation 7 will be designated 4', since

> ira. Since the w. values are associated with the same output and
a higher wage rate than their 71.. counterparts, the values ranked 2'

and 4' rank below 2 and 4, respectively. No further. description of the
rankings is required for the analysis below.

FIGURE I

SPECIFIC INFORMATION AND PAYOFFS

TO THE WORKER AND FIRM

Enterprise
Worker Strategies

1. Continue Regardless
2. Terminate Regardless
3. Continue if Success
4. Continue if Failure

Strategies

—11—

D. Market Outcomes
Both the firm and the worker have 4 possible turnover strategies
to choose from, generating 16 possible market outcomes. The payoffs
to the parties are summarized in the game matrix in Figure I, where

payoffs to the worker are in the upper left corners and those to the
firm are in the lower right corners.

Consider first the choice by the worker. The relative ranking of
the

Ujj versus Uj terms is not consequential since it affects comparisons

across different columns, not the choice of the row by the worker. Row 3
is the dominant strategy for the worker since it offers the highest payoff for each possible strategy by the firm.

Similarly, column 3 is the

dominant strategy for the firm, producing a stable, cooperative equilibrium

at (3,3), where each party continues the match only if the worker is productive in period 1.

This outcome is considerably stronger than a Nash equilibrium. Each

party receives its highest valued reward. There is no incentive to behave
otherwise, nor would either party alter its behavior in response to such

strategic efforts. The sequence of moves is irrelevant, as is the possibility to pre—commit oneself to a strategy as, for example, the enterprise might do by adopting a predetermined

employment policy.

The turnover characteristics of the equilibrium associated with
specific information are that successfully matched workers continue the
relationship while those with a low productivity lottery outcome terminate

the relationship. Specific information promotes the stability of successful. matches. Section III will address the issue of whether specific or

—12—

general information is more conducive to worker turnover.
In assessing the economic efficiency of the outcome, the level of

the wage payments is irrelevant since they involve transfers between
the parties that net out in the social welfare calculation. The equilibrium
behavior will lead to maximization of discounted expected output so that
the specific information competitive equilibrium will be efficient.'3
The magnitude of the gain associated with the policy of terminating
unsuccessfully matched workers increases with the extent of the updating

of

*
*
the probability (q or p )

after

a favorable outcome. Loose prior

probability assessments are preferred, for any mean value of the prior,
since they are updated more.
Consider, for example, the beta distribution (y,q) of priors para—
meterized so that q is the mean value of the prior and y is a measure of
its tightness.

14

Then after m successess and n failures in a sequence

of independent Bernoulli trials, the posterior probability of a success
is(yq+m)/(y-I-ni+n). The value of q* consequently is (yq+l)/(y-I-1), while q

is (yq)/(y+l), so

that

*

---<Oand-—>O.
13Efficiency is judged based on the expectations using the employer's
probabilistic beliefs. Clearly, if these perceptions are systematically
wrong, the outcome may not be efficient. Expected output levels with
imperfect information never exceed those with perfect information when
evaluated using the true probabilities.
Raiffa and Schlaifer (1961) emphasize, the beta distribution
is ideally suited to analysis of Bernoulli—type trials and has properties
superior to the normal distribution in such instances.

—13—

Low y's are preferred since the employment relationship is terminated
after an unfavorable outcome, making the greater downward revision for
loose priors irrelevant and the greater upward revision after favorable

outcomes the prime matter of interest. The employment relationship is
continued on an asymmetric basis ——

the

worker remains after a success

but leaves after a failure —— so that only the upper right tail, is of
consequence after period 1. This preference for uncertainty does not
hinge on the risk neutrality of workers.

15

Consirthe expected wage levels of workers during their tenure at
the firm. In period 1, the expected wage is
— (l—p)c =
+ c [bPP—P)J
w0

while in period 2 the expected wage assuming the worker remains at the

firm

is

w1 'i
'p.

0

1+bp

The workerb wage rises over time as he receives an expected wage below

in period land above w0 in period 2. The period 2 wage gain following
a success is greater than the period 1 loss both because of the role of
discounting and the belief that there will only be a probability p that
the wage gain will occur.

The company has no incentive to renege on the offered wage contract.
If this possibility were perceived, company profits would be 32' which

15The case of risk—averse workers is considered in Viscusi (1979a,
forthcoming—a).

—14—
is below 1133• If the termination policy were not perceived by workers,
the firm's profits would be the same as rr21, which is also below ri33.
In short, the turnover properties and incentives to alter behavior over
time have been included as endogenous elements of the model and involve
no additional behavioral stipulations.
These findings also suggest that the observed negative wage—turnover relation
may not be simply due to the compensating differential situation in which

members of a homogeneous group of workersquit if the wage is insufficient.
The negative relation between the observed period 1 wage and turnover
reflects the fact that poorly matched workers earn lower wages and are

more likely to quit than are successfully matched workers. This property
holds for all models considered in subsequent sections as well. The negative
turnover—wage relation is an endogenously determined aspect of matching
processes with imperfect information.

Although the particular wage level does not affect the specific
information equilibrium16, the competitive firm will set the wage level
for the marginal worker using equation 1, appropriating all of the surplus

associated with training.17 The worker has no incentive to take retaliatory
action such as quitting, nor will he have any effective means of doing so.
Market competition is assumed to drive any profits reaped by the company
to zero, although this property Is not required for any of the results here.

assumes of course that some worker does not earn such a great
rent from the job that he remains after an unfavorable period 1 experience.

statement pertains to the marginal worker. Infra—marginal
workers may, of course, reap a surplus.

—15—

III. GENERAL WORKER INFORMATION AND SPECIFIC INFORMATION
-

FOR

ENTEPSES

A. Outcomes with No Wage Policy Changes
Suppose that the worker's experiences at the firm alter his prob-

abilistic beliefs regarding his expected performance at some other job.
In much the same fashion as general training alters the worker's productivity
elsewhere, general information affects the worker's expected productivity

at another firm as well as his firm—specific productivity.18 This generality
is of no direct consequence to the firm, which continues to engage in specific
information acquisition.

Following an unfavorable job outcome, the worker can still pursue his

null alternative w0. Following a successful job outcome he can switch to
a related job at another enterprise for which his probabilistic perceptions

have been altered by the period 1 success. This job offers an expected

wage w >

w0.19

Since the possibility of remaining on the uncertain job

after an unfavorable outcome remains a dominated alternative, general

Information introduces a fifth worker strategy —— choosing the null alternative (w0) after an unfavorable outcome and switching to the independent

uncertain job offering w after a success.

18

In

.

.

.

the general information case, if experiences on one job affect
the probabilistic beliefs on the other position, then interdependence
is mutual. Selecting one position as the initial job is completely
arbitrary.
19For simplicity, I have replaced complete specification of the
component terms of that lottery by its expectation w.

FIGURE II

GENERAL WORKER INFORMATION

AND PAYOFFS TO THE WORKER AND FIRM

Worker

Enterprise Strategies
3
2

1
Strategies

2

3

1. Continue Regardless

L

"

2
___________

Terminate Regardless

3.

Continue if Success

Continue if Failure

3
___________
o

5. Switch to wS if Success,

V0 if

Failure

2
___________

3'

2

2'

1

2'

2

3'

2

2'

1

2'
2'

1
___________
4

4.

i

2
___________
1

1
2

2

2.

4

2

2°'

o'

2'
o

2'

—16—

The associated discounted expected utility values are

u53 w1 — (l—p)c ÷ bpw

+ b(1—p)w0

and
U.,

51

If u33 >

=

U

= U

54•

52

U51, the

problem reduces to that of Section II. This would

occur If the firm—specific learning is more valuable to the worker, or

— (i—p

If

)c >:

the Inequality Is reversed, the two highest ranked outcomes by the

worker are u1, indicated by rank 0', and u51, Indicated by rank 0,
where 0 >

1.

The latter case will be consIderedhere.

General information acquisition by the worker that leads to certain
worker turnover simply transforms the situation into a dominated case

considered earlier, where

51_53hui1
and
iT

52

=11
=1111.
54

Figure II presents the expanded payoff matrix for this game. The
worker will adopt his dominant strategy 5, which is the only turnover

path that offers the possibility ofeither of his two most highly valued

rewards. Strategy 3 remains dominant for the firm. As before, the order
of moves and strategic behavior is irrelevant, as the stable equilibrium
is necessarily (5,3).

—17—

An important issue Is whether this equilibrium is efficient. Since
the wage payments remain simply transfers, the problem is whether the
expected product has been maximized. A competitive market will, set w
S
equal to the worker's expected general output so that the decision to
switch firms after a successful outcome will be efficient If the profit to the
firm if the worker did not quit plus the opportunity cost of a replacement (w0)

is below w plus the expected product of a replacement. This condition
reduces to
*

wS >w0+x(q—q)
or
*

(8)

w8 —w 0>x(q—q)..

*
*
If one sets p equal to q and p equal to q to abstract from problems

of differing probabilistic beliefs, the worker will choose to quit

following a period 1 success if

(9)

wS —w 0 >

*
c(g —g)
i+iq

Even if c is set at its maximum

value

(c=x) that fully reflects the worker's

productivity, the right—hand term in equation 9 will be smaller than in

equation 8. There will be too much turnover and a bias toward opportunities
elsewhere if the wage structure remains the same as in the specific information case.

The difficulty lies in the denominator of equation 9, or the

fact that the base wage rate is the same In each period and is not manip-

ulated to reflect the worker's changing opportunities. The next two
sections will explore alternative wage mechanisms.

—18—
B. Contract Termination Fees
If workers acquire general information and their period 2 productivity
is always greater elsewhere after a success, a simple solution would be to
hire workers for a single period only and lower the initial wage rate to
keep the workers at their reservation wage level in view of their improved

opportunities. While efficient, if the worker's productivity is greater
elsewhere, this situation is not particularly interesting, since it provides

no mechanism that assures that job allocations will be efficient for dif-

ferent relative productivity levels.
The first possible mechanism that will take such ramifications into

account Is to charge all workers a contract termination fee f. Workers
with a period 1 successful outcome will stay If

w —

f<w—

(i_p*)c

or
(10)

f > w

— [w —

(l_p*)c]

while those with unfavorable outcomes will quit if
—

f>w—

(l—p)c

,

or
(11)

f <

w0

— [w — (i—p )c]

I will assume equation 11 is satisfied and that equation 10 is potentially
satisfied or else the highest attainable profit will be

which is

—19—
below ri33. Workers with low period 1 productivity consequently leave the
firm

20

The firm sets its reservation wage w such that
(12)

w0 + bw0 = w — (l—p)c +bp Max[w —

f,

w —

(l_p*)cJ

+ b(l—p)(w0—f)

Two situations must be considered: a) the worker switches to w following
a successful period 1 outcome and b) the worker remains at the firm

following a successful outcome. The firm can select either of these
situations by manipulating f.

Using equation 12, one can solve for the respective wage rates in
each of these situations, yielding

W

=

w0

÷

bf

+

b(l—p)f

+ (l—p)c —

bp(w8—w0)

and

b

=

0

i+bp

+ bp(1_p*)ej
+ c[ l+bp

The worker is unaffected by increases in f because his wages increase
accordingly.

20
Alternatively, the firm could avoid these complications by imposing
f only if a worker terminates a match with a successful outcome. This
modification would alter the wage level but leave the equilibrium outcome
and its properties unaffected. The change would, however, raise the
practical issue of whether the worker and employer could agree on the
period 1 outcome if the worker were to be penalized on the basis of that
judgment.

—20—

The profits over two periods21 for each policy are given by
=

y — (l—q)x + (l—q)c — w + bf ÷ b[y — (l—q)x —

and

=

— (l—q)x + (l—q)c —
+ (l_q*)c -

Wb

+ bq[y

—

(l_q*)x

wb] + b(l—q)[y- (l-q)x — w0

f]

Substituting for Wa and Wb and ignoring possible differences in the
probabilistic beliefs of the worker and firm (i.e., setting p =

a exceeds

one finds that it

—

w0

> x[q*

q, p =q*),

—

it

b

q]

and conversely. The choice of whether to retain the worker or not using f
coincides with the efficiency criterion outlins. above in equation 8.
The particular level of f is irrelevant, provided that equation 11 is
satisfied and the f value yields the desired turnover properties for

and itb as determined using equationlO. The use of the f mechanisms
raises period 1 wages and lowers expected period 2 rewards for workers.
Although efficient, fees for contract termination are difficult to
enforce since the worker has no incentive to reimburse the firm after he

1eaves. Imperfectly portable or not fully vested pension plans can serve

21Unlike the specific information case, it is not appropriate to
look at profits on a discounted worker basis for employment paths. That
approach would be biased in favor of general information, whose gains
would appear to be reaped in every period through lower wages, whereas
specific information only offers deferred rewards. In reality, the time
lags for each are identical.

—21—

this function to the extent that the worker loses his benefit rights

when he leaves the firm. Recent pension regulations (ERISA) limit the
use of pensions as a mobility—reducing instrument by imposing minimal
standards on pension benefit transferability.

C. The Optimal Wage Structure
A more viable alternative to contract termination fees is a temporal

variation in the wage structure. Suppose that the worker would quit in
period 2 if w1 were offered or else the problem is not particularly

interesting.22 The minimal period 2 wage that will keep the worker following a favorable period 1 outcome is w8, where

w

(13)

w8 —

(l_p*)c

or
*
w = w + (i—p )c
s
8

As before, the worker finds it optimal to quit following an unfavorable
outcome, as does the company.

The worker's expected post—success wage Is thus w whether he
switches to the alternative job or is offered a sufficient wage to keep

him

at

the firm since equation 13 will be satisfied. The lowest first—

period wage w that will attract the worker to the firm consequently
satisfies

+ by0 = w

— (i—p)c + bpw + b(l—p)w0

or

w

w0 + bp(w0—w) + (i—p)c

22The problem then Is the same as that in Section II.

—22—
The issue for the firm is whether it should let the worker quit in

period 2 or whether it should raise the period 2wage to w following a

success.23 These two options have the same output and wage costs in
period 1 and in period 2 following an unsuccessful outcome. The only
matter of interest is which is preferable following a success. The profits

associated with continuing the match are
=

y

—

x(l_q*) —

w

wherew is the net expected wage from equation 13 (w —

(l_p*)c),

assum-

ing p and q coincide. The value of discontinuing the match and hiring
a new worker for one period is d' where
=

y — x(l—q) — w2 + (l—p)c = y — x(l—q) — w0

assuming p equals q. The firm will continue the match (it

> lid) provided

that
x(q*_q) >

This

v

—

criterion coincides with the efficiency criterion in equation 8.

Employment matches are continued only if the expected productivity at the
firm is greater than the worker's productivity elsewhere.

The wage schedule that achieves this outcome always lowers the
worker's period 1 wage as the worker in effect pays for information
acquisition in much the same manner as he would for general training.

The expected period 2 wage following a success is always w whether the
23

In either case, workers are assumed to know this wage structure
in advance.

—23—
firm adopts

or d The period 2 wage after an unfavorable outcome is

w0, as before.

D. Implications of General Information
General information acquisition steepens the age—earnings profile
more than would the specific information component of the process. Whenever the temporal wage structure is adopted, as is optimal when workers
quit successful matches when w1 is offered, there is a reduction in the

period 1 wage and an increase in the expected period 2 reward. The
resulting equilibrium is efficient if the wage structure is varied in this

manner. Contract termination fees, if feasible, also would be efficient.
As with specific iearning/ the experimentation process offers greater
expected gains the more one's prior beliefs are updated after a successful

outcome. Both types of information lead to termination of.the employment
relationship after an unfavorable outcome, producing a negative wage—

turnover relationship. A productive work experience, however, will always
lead to continued employment with specific information, but will only
result in a continued relationship in the general case If the worker Is

more productive at the firm than he is elsewhere. The turnover rate
associated with general information acquisition will exceed that for specific

information. Both the wage structure and turnover properties of general
information are similar in many respects to those for general training.

IV. GENERAL INFORMATION FOR THE FIRM
A. Specific Information for Workers
Thus far, workers have been viewed as acquiring information about

—24—

their productivity at the firm and elsewhere, while firms are only concerned
with the worker's firm—specific productivity and any change in the worker's
reservation wage that results from general information.

However, the firm

may. also be engaged in a form of general information acquisition in which

itlearns not simply about the productivity of a particular worker or class
of workers, but he also updates his judgments regarding the productivity
of other groups of workers in that employment situation.

The enterprise

may, for example, be resolving uncertainty about a production process. If
high school educated workers always. meet a production quota, one might infer

that the expected productivity of less educated workers might be sufficient
to warrant some lowering of the educational standard.

Suppose that there are two types of workers, types 1 and 2, each of
which have the same reservation wage rates w0. Within each group, the

workers are identical. The firm assesses the prior probability that a
member of group I will be productive as q... Experiences of each class of
worker influence the posterior probability assessment for each group since

the probabilistic beliefs are assumed to be Interdependent. The firm
must choose which class of worker to hire in each period, where one worker

is hired in each period.23 The expected output in a period using typei
worker after observing c1 successful outcomes for type 1 workers, c2 unsuccessful outcomes for type 1 workers, c3 successful outcomes for type 2 workers,

23As examination of the analysis below will indicate, the implications
of the model are equally applicable to hiring N workers consisting of a
mix of type 1 and 2 workers in each period.

TABLE I
DATA FOR GENERAL LEARNING PROBLEM

State of World
01

02

State Probability

.1

.9

Type 1 Worker's Probability ofSuccess

.8

.1

Type 2 Worker's Probability of Success

1

0

—25—

and a4 unsuccessful outcomes for type 2 workers will be indicated by

E(c1,c2,c3c4). The optimal turnover policy for the firm is assumed to
be known to workers and their probabilistic beliefs are assumed to be

accurate (i.e., p = q1,

p =

q)

so that expected net wage payments in

each period are w0 in this situation of specific worker information.
The firm's decision problem Is to choose which type of worker to
hire in each period, or to optimize
ii

= Max{[E1(O,O,O,O) + bq1Max[E1(l,O,O,O), E2(l,O,O,O)J
+ b(l—q)Max[E1(O,l,O,O), E2(O,l,O,O)],

E2(OO,O,O) + bq2Max[E1(O,O,l,O), E2(O,O,lO)]

÷

—
b(l—q2)Max[E1(O,O,O,l), E2(O,O,O,l)] — w0 by0

Since the wage costs are predetermined and reflect the worker's general
productivity, the maximization of it

simply

maximizes discounted expected

output. Profit maximization and social welfare maximization coincide.
As in the case of general information for workers, general learning by
firms may lead to termination of an employment relationship that was
successful in period 1.

This possibility and the underlying motivation for the above model

can be illustrated further with the following example. Since wage costs
are identical for all possible options, they will be ignored. Moreover,
the interest rate r will be set equal to zero, resulting in a b value of 1.
Output y for a productive match is 1 and for an unproductive match is 0
(i.e., x =

1).

Table I summarizes the probabilistic structure of the problem.

—26—
Suppose there are two possible states of the world,

and 02• There

is a .1 probability that 01 pertains and a .9 probability that 02 is

the actual state. In e1 type 1 workers have a .8 probability of being
productive while type 2 workers always produce y equal to 1. In state

02

type 2 workers are always unproductive and type 1 workers have a .1 chance

of being productive. The issue is to select the optimal employment sequence.
Before doing so, one needs two additional sets of Information. The
expected probabilities of each group being productive in period 1 can be

readily calculated from the data in Table I, implying that q1 is .17 and

Is .1. The posterior probabilities of being productive hinge on the
first period outcome. Since there is only one trial, there will be no

ambiquity in letting 3P(Ojc.

1) denote the conditional probability

that O is the state after observing c. value of 1 where all of the other
ck ternis (k#j) equal 0. Using Bayes' Theorem, one can calculate
as

P(0 c ) = —

11

In

P(c 3.Pe 3.)P(e 1)

P(c101)'(e1) + P(c1102)p(02)

similar fashion, one finds the P(011c2)

P(011c4)

=

.8(.l)

.8(.l) +

equal.

.l(.9)

=

47

.02, PC81e3) equals 1, and

zero.

equals

The value of ,r given the numerical values above and ignoring V0 is
IT

Max(.l7 +
.1

Max[.43, .47] + .83 Naxf.1l4,, .02],
+ .1 Max[.8, 1.0] + .9 Max[.l, 0J} = .34
.17

The optimal sequence of decisions is to hire a type 1 worker in period 1,
switch to a type 2 worker after a favorable period 1 outcome (c1), and
continue to hire type 1 workers if the period 1 outcome is unfavorable
Cc2).

-27—
Initial experimentation with type 1 workers is preferred because they
offer sufficiently greater expected initial productivity. However, a

successful outcome raises the conditional

probability of 01 sufficiently

so that type 2 workers become more attractive. As was indicated above,
general information by the firm may lead to termination of employment

matches after successful productive efforts, whereas specific information
never has this effect.

B. General Information for Both Parties
Suppose that the firm is engaged in the acquisition of information
that affects its general probabilistic beliefs regarding both classes of
workers, while the workers are also engaged in a general information

acquisition process. Following a period 1 success, type 1 workers •can earn
an expected wage w1 elsewhere while type 2 workers can earn w2. The firm
has no incentive to keep any particular worker or to fire unproductive
workers since its learning is about classes of worker types not specific

Individuals. Assuming the worker and employer probabilistic beliefs
coincide, the expected net period 2 wage rate will be w0. In period 1, the
job offers workers the chance for general information and a higher period

2 wage elsewhere, producing a net wage rate of w0 —

—

bq2(w

—
2

bq1(w1—w0)

and

w0) for type 1 and 2 workers, respectively.

The wage structure will attract workers, and the turnover properties

are irrelevant. What remains an issue is whether the competitive firm's
employment policies will be efficient. Using the same notation as in
Section IVA, one finds the discounted expected profits are given, by

—28—

=

Max{E1(O,O,O,O)

—

w0

÷ bq1(w51—w0) +

bq1Max[E1(l,O,O,O) — w0, E2(l,O,O,O) —w0] +
1(l—q1)Max[E1(O,l,O,O) —w0, E2(O,l,O,O) —w0]

E2(O,O,O,O) —

+

bq2(w52w0) + bq2Max

(E1(O,O,l,O) —w0, E2(O,O,l,O) —wo] +
d(l—q2)Max[E1(O,O,O,l) —w0, E2(O,O,O,l) —w0]}

This expression can be rewritten as
ii

= Max{E1(O,O,O,O) +bq1Max[E1(i,O,O,O) + w1 — w0
E2(l,O,O,O) + w1—w0] + b(l—q1)Max[E1(O,l,O,O),
E2(O,l,O,O)], E2(O,O,O,O) + bq2Max[E1(O,O,l,O) +
—

+
w0, E2(O,O,l,O) + w2 — w0]

b(l—q2)Max[E1(O,O,O,l), E2(O,O,O,l)] —w0 —

bw

This reformulation highlights the efficiency of the firm's objective.
The enterprise maximizes the expected initial product plus the discounted
expected period 2 output at the firm and any gain In the worker's productivity

(e.g., w1—w0), less the opportunity cost of labor. As in all of the cases
considered thus far, market outcomes will be efficient. The general information
situation has the high turnover and steep wage structure that one would expect
from a combination of the two general information models.

V. CONCLUSION
For employment matches undertaken with Initial uncertainty, one can draw
a distinction between general and specific information in much the same manner

as the traditional human capital treats specific and general training. For

—29—

the worker, specific information only affects his probabilistic beliefs about

his productivity at his current place of employment, while general information

alters his probabilistic beliefs about work elsewhere. Specific information
for the firm influences only its assessment of a particular worker's productivity, whereas with general Information the firm in effect learns about
the nature of the production process and the productivity of different types
of workers.

With wage rates that can vary over time, the competitive equilibrium
contracts will result in efficient job allocations and levels of turnover.

There is no potential for strategic behavior that would alter this equilibrium

outcome. Both general and specific information steepen workers' earnings
profiles, though the extent of the increase is greater in the general case.
General information also leads to more termination of employment relationships

than does specific information. In both types of learning there will be an
observed negative relationship between turnover and wages. This relation
would hold apart from any compensating differential argument because workers

who are unproductive in the initial period earn lower wages and are more likely
to switch to an alternative job in the subsequent period.
Throughout the analysis, no explicit training costs were incurred and no

changes in productivity took place. What did occur is that information generated
by work experiences enabled employers and workers to better identify the true
state of the world and to select the optimal match for that state, where all

state—specific productivity levels were assumed fixed. The diverse parallels
of the specific/general distinction in both the human capital training theory
and the employment matching analysis suggest that it is the specific/general

—30—

nature of the productivity—enhancing activity which is more important than the

features of the process itself. This analysis of general and specific information
acquisition also strengthens the conceptual linkage between traditional human
capital theory and the more recent theory of marriage and other matching problems.

—31—

REFERENCES

Arrow, Kenneth, "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing," Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. XXIX, No. 80 (1962), pp. 155—173.
Becker, Gary, Elisabeth Landes, and Robert Michael, "An Economic Analysis of
Marital Instability," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, No. 6 (1977),
pp. 1141—1187.

Becker, Gary, "A Theory of Marriage," in T.W. Schultz, ed., Economics of the
Family (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974).

____________ Human Capital (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research,
1964).

Ben—Porath, Yoram, "The Production of Human Capital over Time," in W.L. Hansen,
ed., Education, Income, and Human Capital (New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1970).
Berry, Donald, "A Bernoulli Two—Armed Bandit," Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
Vol. 43, No. 3 (1972), pp. 871—897.

Jovanovic, Boyan, "F±rm Specific Capital and Turnover," Journal of Political
Economy, forthcoming (1979a).

________________ "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," Journal of Political
Economy, forthcoming (l979b).
Lazear, Edward, "Age, Experience, and Wage Growth," American Economic Review,
Vol. 66, No. 4 (1976), pp. 548—558.
Leighton, Linda, and Jacob Mincer, "Labor Turnover and Youth Unemployment,"
paper presented at NBER Youth Unemployment Conference (1979).
Mincer, Jacob, Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (New York: National Bureau
of Economic Research, 1974).

____________ and Boyan Jovanovic, "Labor Mobility and Wages," NBER Working
Paper No. 357 (1979).

Mortensen, Dale, "The Matching Process as a Non—Cooperative/Bargaining Game,"
unpublished paper, Northwestern University (1979).

_______________ "Specific Capital and Labor Turnover," Bell Journal of Economics,
Vol. 9, No. 2 (1978), pp. 572—586.
01, Walter, "Labor as a Quasi—Fixed Factor," Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
LXX,No. 6 (1962), pp. 538—555.

Parsons, Donald, "Specific Human Capital: An Application to Quit Rates and
Layoff Rates," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 80, No. 6 (1972), pp.
1120—1143.

—32—
Pencavel, John, "Wages, Specific Training, and Labor Turnover in U.S.
Manufacturing Industries," International Economic Review, Vol. 13,
No. 1, (1972), pp. 53—64.
Raiffa, Howard, and Robert Schlaifer, Applied Statistical Decision Theory
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1961).
Reder, Melvin, "Wage Differentials: Theory and Measurement,"in Aspects of
Labor Economics (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962), pp. 257—311.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Learning and Experience in the Labor Market," Journal of Human
Resources, Vol. VII, No. 3 (1972a), pp. 326—342.

______________ "Learning by Experience as Joint Production," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. LOCXVI, No. 3 (l972b), pp. 366—382.
Viscusi, W. Kip, "A Theory of Job Shopping:A Bayesian Perspective," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming—a.

_______________ Employment Hazards:An Investigation of Market Performance (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979a) in press.

______________, "Job Hazards and Worker Quit Rates: An Analysis of Adaptive
Worker Behavior," International Economic Review, Vol. 20, No. 1 (l979b),
pp. 29—58.

"Sorting

Models of Labor Mobility, Turnover, and Unemployment,"
NBER Working Paper (1979c).
-,

__________ "Self—Selection, Learning—Induced Quits, and the Optimal Wage
Structure," International Economic Review, forthcoming—b.

