                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE DURATION OF YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT
                    IN WEST GERMANY:
             SOME THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS


                     Wolfgang Franz



                  Working Paper No. 397




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts kvenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                       October   1979




The underlying research is supported by a grant from the
"Deutsche Forschungsgemeinscbaft." The paper was prepared
during the author's stay at the NBER. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful for
discussions with Gary Chamberlain, John Flemming, Robert
Hall, Zvi Griliches, Jacob Mincer, and Michael Spence.
None of them are responsible for any error.
                                                 NBER Working Paper 397
                                                           October 1979



              The Duration of Youth Unemployment in West Germany:

                         Some Theoretical Considerations


                                ABSTRACT


     This paper presents a theoretical model dealing with the

duration of youth unemployment in West Germany. Duration can be

expressed in terms of the underlying hazard function. After a

brief discussion of a reasonable shape of the hazard function a

distinction is made with respect to the probabilities of receiving

a job offer and accepting it. Determinants of the latter decision

are developed using a unified model of consumption, leisure, and

job search. Uncertainty and some restrictions such as standard

work time and entitlement to unemployment compensation are taken

into account. The probability of receiving a job offer depends,

among other factors, on the screening process undertaken by the

firms.

                                                 Wolfgang Franz
                                                 Seminar gebaude A5
                                                 Universitat Mannheim
                                                 West Germany
                                                These are the unhappy persons
                                                who, in the great lottery of
                                                life, have drawn a blank.
                                                Thomas Robert Maithus (1798)


 I. Introduction and caveats

     The duration of unemployment is one of the most important factors

of unemployment experience besides the risk of becoming unemployed and

the number of spells of unemployment. A study of youth unemployment in

Germany, therefore, has to carefully examine the determinants of the

duration of youth joblessness. Previous work has shown [W. Franz(1979)]

that the average duration of youth unemployment is considerably shorter

than that of adult unemployment. The probability of becoming unemployed,

however, is much higher for the youths than for adults. This is not to

say that youths do not suffer much from unemployment due to the short

duration. At least the number of spells in a given time period, say one

year, has to be taken into account in order to compare adequately.

     Given that whether to be unemployed or not may be(still) a lottery

as Thomas R. lthus has pointed out, are there biases in the sampling

scheme with respect to specific individual characteristics — say education,

work experience, age, or sex, for example?

     The present paper which is a part of a larger study on youth unemploy-

ment tries to outline a theoretical basis for the empirical investigation

of the causes of youth unemployment. The empirical part will use German micro

data of unemployed persons leaving the unemployment register within a given

sample week(September,1976). Although the theory discussed in this paper

exceeds the framework of the empirical approach, it does not take into
                                   —2—

account several important aspects of the duration of youth unemployment

due to the limitations of the data. Most important, the general level of

aggregate demand for labor is given and only differences of this level

with respect to regions, industries etc. can be taken into account partly.

It might, therefore, be helpful to label this study by: warning —   aggregate
demand is given.

II. Theory

     In this section a theoretical framework explaining the duration of

youth unemployment is developed. A theory of unemployment has to take

into account both supply and demand factors.' One possible recent approach

is to discuss the individual's time allocation decision on the basis of a

unified model of consumption, labor supply, and job search such as the

sophisticated model of J.J. Seater (1979, 1977), for example, which partly

contains most of the earlier micro foundation models as special cases.

     One disadvantage of the Seater model, however, is the ignorance of

any demand factor since it is assumed that the individual can make a work—

no work decision each time period regardless of whether there is a job offer

or not. Besides this, there is no uncertainty and no unemployment insurance

introduced in this model and the sense of job search during the last job of

working life is not quite obvious. Assets are introduced but the individual

does not derive utility from asset holding. With respect to youth unemploy-

ment there is some doubt if youths apply such a general life—time utility

maximization approach. The elegance of that approach may be at the expense

of describing reality.

     In what follows we try to discuss the duration of youth unemployment

considering demand factors, unemployment insurance, and uncertainty more

explicitly. To begin with, the duration can be expressed in terms of the

hazard function.2 It is defined as the proportion of items failing in a time

period (x, x + dx) among those items which have survived up to the time x.
                                                              —3—


In our study the hazard function is the proportion of unemployed who left

unemployment status in the sample week among all unemployed registered.

        More precisely, the hazard function h(x) is defined as

(1)     h(x) =        F(x)/dx

where F(x) denotes the cumulative distribution function and where 1 —                        F(x)
can be interpreted as the sum of unemployed who "survived" in the unemployment

register until x. The function 1 —                          F(x) is the "reliability" of unemployment
and is characterized by the hazard function. Eq. (1) can be written as

(2)     h(x) dx = d       [   — ln(l—F(x)      )       ].
Integrating      (2) from a truncation point x to a time x gives

                          —                        x
(3)     fX   h(x)dx           ln(l—F(x)   )

         xo                         0

and    if we define F(x) = 0 we obtain

(4)     fX   h(x)dx   =   - ln(l-F(x)     ).
        xo
Solving (4) for F(x) gives

(5)     F(x) = l—exp          {JXh()d}
                       xo
        A distinguishing characteristic of each life—length model is the under-

lying hazard function. If we know the hazard function of the unemployed we

can calculate the respective duration of unemployment. Hence F(x) describes

the distribution of the duration of unemployment. Several hypotheses concerning

that distribution may be formulated depending on whether the hazard function

is constant or varying with duration.3 In order to allow flexibility assume

that h(x) is of the form

(6)     h(x) =    A   xAlaA
from   which the following two parameter Weibull— distribution                      results if the

truncation point x0 is zero.4
(7)     F(x;a,A) =        f
                          x    =
                                    (x;o,A) dx


                      = l—exp{ —()A}
                                                      —4—

The flexibility of the Weibuil— distribution can be shown by reducing the

Weibull—variable X by the transformation Z =                  X/a. Hence
(8)     h (z;x) =   A


and h decreases (increases) with increasing z when A<i(A>l) and remains

constant for A=l (exponential model6). Employing eq.(6) we can specify the

hazard function by

(9)     ln h (x;A) =i3Z        (x)+(A—l)ln x-I-e•
           w              1J                           1
where Z..(x) is a vector of explanatory variables of the i—th individual in the

j—th spell of unemployment and x is the duration of that spell. The ct• represent

individual differences not captured by the Z—variabies. If we assume that

the explanatory variables do not vary within one spell and simplify notation,

eq. (9) reduces to

(10) in h(x)=Z.. + (A—i) in x +

      Although the Weibull—distribution seems to be rather flexible at a first

glance, a major disadvantage of an approach using this distribution is the

sharp contrast between a rising and a falling hazard function corresponding

to the value of A.      Suppose, for example, that an unemployed person does not

suffer so much in the first days of unemployment as later. Or suppose the

labor office needs some days to complete the unemployed person's records and

to propose a job, and another few days pass until the unemployed person starts

working. Both examples imply that the hazard function may rise to a peak in

the first days and then decrease with time. Opposite to pure reliability

application where it is difficult to rationalize such a shape7, it should

not be excluded a priori in the present study. A promising specification,

therefore, may rely on the log—normal distribution. The probability distri-

bution function and the cumulative distribution function of a log—normal random

variable are given by8

        fin (x; )       .—----—
                               'I
                                                       -I




                               iJ
(l0a)        /                                  1 (———-'-—)
                                                   2

        F1(x;,& j                                           . \fxL. /L)
(lOb)
                                    .1;-'
                                            X   '()   L
where x,cy>O and ln stands for log—normal. Inserting equations (lOa) and
                                                                         (lob)
                                -.5--

into equation (1) gives the hazard function of this distribution. It

can be shown that the hazard function increases to a maximum and then

decreases to zero as x -*      Employing this type of a hazard function seems

to be more appealing than excluding a maximum value of the hazard function

a priori.

     One should be careful, however, in deciding whether the individual

hazard function is constant or not. As has been shown,for example, by

S. Salant(1977) and T. Lancaster(l979) an observed falling hazard function

may be due to the effect of unrecognized heterogeneity of the individuals

in question. They may have in fact a constant hazard function but individuals

with high escape rates will tend to be ?Isorted out sooner and those

individuals with a poor performance will remain. Thus the average hazard

function may decline due to heterogeneity although the individual hazard

function may be constant over time.

     After this brief discussion concerning the distribution of the duration

of unemployment the next step is to analyse the explanatory variables of

the hazard function. The probability of leaving the unemployment register

and being employed in a given time period can be viewed as the joint probability

of receiving at least one job offer (A) and of accepting one job off er(=B).
                                  10
Hence this joint probability is

(11) p(AB) =   p(BA)p(A)
The probability of receiving a job offer p(A) has to take into account both

general business conditions and individual specific characteristics of the

unemployed person seen by the employer. The conditional probability of

accepting a job offer represents the choice of the individual whether to work

or not, which depends onthe individual's preferences and his budget constraint.

            Factors determining the decision whether a job offer is accepted by

the unemployed person or not are considered first. Although the above considera-

tions concerning the hazard function suggest a multiperiod framework of the decis-

ion process, we restrict ourselves to a two time period model (period t and     t   1)
                                          —6--
in   order to evaluate the effects more clearly. The folio wing considerations,

however, may     be   extended to the life—time model without substantial change

to the results.

         Consider an unemployed youth at the beginning of period t and suppose

he has got a job offer for t but he does not know if he will get one for

t + 1. The youth derives utility from consumption (C), measured in goods,

and leisure (F), measured in hours, whereas labor (L) and job search (S),

both measured in hours, cause disutility. Let T be the fixed time at the

individual's disposal,11 which he may        spend   in L,S, and F with the restriction

that

(12) T =    LE+ ST+ FT T     t,   t + 1

The utility function is assumed to be constant over the two periods and

specified as

(13)     U[(-t), F(r]     U[C(T), L(T) + S(T)] T=t, t+1 with u>O, UCC<O, UL+S<O,
         UL+SL+SO. We assume that the utility function satisfies the usual

properties.12 The individual's two period budget constraint includes labor

income and unemployment compensation. For the sake of simplicity and taking

into account that the individual is a youth we neglect wealth considerations,

i.e. the initial and final value of assets equals zero. The youth may, however,

make a deficit or a surplus in the first period. With respect to a deficit

there may be credit restrictions for an unemployed youth which are neglected

her e.


         The individual faces several requirements concerning the work time and

the entitlement to unemployment compensation. These restrictions may be

described by the following assumptions,

Assumption A: Consumption must be positive in both periods in Order to allow
               for a minimum consumption. Since the youth is assumed to have
               no wealth he must work in at least one time period. We can,
               therefore, distinguish three cases.13
               Case
                          I: Lt>O. Lt+10
                   Case II: L>O, Lt+1>O
                   Case III: LEO, Lt+i>O
                                      —7—

Assumption B:      All job offers require that the individual must work at least
                   some standard number of hours L. The individual is allowed
                   to work any amount over L within the time restriction given
                   by T (eq.12).
Assumption C:      The individual receives unemployment compensation only if he
                   has worked before. Assume he is not or no longer entitled to
                   unemployment compensation in the first period, hence he gets
                   unemployment compensation only if Lt>0 or, recalling assumption
                   B, if Lt> IL. The amount of the unemployment compensation depends
                   on the previous income wtLt and the unemployment benefit ratio
                   for the second period 9 . Besides this, unemployment compen—
                   sation is of course not available for Lt÷i>0. Hence, the
                   individual may receive unemployment compensation only in case
                   I(Lt> L,L+i =0).
                   Case I.: Lt>t, Lt÷10, tlt+l>0

                   Case u L>L,           9+0
                   Case IIILt=0, Lt÷1>T, 9t+1°

Assumption D: Job search S makes sense only if the individual plans to work
               in the second period. Clearly, this follows from our limitation
               to a two period model. In a life—time model job search would also
               not make sense if the last job of working life is held.

Hence, we obtain finally:


                    Case I: Lt>L, Lt+i=0, 9t÷i>°' s=o

                    Case II:L>L, Lt+l>L, q÷1=0, St>o

                    CaseIIILt=0, Lt+l>L, 9t+i=0' t>0
There may   be,   however, some doubt if case III is a true chcicc for the   indLidual
since there is no guarantee for a job offer in period t + 1. In order not to be

accused of letting the youth starve if he chooses Lt=o but unexpectedly does not

get a job offer, we redefine C as consumption exceeding the minimum consumption

and assume that the youth really does want to consume more in both periods and

therefore must plan to work in at least one period. Hence lim U= +           now
                                                             C-C
with C the minimum consumption paid by the parents in both periods in any of

cases I to III. Alternatively we can assume that the youth will be on a very

poor welfare program for period t + 1 if he fails to get a job.
                                           —8—
The budget constraint is then given by

(14)                  )((' L -p) r £il                                    f14 L       -C

                '     )   r   'r -r—
                      Lt
                                    L    Cl r c      C

                       Lc
where r is the market interest rate by which the individual may borrow or

lend and which is assumed to be constant(rt =            r).    is the highest wage offer

the individual has received until the beginning of period t.             Its determinants

are discussed later.                is the wage rate the individual expects to receive

in the future. It differs from his current wage                in several ways. As

mentioned earlier, the unemployed person may be uncertain if he will get a

job offer at the beginning of the second period and how much of the current

wage he can achieve. Let                be an additive stochastic disturbance term with
       2
N(O,c      )   to   formalize this uncertainty. It includes a zero wage offer if

               is small enough to compensate all other factors determining the future

wage rate. Such other factors are expected business conditions B*t+1,

abilities A, and the search duration in period t. The search duration is not

assumed to be a necessary condition to get a job offer but is expected to have

a positive effect on both the probability of receiving a job offer and the

wage rate offered. There may be a negative effect if the search is carried

out while unemployed. The employer may view an unemployed searcher as an

applicant with less satisfactory potential performance. The unemployed searcher

himself may have a weaker position compared with an employed searcher due to

a higher readiness to make concessions. In order to take into account this

negative effect let D3 be a dummy being 1 for case III (unemployed in period t)

and zero otherwise. This dummy variable also takes into account the possibility

that in case II the job held in t may be the same which is held in t+l. Hence

we expect a higher probability to get a job offer in t+l if D3 equals zero

(case I and II).
                                                           —9—



 (15) w1 =       cz1w
                        +
                            g(D3,B1AS) + ut+1
                 D3 =
                            1 if L=O
                            0 otherwise


        The restriction concerning the minimum work time is met by introducing

 a slack variable H>O with

 (16)   L —H =L or L =L + H Tt,t+l
         T   T          T          T

        The question is does the individual choose not to work in one period

and to become unemployed, and if he does so which period is the unemployment

period. We are especially interested in whether or not the individual, who

 is assumed to be unemployed before period t, remains unemployed in t. The

 objective of the individual is to maximize the expected value of utility

 subject to the constraints.

        In general the problem is given by


(Al)                                   E   {L                        ç (LS) ,                    L1 I   }




                                   4
                                           (,
                                           1
                                                                                   )


                                                                                   rr
                                                                                        '        L




                                   I                       C'



                                                                ()3                          )
                                           /
                              L
                                           j   C       c        w•


                                                                      >C    '1Lf       Lf4
                               /       /       C


                                                                        0
                              In
                                                   C                 ;v.e
                                                 —l 0—




                 How does the individual make his decision? Note that he cannot

            maximize expected utility of present consumption, labor, and job search

            unless he knows the expected utility of the second period. The reason

            is that he cannot be sure to get a job offer in the second period. Hence

            the decision of the optimal values of the variables in the present

            period is conditioned by whether he gets a job offer for the second

            period or not. Remember, for example, that in order to receive a job

            Offer some search time is useful (see equation 15). The maximal

            utility of the second period is determined by the amount of C, L+i,

            and w1 and therefore also of St because of the relationship between w+i

            and S. Hence the decision for the first time period requires some

            information concerning the decision of the second time period. If

            the individual would reverse the decision process it might happc

            that he would decide not to search (or only a little bit). But that might

            imply no job offer which conversely implies work in the first period.

            Hence the individual must solve his maximization problem in two steps

            where the first step is to maximize expected utility of the second period.

                  The procedure can be illustrated by employtng a decision flow diagram
                                  14
             ('decision treet')
                                                                     A
                                             •
                                                                                S, C)
                      EUi(Li, S, c÷1)
        L
Lt+i
                                                         L
                                                                         2 s'   c)
                                                             S




Ltfl
       =0                                                            A

                                                                     EU3(L, C)

                                                    It
second time period                               first time period
                                            —11—


 The starting point is the decision whether to work in the second period or

 not. This decision implies an expected utility of
                                                               U1 and U2, respectively.
 Then the decision for the first time period is made taking into account

 the results for the second period. The resulting expected utilities

of the second step are EU., 1=1,2,3. The total expected utilities of all

three possibilities are

         EU1    =    EU       +ETJ
                          2          3


         EU1'   =
                     EU1 + EU1


         EU'TT =              +
                    EU1           EU2

The numbers I, II, III correspond to the three cases mentioned earlier.

         To avoid possible confusion it should be mentioned again that one

means the first step in the decision process which concerns the second time

period. The expected utility from working in the second period EU1 is

discussed first. Recalling equation 15, w1 depends on several variables

including skills, business conditions, job search duration, and whether

the job searcher is unemployed or not. Let X be a vector including these

determinants and let w1 be the resulting wage rate which differs from

w1 because of uncertainty.

        Suppose that the distribution of w1 can be approximated by a contin-

uous   density function f [w+1              and    assume further that all wages below
a given level, say,                are non—admissable job offers since the employer
must at least pay the negotiated wage rate
                                                      w1.




                    -                                 , wt+l
                        t+1
                                     —12—




Define f[t+1(X)] >0 and

           of[t+i(x) ]d1=l.

The probability that the individual receives a job offer is then given
by


           (18)
                      f[w  (X)]dwt÷l
                   w t-i-l
Both the negotiatedwage rate           and the distribution are assumed to

be known to the individual. The uncertainty mentioned above is captured

by an additive disturbance term u1 N(0, y2). 1-lence



           (19) w1 = wti(X)     +
                                    u1
and the joint density function is given by



           (20)    g[w41(X). u) > 0, where


           (21) P p g[÷1(X).        ut÷i]dwt+1 du÷1=l


If we assume a bivariate normal distribution for w1 and u+1. with variances

a2 anda2 and covariancepaa it follows that the joint density function is

given by

           (22)    e_C/2awau /l_p2
where



                    1      t+l - Wt÷l)2  2 2pu(+1 -
                           [          —+—-----
                  2(l-p)       aw           a
                                                2
                                                        wu
                                                                       ]

                                                U

and where w1 denotes the mean of                Using expression (22) we are

able to calculate the probability that the individual receives a job offer
                                            —13—




(i.e. w÷1               This implies, however, that the individual is willing

to accept w41 <    w1     if the probability of a positive error provides that

w41 >           That means, for example, that he may reduce his job search
duration to an amount which --          ceteris   paribus -- would imply no job

offer (wt+i< wt+1). But since he views the influences captured by a

positive u÷1 as certain and strong enough,he nevertheless expects to

get a job offer, (i.e. a wage rate w1 >                      In   the latter case, then

there would be no need to work in the first period. This, however, would

suggest more the behavior of a risk attraction. In the case of more

risk aversion we may employ the following approach. Assume a zero covari-

ance, for the sake of simplicity, and rewrite (22) as




         (23) J       E   , (x)]                   •                d

If the individual is more risk averse the probability of receiving
a job offer     may be sufficient to       the individual if

                      J                                  f ) o1
                                                                        .J
         (24)
                                         (x)]




                    o.s f 4{41(X)JrIt41
                           wt44
In this case both w       and u         must have passed threshold value until
                    t+l           t+l
the individual has a non-zero expectation of a job offer. Since the indi-

vidual must work in the second time period unless he works in the first

period, there is some reason to believe that he may act as a risk averter

in the sense mentioned above.'5

         Hence the expected value of the future wage rate is derived in
                                            —14--
 the following manner:

 (25)

  E   (t4   I                         a                I
                                                                               a)
                         (K)] #J (+4)a}/ foJs(x)J
     2 fJ              R+1 (fl
                                                    fQJrr
                                                             / f f1)]+.
Although rather   restrictive assumptions have been employed, the   descrip-
tion of the decision problem of the youth turns out to be rather compli-

cated. We did not take into account other important features. To give an

example, the individual does not correct his estimate of w1 during the

first period. Once he has made his decision he does not revise it.

Including this would require an introduction of optimal stopping rules.

Besides the increase in mathematical complication of the system there is

some justification for not revising the decision if the periods are

not too long (a month, for example),16 and roughly coordinate with the

employer's interval of hiring (say the 1st of each month). Therefore

we do not proceed in analyzingthe stochastic nature of the future wage rate,

but continue to derive the expected utilities according to the decision

flow diagram.

         The utility from working in the second time period E U,1 is given

by

         (26)            E
                             fE                            /Pt] (w I ti
                                  &   't4
The first expression is the benefit from working in the second period and

the second expression denotes the cost in terms of the (negative) marginal

disutility of labor. It can be seen that this expected utility is greater
                                  —15—


the higher the marginal utilities of consumption and the lower the dis-

utilities of labor and job search. The duration of job search plays an

ambiguous role. It raises both the wage in t+l and the disutility in t.

The other explanatory factors and u+1have an unambiguous effect on EU1.

The better the business conditions, the more highly skilled the indivi-

dual is, and the higher the variance of u+i the more likely is a higher

value of Eli1 provided that the individual gets a job offer. However,

the more risk averse the individual is, the smaller will he perceive the

probability of a job offer; so there may be no realistic choice whether to

work in period t+l or not. He then may return to the starting point and

follow the decision flow diagram for Lt+1 = 0 and Lt >     L.   On the other

hand, if the probability of getting a job offer is certain enough, the

individual in a second step makes a choice whether to work in the first

time period or not. In each of these cases the expected utility is calcu-

lated by adding the (negative) expected disutility of labor to the

(positive) expected utility of consumption. Hence



          (27) E           E {{           +   ___                       E




          (28)E
                                               (.)
          (29) E
                           E{[                        /P+i].+    L E [) L
 Note   that in the case E U2 the individual does not derive utility from con-
  sumption   financed by   work in the first period. As indicated by the flow diagram,
 however,    he may partly shift consumption financed by work in the second period

  into the first period. The respective utility is included in E U1.

 We must now consider unemployment compensation to which the individual

  is entitled if he has worked in period t but does not work in t+l. The

 exnected utility resulting from irnemn1ovmi-it comnristion -Ic thrfnr
                                              —16—




included   in




           (30)
                          E                  _)fp +
                                                              it-I



By deciding how much to work in the first period the individual therefore

has to take into account the benefit resulting from receiving unemployment

compensation.
                              I     II                III
           The values for EU , EU        ,   and EU         can be calculated, however,

only if the expected optimal values of labor, job search and consumption

are known These values can be obtained by differentiating the Lagrange-

function (17) with respect to the decision variables subject to the

budget constraint.



                          E                          (14)P4           2(.)
           (31)

                                                               tl               J
This   condition holds for all three cases and simply states the well-

known result that the ratio of expected future and present marginal

utilities of consumption equals the market discount factor provided that

the interest rate is known with certainty and the price level is con-

stant.




           (32)   %: E {                       {- ('+]                                    o


This condition is valid for cases I and II with employment in the

first period. It is an inequality because of the constraint Lt                  L

and indicates that the individual may not be able to realize the utility

maximum of the unconstrained case. The difference between cases I and 111 is

the yalue of         It is zero for case II since L÷i>L. In general this con-

dition states the relationship between          the expected marginal disutility
of present labor and the expected marginal utility
                                       —17—




of   future consumption. A higher current real wage rate and/or a higher

unemployment compensation imply higher future consumption and/or a

smaller current labor supply.



                                __
          (33)
                        E1             Ypj         L41
                                                         +
                                                             --—— j
                                                                          =   0


This condition holds with no difference for cases TI and III since job

search makes sense only if the unemployed plans to work in the second

period (assumption D). The higher the amount of planned labor supply

(below L) in t+l and the more profitable job search (i.e. the greater

             the higher the duration of job search in period t.

                                   •
                                        _fLu.)                       -
          (34)   44                           L              ('(41 '44            )


                                                   7
                                        +—-----—
                                          DW41   J
This inequality holds for cases II and III since in case I labor supply

is zero for period t+l. The derivation of (w+It+1) has been described

above. Note that D3 (whether the job searcher is unemployed or not) is

zero for case II and one for case III. The higher w+1/BD3 is, the less

successful is job search with respect to a higher wage rate the individual

expects to receive. Ceteris paribus, however, a higher duration of job

search in t means a higher wage rate in t+l, thus enabling the individual to

consume more and/or work less as condition (34) indicates. On the other

hand, the greater the uncertainty with respect to the likelihood of receiv-

ing a job offer, the smaller is the amount of these convenient effects.

If the uncertainty is great enough, the individual must switch from cases

II and III to case I.
                                  —18—




         The effects of changes of exogenous variables depend on the

values of the parameters of the entire system. To give an illustration,

consider case II with labor supply in both periods and assume an increase

in the present wage rate. To begin with, condition (32) states that

this may lead to a lower current labor supply and/or to a higher future

consumption with the amount of both effects depending on the expected

marginal(dis-)utilities. Condition (31) states that present consumption

will increase, too. In order to satisfy condition (33) the decrease in

            may cause an increase in the duration of job search since

the individual may have free time available from his diminished current

employment. The latter effect, however, depends on the planned future

labor supply. A higher duration of job search implies a higher future

wage rate, ceteris paribus, which has a contrary effect to the decrease

in the utility in future consumption due to higher future consumption

induced by the increase in the wage rate in the current period. The net

effect determines the sign and the amount of the change of future

labor supply, which again simultaneously influences the duration of

job search according to condition (33).

         Although evaluating these effects may be instructive, we are

more interested in the question of whether or not the individual switches

from one case to another since we want to investigate the determinants

whether an unemployed person leaves the unemployment register or not. More

precisely, when does the individual switch from remaining unemployed

and working in the second period (case III) to the cases of accepting the

job offer and working being either employed or i-nemployed in the second

period? Given the values of the exogenous variables, the individual

calculates the expected utility for all three cases inserting the optimal

values of the endogenous variables into the utility function. Assume
                                                   —19—




           that the individual has chosen case III. He will swith to, say, case I
                 I
           if EU becomes greater that EU
                                           III.i.e.
                                               ,



                 (35)


E
    f{ ---' +
                     U
                       1              i                    UL)
                                                                 (ps] L } + E       L
                                                                                         jJ




>E{{                       41lf$i 1t4I ) L E f) L41 E
           Themajor eects can he seen already without explicitly solving the
           inequality. A switch to case I is the iore likely, ceteris paribus
                 (i)       The higher the unemployment benefit ratio. At a first

           glance this result may be contrary to the theoretical and empirical

           discussion of this topic.17 Note, however, that the individual in

           this model is not (or no longer) entitled to unemployment compensation

           which does not seem to be completely unrealistic in the case of youth

           unemployment.     In order to be entitled to "enjoy" the high unemployment
                                                                      18
           compensation the individual must have worked previously.        Therefore,

           this result is not necessarily contrary to the mentioned studies. What-

           ever the relationship between unemployment and unemployment compensation,

           what these theories have in mind is the work behavior of the second

           period of this model.

                 (ii)      The higher the present wage rate compared with the expected

           future wage rate. Taking into account the determinants of the expected

           future wage rate, the individual will be more likely to switch to work

           in the first period the worse the expected business conditions, the

           weaker the position of an unemployed searcher (compared with an employed

           searcher), and the greater the uncertainty of getting a job offer at all.
                                       —20—




      (iii)     The higher the disutility of job search (i.e., the higher

 I U(.)/S) and the less the improvement of the future wage rate due to

 job search.

     (iv)       The lower the abilities of the individual.    Higher abilities
 measured by school education, vocational training, and work experience

 may lead the individual to the assumption that he will get a higher

 wage rate in the future. That is to say, in terms of search models the

 reservation wage increases with the level of abilities. This implies

 a higher duration of inemployment ceteris paribus which may be a rather

 curious result and contradicting actual experience, at a first glance.

Note, however, that demand conditions which also rely upon the indivi-

dual's abilities have not been taken into account yet.

     (v)        The less the individual suffers from working now than later.

That means the greater the disutility of labor in the second period

compared with the first period (i.e., the greater the difference

                                more likely is a switch to working in the

first period.

    We want to stress, however, that there are interactions between

these effects and that these arguments are valid ceteris
                                                             paribus only.
Some of the variables of the system are not observable, of course. But

they may be influenced by individual characteristics reported in the

records of the unemployed. The crucial step is to link the unobserv-

able components of the theory with observed characteristics of the indi-

vidual (i.e., in the present context to determinemainly how the (dis-)

utilities of the model may be influenced by observable individual

characteristics such as health conditions, marital status, etc.). The

fOllowing examples may illustrate. A high number of proposals for jobs
                                   —21—




made by the labor office and rejected by the applicant may indicate a

present weak work ethic, i.e.   a high disutility of labor in the first

period in our model. The number of unemployment spells (relative to the

individualts age) may serve as a similar proxy. Temporary poor health

conditions may increase the present disutility of labor, too. Marital

status may affect the marginal utility of consumption since the same

level of consumption may have a higher marginal utility for a married

individual who is the bread-winner of the family. For a married indivi-

dual the model suggests a higher consumption implying a higher total

labor supply and thus a higher probability that the individual wants to

work in boih periods. It is unnecessary to say that one must be careful

in making general statements. In order to illustrate for the latter

example: the probability that a married woman, who is not the main

bread-winner of the family, accepts a job offer may be lower than that

of a single woman. The former may have a low'regional mobility due to

the employment conditions of her husband.

    Recalling eq(ll), the question whether an individual leaves the

unemployment register depends on both the probability that the indivi-

dual receives at least one job offer and that he accepts one.'9 It

remains to discuss the first probability. Assume that there are vacan-

cies with different requirements concerning the qualifications of the

job.2° Assume for a moment that the job searcher or the firm contacted

each other, which is the more likely the more intensive and longer the

duration of search of both parties has been in the previous period. When

will the searcher get a job offer (including a wage offer)?

    In order to make a decision the firm must determine the applicant's

productivity. A screening process is undertaken, therefore,which assigns
                                        —22--




each applicant with a score: failing or passing. The decision if an

applicant fails or passes depends on whether he satisfies a given mini-

mum requirement of ability. If no applicant passes the test the firm

continues to search.2' Applicants who fail do not get j.oboffers. But

on the other hand, not all applicants who pass will get job offers. The

first reason is that the firm does not hire overqualified workers for a

job with given skill requirements even if the applicant agrees upon a

rather low wage rate compared with his ability. At a first glance, this

may violate the standard assumption of a profit maximizing firm which

states that the firm hires those persons whose marginal product is

higher or equal their real        wage rate. Note, however, that the marginal

product of an applicant with much more ability that required may be

lower than that of an applicant who meets the requirements. This may be

due to the dissatisfaction of his situation, for example, which may even

negatively influence the morale of the other employees.

      Suppose the ability - which is defined more precisely later - can

be measured by an index. Let f(A) be the distribution of ability of

all applicants known to the firm, Ad the firm's desired level of ability22,

A .
 mm
      the   minimum level to be fulfilled in order to get a job offer, and A
                                                                            max
the maximum level beyond which the applicant is viewed to be overqua'ified.




                          p.
                                           —23--




 The probability of being considered to get a job offer is then given by

                       A
                  p     max
       (36)        H 1A       f(x)dx
                        mm


Young workers may be allowed to have a greater variance of abilities

since (vocational) schooling is often the only information available to

the employer.

    The sequence in which each of the applicants will get a job offer

(combined with a wage offer) depends on the value of A-A with A        C
                                                       d       mm —A,Ad—Amax
The applicant with the highest (positive) value will receive a job offer

first. Since his abilities are higher than the requirements for this job,

the firm may offer him a higher wage rate compared with the wage rate

of the applicant with abilities Ad. This depends on how much the firm

believes in an increase of productivity due to these higher abilities.

This leads to the general question to what extent measured abilities

are able to predict the productivity of the applicant.

    There are different views on how much education determines productiv-
       23
ity.          Productivity may depend only on the type of the job and not on

education (pure signalling model) or may be determined by education (pure

human capital model).

    Assume that the level of abilities can be measured by an index in-

cluding school education, vocational training, and the result of an

interview. The fact that certain characteristics ("signals") attached

to the individual do not always tell the whole story about the indivi-

dual's productivity makes the hiring decision an investment decision

under uncertainty.24 "On the basis of previous experience in the market,

the employer will have conditional probability assessments over produc-

tive capacity given various combinations0f signals and indices."25
                                    —24—




The expected marginal product for an individual with given observable

                                               . <A<A
attributes then results in a wage offer (if A mm—  — max).   The firm may

increase the wage offer if the applicant does not accept it. The maximal

amount of this revision is reached when future marginal costs due to a

non-hiring of this applicant (search costs of the firm) equal the marginal

cost of the additional wage payment, ceteris paribus.26 It is this

final wage offer of the firm which was introduced in the individual's

unified model of consumption, leisure, and job search, and which has

been denoted by w earlier. Hence, this wage offer depends on the expected

productivity of the applicant Tr* and is conditional on the educational

level F (neglecting search duration for this moment).



    (37)     w = w(rrIEt).


    The less the individual's abilities differ from the firm's desired

level of ability (Ad), the greater is the probability of getting a job

offer, ceteris paribus. As has been pointed out, a certain minimum

level of abilities is very important depending on the kind of job which

is in question.27 The crucial step, however, is to fit these considerations

in a manageable framework taking into account the limitations of the data.

Suppose therefore,that we can distinguish between n categories of jobs

with given requirements concerning skills. Assume that each individual

can be placed in one(and only one) of these categories according to his

personal abilities measured by school education. Each category of jobs

requires a minimum level of skills measured by the extemt of vocational

training (including higher vocational training schools) and work experi-

ence.28 Let DA be a variable which indicates to what extent the indivi-

dual meets the minimum requirements.29 The greater DA is, the higher
                                       —25—




the probability that the individual receives a job offer.

    We want, however, to stress the simplicity of this procedure which

takes into account only a part of the theoretical considerations. The

upper limit of skills the firm allows for a certain job is disregarded

because data on vacancies distinguished by the level of requirements are

not available.30 We do know the number of the labor office's proposals

to the unemployed for presenting himself before firms that have announ-

ced vacancies in jobs that the labor office judges to be roughly appro-

priate to the unemployed person. Due to several deficiencies of this

variable3 it can serve only as a rough proxy for the                 proba-

bility of receiving a job offer.

    Hence, the probability that the individual receives a job offer at the

beginning of period t is the higher

    -   the   longer and more intensive the search has been in previous

        time periods,

    -   the   more the individual meets the minimum requirements of skills

        of the job category he is belonging to, and

    -   the   higher the number of the labor office's proposals to the

        unemployed persons described above.
                                      —26—




 III. Conclusion

 The outcome of the theory may be summarized as follows.

 (i) A distinguishing characteristic of the duration is the underlying

      hazard function from the shape of which the length of a stay in

      the unemployment register can be calculated. A log—normal dis-

      tribution seems to be an appropriate specification.

(ii): Heterogeneity of the individuals can be taken into account by

      analyzing both the probability of receiving at least one job offer

      and the probability of accepting one job offer for each individual.

(iii) The decision of the individual whether to accept a job offer or

      not can be analyzed in a unified model of consumption, labor supply,

      and job search. Several restrictions concerning some minimum work

      time, a minimum wage, and the entitlement to unemployment must be

      considered. Besides this uncertainty with respect to future job

      offers plays an important role. The greater uncertainty the more

      likely is an acceptation of a job offer now. Search plays an

      ambiguous role since it raises disutility and the probability of

      receiving a better job offer. The effect ofthe amount of unem-

      ployment compensation is ambiguous, too, and depends on whether

      the individual is entitled to it or not in the present time period.

      Higher abilities of the individual may result in a higher reservation

      wage such implying a longer duration of job search ceteris paribus.

(iv) The probability of receiving a job offer depends on the screening

      process undertaken by the firm, on the abilities of the individual,

      and on the search duration of both parties. The wage offer is

      determined by the expected productivity of the applicant and is

      conditional on his educational level. Higher abilites may lead to
                                    —27—




    an overqualification of the individual with respect to the require-

    ments of the job in question.

(v) The crucial step is to link several (unobserved) variables of the

    model to usually observed variables. Although some attempts are

    described no claim is made that available data are a satisfactory

    substitute for the variables in question.
                                                     —28—


                                                Footnotes



  1For possible causes of youth unemployment (in the U.S.) see R. FREEMAN

     (1979) and (in the Federal Republic of Germany) W. FRANZ (1979).

  2For more details see K. V. BURY (1975) and D.R. COX (1962), for example.


  3See C. CHAMBERLAIN (1979), D. R. COX (1962).

 4See K. V. BURY (1975, p. 489).

 5         .    =   xx
                    —()
                                   x
                           . exp{—(—)
                                        A
                                            }



 6Xl      implies fw'a,Al) =      exp{—         }   fEXx;)   and FEx(x,a) = 1 — exp{—
                                                                                        }
     In   the case X=l the WEIBULL—model coincides with the gamma—model. The

  main difference between the WEIBULL— and the gamma—model is that the WEIBULL

  hazard function approaches zero as x*aifA<1 whereas the gamma hazard

  function approaches an asymptote value)O. See G. CHAMBERLAIN (1979, p.33).

 7K. V. BURY (1975, p.500).


 8For an extensive discussion of the log—normal distribution see J. AITCHISON

  and J. A. C. BROWN (1957).

 9See G. S. WATSON and W. T. WELLS (1961). The higher the value of a the

  earlier the maximum of the hazard function with respect to time.

'0This is similar to the procedure of L. S. LEIGHTON and J. MINCER (1979,
                                                                          p.35)

 who consider the probability of finding a job offer and the probability of finding

 an acceptable job conditional on finding a vacancy.

In the model of J. J. SEATER (1979, 1977) where a week is the
                                                              underlying time
 period T equals 168 hours. A discussion about how much recreation time an

 individual needs at the minimum is beyond the scope of this paper and is left

 to the reader.
                                               —29--

22Admay or may not coincide with the first moment of the distribution.


23See M. SPENCE (1976).

24See N. SPENCE (1973). ttSignals" are subject to manipulation by the individual,

 whereas        "indices" are attributes generally thought not to be alterable (sex,
     for example). The uncertainty may be reduced by a time of probation with a very
     short    period of notice.




25See N. SPENCE (1973) p.352).

26
     The. expected return from screening one more applicant is the probability of being

     qualified multiplied by the difference between the marginal product of a worker

     correctly predicted to be qualified and his wage. In equilibrium this return

     must equal the marginal cost of screening.

     See C.    J.   BORJAS and N. S. GOLDBERG (1978, p.919).


27These minimum abilities may, of course, change over time. There is some

     evidence that employers had raised this minimum level for some jobs during

     the last recession.


28The details are reported in the empirical part. In order to give an impression now

     what we have in mind suppose n=2. Let category 1 include all jobs which

     require abilities measured by a level of school education below high school

     education (i.e., below "Nittlere Reife" or "Fachschule"). The minimum level

     is assumed to be vocational training or at least some training on the job and

     work experience for this category. With respect to category 2, minimum require-

     ments are difficult to explore. Lack of data prohibits us from taking more into

     account than work experience.


        the empirical section it turns out that DA is a dummy with flAl if the

     minimum requirements are met and DA=O otherwise.
                                                    -3c1-
 They include separable, complete, reflective, transitive, Continuous and
   strongly monotonic preferences and that urn U =
                                                            c÷o
                                                                           '' lim
             urn     U    0, urn     —   ':,          U           = U        = 0
             L+S-O    L+S    L+S=T                        C,L+S         L+S,C
 '3We neglect the case L =                         fQr a youth satisfactorily supported by his
                                 Lt+1 = 0
      parents since it gives no substantial additional information.

 14See e.g. M. H. DE GROOT (1970), and H. RAIFFA (1970).
                                                                                   denotes a

      decision fork and 0 a chance fork. See H. RAIFFA (1970), p.11.

 15
      We                                       .
           assume that his economic situation will be very bad if he fails to

      get a job and did not work in the first period.                    lIe may he on a very poor

     welfare program or receive some money from his parents, for example.

16Toø short a time period, however, may be in conflict with the
                                                                requirement that
      the individual must have worked in the present time period in order to be

     entitled to unemployment compensation.

'7See e.g. H. G. GRUBEL and D. XI (1976), H. KONIG and N. FRANZ
                                                                                          (1978), and
     B. T. NORTENSEN (1970).

'8For a similar result see D. T. NORTENSEN (1977).

     For simplicity assume that —
19
                                L is high enough to make it impossible for the

     individual to hold two different jobs.

20Remember the
                     caveat in the introductory chapter. We do not discuss hiring
  in general. This may be due to replacement demand or additional demand because

  of a higher (expected) level of demand for the firm's products.

21Another possibility in this case would be that the firm lowers
                                                                 the level of
 these minimum requirements.
                                     Note, however, that the firm may run into
                                                                                                difficulties,
 then. First, the job requirements
                                               may be statutory (example: medical service).
 Second, other persons holding a similar job within the firm may object to the

 lowering standards because it might later reflect on their own qualifications.
                                            —31—
30
     Neither a minimum nor a maximum
                                       nor a desired level of required skills is
     reported. If only one of these were
                                            available, one might assume a variance
  of skills allowed by the firm and calculate an approximate
                                                             range of skills
  for each category of vacancies and the percentage of
                                                       unemployed persons
  falling into this range. This
                                 percentage would be a better proxy for the proba—
  bility to get a job offer.

31Not all vacancies are announced to the labor
                                                    office, and experience indicates
  that the appropriateness of the
                                       unemployed the labor office presents to the
 firms may be seriously questioned in some cases.
                                      —32--



                                References

Aitchison, J. and J.A.C. Brown (1957), The Log—normal Distribution, Cambridge.

Akerlof, G.A. and B.G. Main (1978), Unemployment Spells and Unemployment
       Experience, Federal Reserve Board, Special Studies Paper No. 123,
       Washington, D.C.

Amemiya, T. (1974), Nultivariate Regression and Simultaneous Equation Models
      When the Dependent Variables are Truncated Normal, Econometrica 42,
      pp. 999—1012.

Amemiya, T. (1973), Regression Analysis When the Dependent Variable is Truncated
      Normal, Econometrica 41, pp. 997—1016.

Barlow, R.E. and F. Proschan (1965), Mathematical Theory of Reliability,
      New York.

Barlow, R.E., A.W. Marshall and F. Proschan (1963), Properties of
      Probability Distributions with Monotone Hazard Rate, The Annals
      of Mathematical Statistics 34, pp. 375—389.

Borjas, G.J. and N.S. Goldberg(l978), Biased Screening and Discrimination
      in the Labor Market, American Eëonomic Review 68, pp. 918—922.

Bury, K.V. (1975), Statistical Models in Applied Science, New   York.
harnberlain, G. (1979), Heterogeneity, Omitted Variable Bias, and
      Duration Dependence, Harvard Institute of Economic Research,
      Discussion Paper Number 691 (March 1979), Harvard University,
      Cambridge (Mass.)

Cox, D.R. (]962), Renewal Theory, Frome and London.

DeGroot, N.H. (1970), Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York.

Ellwood, D. (1979), Teenage Unemployment: Permanent Scars or Temporary Blem-
      ishes, forthcoming in: R. Freeman and D. Wise (eds), National Bureau
      of Economic Research Conference on Youth Unemployment.

Franz, W. (1979), Youth Unemployment: The German Experience, Part I,
      Institut fir Volkswirtschaftslehre und Statistik der Universitat
      Mannheim, Discussion Paper No. 116/79, Mannheim.

Freeman, R. (1979), Why Is There a Labor Market Problem?, National Bureau
      of Economic Research Working Paper No. 365, Cambridge, (Mass.).

Griliches, Z., B.H. Hall and J.A. Hausman (1978), Missing Data and Self—
      Selection in Large Panels, in'The Economics of Panel Data,
      Annales de 1'Inse' 30/31, pp. 137—176.

Grubel, H.G. and D. Naki (1976), The Effect of Unemployment Benefits on
      U.S. Unemployment Rates, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 112, pp. 274—299.

Harris, C.M. and N.D. Singpurwalla (1969), On Estimation in Weibull Distribu—
   •  tion with Random Scale Parameters, Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 16,
      pp. 405—410.
                                    —33—


Heckman, J.J. (1976), The Common Structure of Statistical Models of
      Truncation, Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables
      and a Simple Estimator for Such Models, Annals of Economics and
      Social Measurement 5, pp. 475—492.

Johnson, N. and F. Kotz (1972), Distributions in Statistics: Continuous
      Multivariate Distributions, New York.

Kendall, H.G. and A. Stuart (1968), The Advanced Theory of Statistics,
      Vol. 1: Distribution Theory, 3rd edition, New York.

Kiefer, N.M. and G.R. Neumann (1979), Individual Effects ib a Nonlinear
      Model: Explicit Treatment of Heterogeneity in the Empirical Job—
      Search Model, Center for Mathematical Studies in Business and
      Economics, University of Chicago, Report 7921.

Konig, H. and W. Franz (1978), Unemployment Compensation and the Rate of
      Unemployment in the Federal Republic of Germany, in: H.G. Grubel and
      M.A. Walker (eds.), Unemployment Insurance — Global Evidence of its
      Effects on Unemployment, Vancouver, pp. 236—266.

Lancaster, T. (1979), Econometric Methods for the Duration of Unemployment,
      Econometrica 47, pp .939—956.

Leighton, L.S. and J. Mincer (1979), Labor Turnover and Youth Unemployment,
      mimeo.

Lindgren, B.W. (1976), Statistical Theory, 3rd ed., New York.

Maddala, G.S. (1978), Selectivity problems in longitudinal data, in:
      The Economics of Panel Data, Annales de l'Insee 30/3 1, pp. 423—450.

Mann, N.R., R.E. Schafer, and N.D. Singpurwalla (1974), Methods for Statistical
      Analysis of Reliability and Life Data, New York

Mortensen, D.T. (1977), Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Decisions,
      Industrial and Labor Relations Review 30, pp. 505—517.

Raiffa, H. (1970), Decision Analysis, Reading (Mass.).

Salant, S.W. (1977), Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts,
      Quarterly Journal of Economics 91, pp. 39—57.

Seater, J.J. (1979), Job Search and Vacancy Contacts, American Economic Review
      69, pp. 411—419.

Seater, J.J. (1977), A Unified Model of Consumption, Labor Supply, and
      Job Search, Journal of Economic Theory 14, pp. 349—372.

Spence, N. (1976), Signalling and Screening, Harvard Institute of Economic
      Research, Discussion Paper No. 467, Cambridge (Mass.).

Spence, N. (1973),Job Market Signalling, Quarterly Journal of Economics
      87, pp. 355—374.
                                  —34—


Theil, H. (1971), Principles of Econometrics, New York.

Watson, G.S. and W.T. Wells (1961), On the possibility of improving
      the mean useful life of items by eliminating those with short
      lives, Technometrics 3, pp. 281—298.
