                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   TEENAGE UNEMPLOYMENT:
          PERMANENT SCARS OR TEMPORARY BLEMISHES




                     David T.   Eliwood



                  Working Paper No. 22




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                      October 19T9




This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on Youth
Unemployment, May, 19T9, and will be included in a con-
ference volume. I am extremely grateful for discussions
with Richard Freeman, Gary Chamberlain, Robert Meyer,
Lawrence Summers, and David Wise. I received helpful
insights from participants in the Columbia University
Labor Economic Seminar. Research for this paper was
funded in part by a grant from the Department of Labor to
the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper 3Q9
                                                          September 1979



  Teenage Unemployment: Permanent Scars or Temporary Blemishes


                            ABSTRACT


     This paper examines the persistence and long—term impacts of

early labor force experiences. The paper reports a rise in employ-

ment rates for a cohort of young men as they age, but points out

that those persons with poor employment records early have compara-

tively poor records later. In order to asses the extent to which

differences in later employment and wages are causally related to

these earlier employment experiences, the methodologies of Heckman,

Chamberlain, and others are extended to account for Markov type

persistence and a straight forward estimation technique results.

In addition, a Sims type causality test is used to measure the

true impact of work experience on wages.

     The paper concludes that the effects of a period without work

do not end with that spell. A teenager who spends time out of work

in one year will probably spend less time working in the next than

he would have had he worked the entire year. Furthermore, the lost

work experience will be reflected in considerably lower wages. At

the same time, the data provide no evidence that early unemployment

sets off a vicious cycle of recurrent unemployment. The reduced

employment effects die off very quickly. What appears to persist

are effects of lost work experience on wages.



                                 David T. Ellwood
                                 National Bureau of Economic Research
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                 617/868—3913
      Teenage unemployment poses a puzzle for economists. Its causes and

consequences are not well understood because of conflicting economic

analyses. The human capital model suggests that since investment should

be quite heavy in the early years, teenage unemployment carries with it

heavy costs. But search theory suggests that shopping around is a

necessary and desirable activity, particularly for those with little

information about opportunities in the labor market. There is also

concern that early labor force attachment may be weak, raising the

possibility that early unemployment may just represent consumption of

leisure. This paper focuses on the longer term consequences of early

spells out of work for male teenagers.

      The fundamental problem in capturing the long-term effects of

unemployment is separating differences in employment and wages which are

causally related to early unemployment from the differences which are

due to unobserved personal characteristics correlated with early unem-

ployment. Whereas elsewhere in economics, researchers routinely assume

homogeneity of tastes and preferences, heterogeneity lies at the very

heart of the issue here. Separating the individual component is the

primary challenge faced in this paper.

      This paper is divided into three sections. The first simply

describes the early labor market experience of the young men in this

sample. Strangely there is little published data which trace the

experience of a complete cohort over four years. In most other work

the high rates of attrition and re—entrance into the sample over the

period at least open the possibility of distorting the underlying pattern.
                                                                   —2




 The second section extends the work of Heckman and Chamberlain to test

 the long term effects of early employment on future employment. The

 final section uses a Sims type causality model to measure the impact of

work experience on wages.

      I conclude that the effects of a period without work do not end

with that spell. A teenager who spends time out of work in one year

will probably spend less time working in the next than he would have

had he worked the entire year. Furthermore the lost work experience

will also be reflected in lower wages. At the same time, my data

provide no evidence that early unemployment sets off a vicious cycle

of recurrent unemployment. The reduced employment effects die of f very

quickly. What appears to persist are effects of lost work experience

on wages.



Scars ——    In   Theory and Practice

      It is useful to begin by examining the implications of early

unemployment according to several more common labor theories. Perhaps

most prominent in its prediction of long-term effects is human capital

theory. While the theory isn't concerned with early unemployment

inducing later unemployment, its emphasis on human investment early in

the job career to explain the concave pattern of aggregate age—earnings

profiles implicitly imposes heavy costs on the unfortunate young person

who misses out on early investment opportunities. If no investment

takes place during the period without employment, the entire profile

is shifted back. Even if retirement is also delayed, the present value

of the entire earnings streams must now be discounted over the lost time.
                                                                 —3




      The dual labor market theorists paint an equally bleak picture.

Poor work habits develop over the periods of discouragement, catalyzing

weak labor force attachment and alienation. The result is a vicious

cycle of unemployment followed by deterioration followed by more un-

employment. Pervading the institutional literature is the related

notion of tracking. Teenagers face only a limited number of entry—

level jobs which lead to better jobs. Those who miss good jobs early

are permanently tracked onto inferior ladders.

      One troubling question is whether early unemployment is largely

a result of a job shortage or of weak labor force attachment. Most

theories which predict long-term impacts of unemployment emphasize the

involuntary nature of early unemployment. If much of it is "voluntary,"

it still may be reasonable to consider whether there are long—term

consequences. Teenage unemployment cannot be strictly voluntary since

it is so strongly counter—cyclical. But it is possible that some por-

tion of the problem is due to weak attachment. Young people may take

jobs only when they are readily available. Early experience may quicken

labor force attachment and reinforce desirable work skills. If it

is considered socially desirable to hasten the assimilation process,

then it would be desirable to make jobs readily available to the young.

      A slightly more sophisticated argument emphasizes the severe

informational problems of the young in the labor market. Teenagers

and employers are involved in an elaborate game of mixing and matching

skills and jobs, but there is relatively little information available

to either party. The employers rely heavily on evidence of past work

experience in making hiring decisions because they need to separate
                                                                      —4




  persons with poor work skills and weak attachment from those with

  superior work qualities. Employers avoid hiring workers who have been

 out of school for some time but have little experience, so those workers

 who were involuntarily unemployed are inappropriately typed as poor

 workers. The problems may be exacerbated in recessionary times. If

 employers are slow to adjust their expectations for experience from

 young applicants, cohorts entering a weak labor market will suffer,       Of

 course, permanent damage need not occur at all. Early unemployment

 may simply be productive job search or simple consumption of leisure.

       There is a small but rapidly growing literature
                                                         testing the long-
 term effects of early spells of unemployment.   (See for example Becker
 and Hills (1978), Stevenson (1978).) These papers conclude that early unemploy-

 ment has sizeable long-term effects. The methodology usually involves

 regressions of wages or weeks worked of persons beyond their teens on

duration and/or spells of teenage unemployment several years earlier.

Although most pay lip service to the difficulty of controlling for

individual differences, it is typical to include several background

variables as a control in the equations. This methodology is troubling.

If there is a true job shortage employers are likely to hire the highest

quality workers first. If early unemployment is in part a reflection

of weak attachment, then some persons with unemployment are also low

quality workers. In either case, early unemployment is certain to be

highly correlated with aspects of worker quality. The findings of

these studies document persistence very convincingly but serious ques-

tions remain about whether early experience has causal effects in later

economic behavior.
                                                                          —5




       It is the conclusion of this paper that while long-term effects

 do exist, they may be a good deal smaller than the literature suggests.



 The Data

       Current published data tends to obfuscate early patterns of market

 experience. Data from the Current Population Survey are currently

 published by age group and school enrollment status. Throughout this

paper, I will concentrate only on those persons out of school. I see

much fewer possibilities for long—term effects of unemployment during

 school. The composition of the 16-19 year old out of school labor force

is very different from that of the 20-24 age group. The 16-19 year old

group includes early dropouts and high school graduates. The 20-24

year old group includes persons with little school but 8 years of exper-

ience along with recent college graduates. To look across different

age groups and to draw conclusions about the patterns of unemployment

as persons age is to invite error.

      Ideally, one should like to follow a cohort of persons permanently

out of school over five or ten years. The National Longitudinal Survey

of Young Men ——   the   so—called "Parnes data" ——   allows   such an examination.

Some 5225 young men between the ages of 14 and 24 were interviewed in

1966. They were then reinterviewed annually through 1971, then again

in 1973, and again in 1975. Typically, respondents were interviewed in

Novethber about their current labor force status and most recent wage

as well as about their experience over the past year. The sample

chosen for analysis here was a group of roughly 750 young men who left
                                                                 —6




school "permanently" in 1965, 1966 or 1967 with less than 14 years of

education. Unfortunately, this period was the height of the Vietnam

war. Thus, slightly over half the sample is not observed in the four

full years after they left school, primarily because of military service.

The 364 young men who remain do appear to be somewhat less prone to

unemployment and time out of the labor force. Persons who were

observed in the first full year out of school but were not observed in

some later year had a labor force participation rate of 84.1 percent,

an unemployment rate of .l percent and an employment rate of 78.2 percent.

Persons who remained in the sample had rates of 86.1 percent, 5.0 percent,

and 81.8 percent respectively. This sample selection is an obvious

source of potential bias and will be addressed in more detail later.

      Another well known "problem" with the Parnes data is that they

show very different rates of employment and unemployment than do pub-

lished statistics derived for the CPS. The longitudinal data used here

show much higher employment rates and lower unemployment rates than

the CPs data. For a discussion of the likely reasons for these differ-

ences see Freeman and Medoff (l979b). The sample selection and CPS

comparison suggests that the NLS sample may miss some of the longer-

term unemployed persons, for whom unemployment could have the most

serious consequences. Thus, the current sample could serve to under—

represent the long—term consequences of early labor market experience.

      Few of the young men in the survey data leave school in November.

In the year of leaving school, retrospective labor force figures cover

both time in and out of school. After numerous attempts to adjust for

*
   Meyer & Wise (1979) report similar results for the National thngitudinal
Survey of the High School Class of 1972.
                                                                         —7




the   problem, I finally decided to simply omit the first part—year of

experience. In later sections when I refer to the first year of exper-

ience, I refer to the first full survey year after graduation or dropout.


I. THE EARLY LABOR MARKET EXPERIENCE

        The labor market position of young men improves dramatically during

the first four years out of school. Table 1 shows that while an average

of nearly 20 percent are without work in the first year, only 10 percent

are not working 3 years later. Labor force participation rates rise

precipitously, from 86 percent to 95 percent. The marked improvement is

countercyclical in this case since for roughly two—thirds of the sample (those

leaving school in 1966 and 1967) the fourth full year out of school comes dur-

ing 1970 or 1971 ——   recessionary years. Indeed, if the overall economic
picture had remained stable over this period, even more rapid improvement

would likely have occured. Almost immediately, however, the unemployment rate

shows up as a questionable indicator fo labor market performance for this

group. While the other statistics, most notably, the employment ratio, show

clear improvement over time, the unemployment rate follows no clear pattern.

Although it is possible that the unemployment rate accurately captures the

relative number of persons seeking work but unable to find it, it is also pos-

sible that the unchanging unemployment statistic misrepresents the trend in

the labor market position of young men. In these retrospective figures,

unemployment may   well mean something different to persons one   year

out of school than to persons four years out. As the young men age,

they may become increasingly reluctant to report themselves as Out of the

labor force even if they are not spending time in productive job search.
                                                                     —8




                                   Table 1


      Unemployment Rate, Employment Ratio and Labor Force Participation
               Rate For Young Men During First Four Years After
Leaving School in 1965, 1966, or 1967 With Less Than 13 Years of Schooling




                   Unemployment              Employment           Labor Force
                       Rate*                    Rate**            Participation Rate**


Year 1                5.0                     81.8                   86.1


Year 2                6.4                     84.7                   90.5


Year 3                4.8                     89.3                   93.8


Year 4                5.4                     90.0                   95.0




*    average weeks unemployed/average weeks in labor force
**   average weeks employed/52
*** average week in labor force/52
                                                                    —9




 Another alternative is that in later years only a hard core cannot find

 jobs. These persons become discouraged and drop out of the labor force.

 Either way the distinction between unemployment and time out of the

 labor force is blurred.

      The steady improvement in the employment rate of the cohort masks

remarkably dynamic labor force patterns. The initial years of employment

experience are pocketed with spells of unemployment and time out of the

labor force. Only 18 percent of all young men in this sample have f our—

year employment histories unmarred by a spell out of work. Table 2 shows

that nearly 40 percent of all young men spend time out of the labor force

in their first year, while just over one quarter report unemployment.

Overall, 57 percent of these young men spent some time out of work. The

probabilities of adverse experiences decline substantially over the period.

Yet even in the fourth year out of school when the overall employment ratio

is 90 percent, almost 40 percent spend some time not employed. And while

the labor force participation rate is hovering at 95 percent in that fourth

year, one quarter spend some time neither working nor looking for work.

      Perhaps the most dramatic result in these first few tables is the

prominence of time out of the labor force. Nearly 40 percent of the

sample self report time spent neither working nor looking in the first

years. These 40 percent report average spells of 18 weeks —— more than

four months ——   during   a period of very low unemployment. Perhaps these

are discouraged workers. Yet three—quarters of them spent no time
                                                                —9a




                                Table 2


         Probability of Unemployment, Time Out of the Labor Force
   and Time Not Employed During First Four Years After Leaving School




               Probability of      Probability of Time      Probability of Time
               Unemployment        Out of Labor Force       Not Employed


Year 1             26.9%               40.1%                    56.6%


Year 2             27.5                31.9                     51.1


Year 3             23.0                23.6                     40.9


Year 4             21.9                24.1                     38.2
                                                                    —10




unemployed at all during that first full year! Of course, some may have

had severe unemployment problems in the part year preceding the first

survey year. Still, four months is a remarkably long time to be dis-

couraged, particularly when one's peers are reporting a 5 percent

unemployment rate. The sample selection rules, which appear to discrim-

inate against the non—employed, make the results seem even more dramatic.

The rapid rise in labor force participation rates and employment rates

during the downward swing of the business cycle must almost certainly

indicate increasing labor force attachment.

     One important concern is whether to regard reported unemployment

as a separate experience from reported time out of the labor

force. The evidence cited thus far suggests that retrospective

unemployment figures do not appear to capture the essence of the

employment situation. While the distinction between those actively

seeking work and those who are not seems particularly important in

this group, the line is poorly drawn using retrospective employment

figures. Of course, few labor force statistics are derived from retro-

spective data. Still, the standard CpS question about whether the teen-

ager has done anything to look for work in the past four weeks (a speci-

fic method must be listed) may not separate them too much more efficiently.

      Unfortunately, if it is difficult to separate the truly unemployed

from those with weak labor force attachment in surveys, it may be

equally difficult for employers. Thus, those persons who are seriously

searching for work but have been unable to find it may suffer from

guilt by association.

      This brief section has painted a pattern of change and
                                                                 —11




 diversity. Early in their career young men spend a great deal of time

 without work. By their forth year, however, most workers are settling

 into a more stable and presumably permanent work situation. The next

 section shows that while the early years are periods of rapid improve-

ment for the young men overall, adverse experiences persist.



The Persistent Pattern of Adverse Labor Market Experiences

      Early labor market experiences foretell future ones. Persons who

escape unemployment early will likely escape it later. Figures 1, 2,

and 3 are probability trees for unemployment, time out of the labor

force, and time not employed for the four periods. Each branch corres-

ponds to one period. A 1 indicates that unemployment or non-employment

was experienced in the period, a 0 indicates that it was not. Above the

line in any branch is the probability of being in that state conditional

on being at the previous branch. Below the line in parenthesis is the

unconditional probability of being on that branch (or the proportion of

all persons who are found on that branch). The bottom number is the

average weeks of unemployment in that period by persons on that branch.

Thus in Figure 1, 53.1 percent of persons who had been unemployed in

their first year were unemployed in their second year. 14.3 percent

of all persons had unemployment both periods and these persons averaged

14.2 weeks of unemployment in the second year.

      All three figures demonstrate striking persistence in the labor

force experiences. The probability of unemployment (non—employment)

in the second period conditional on first period spells is .531 (.631),

while those who escaped early problems have only a .180 (.354) probability
                                                                  -12
             Figure l Probahi].itv Tree nf

Weeks Unemployed in First Four Full Years Out of School

                        N =    364                              .684

                                                           —    14.6 WKS
                                               .365 _.-


                                                               (.016)
                                                                 0.0 10(5
                                531


                                                                .333
                                                               (.030)
                                                                11.0 WXS


                                               o.OWKS
                                                                .667
                                                               (.060)
                                                                 0.0 S
  8.3
                                                                .462
                                                               (.016)
                0                             .263
                                                                 4.0 WKS




                                                               (.019)
                                                                 0.0 10(5
                               .469
                              C .126)

                                                                .121
                                                               (.011)
                                                               27.4 WKS


                                               0. 0 10(5

                                                                .060)
                                                                 0.0 10(5




                              .180




                                                               0.0 10(5
                   Figure 2: Probability Tree of

Weeks Out of the Labor Force in First Four Full Years Out of School

                             N = 364
                                                                        .522
                                                                  , _,'(.033)


                                             — Z8
                                                                       19.6 WK$
                                                      .377
                                                     (.063)

                                                                       (.030)
                                                                         0.0 0(S

                                20.3 (.0(5
                                             0                          316
                                                                     .033)
                    I—                                             16.3    S
                                                     (.104)
                                                      0.0 (.0(5
                                                                      (.071)
                                                                        0.0 WKS
      .401
      .401)
      18.0 W5


                         0                            .235




                                 0.0

                                                                        4.4 141(5




                                                                        0.0 141(5


                                                                       .400

                                                     .273
                                                 -
                                                                       .600
                                                                      L025
 O

                                j5
                                                                        0.0 WXS




                     1
                                                                      __
                                                     (.110)0
                                                                       .088)
                                                                        0.0 s
      .599
     C .599)
       0.0 WKS -



                         0

                                                                        0.0 141(5


                                 0.0 141(5




                                                                        0.0 10(5
                    Figure 3: Probability Tree of                                          —14
    Weeks Not Employed in First Four Full Years Out of School

                                  N = 364
                                                                                   .695
                                                                               "157)
                                                                                 17.5 10(8
                                                               .631 ,/
                                                              16.6 1(KS


                                                                                   •0.0 10(8
                                    631



                      I
                          -                                    369
                                                                                   .333
                                                                                   11.0 5
                                                               0.0 10(5
                                                                                   .667

                —                                                                          'KS
     566


                                                                                   .333
                                                                          --        7.0 10(5
                                                              .316


                                                                                   .044)
                                                                                   0.0 'KS
                                    .369
                                    0.0 W3'
                                                         0                         .212




                                                                                   0.0 'KS




                                                                                  23.1 10(5


                                                         -
                                                              14.1 WKS',
                                                                                  .478
                                                                                 rTSST
0                                  .354 —-
                                              --.-                                 0.0 'KS

                              -    (.15V
                                    6.5
                                                                                  .303
                                                                                   6.4 10(5
                                                             (.091) —.
                                                                0.0
                                                                                  .697
                                                                                 11T
                                                                                   0.0 10(3
    .434   --

                                                                                  .400
                                                                                 (.022)
                                                                                   5.1 1(5

                                                              5.Z10(S
                                                     I
                                                                                  0.0 'KS

                                   0.0 'KS 0
                                                                                 .207
                                                                           '(.047)
                                                                                  8.4 10(3
                                                             .804


                                                                                 .179)
                                                                                  0.0 IKS
                                                                   —15




 of unemployment (non-employment). By the fourth period, boys with

 three straight years with unemployment are 7 times more likely to

 become unemployed than those with three straight years without it.

       This sort of probability tree is common in the literature (see

 Heckman and Willis, 1977; Heckman, 1978a and l978b); however, the patterns

 can be misleading. If spells are long, say 10 weeks, and if spells

are distributed randomly throughout the year, then 20 percent of all

the unemployed in one year will have spells which overlap into the

next one. This would cause a much higher probability of unemployment

in the second year conditional on having experienced it in the first,

regardless of the underlying pattern. In this sort of table, there is

no straightforward way of making an adjustment for this problem.

      Happily, overlap problems do not affect probabilities of third

or fourth period events conditional on the first period event. Table 3

reveals that persons with poor first period records are likely to have

poor records three or four years later. Persons who spent time out of

work in the first period have a .447 probability of similar problems

in the final year as contrasted to a .297 probability for those persons

with uninterrupted work histories in the first year.

      A somewhat more appealing measure of persistence is a simple

correlation matrix. Table 4 provides the correlations for weeks of

unemployment over the first four year and for the weeks not employed.

Once again the persistence is prominent, but not quite so prominent as

might be expected. Weeks not employed shows a one year correlation of

about .5, but it decays rapidly. Within two years the value falls to

around .25. Remarkably, weeks unemployed show far less persistence and
                                                                         —16




                                   Table 3


                  Probability of Adverse Market Experiences
                 in Later Years Conditional on Early Experience




                            Unemployment     Time OLF     Time Not Employed


P(1 in year 2/
  1 in year 1)                  .531           .418               .631


P(1 in year 2/
  0 in year 1)                  .180           .252               .354


?(1 in year 3/
  1 in year 1)                  .327           .294               .514
P(1 in year 3/



l                               .94
  O an year 0)
                                               .197

    in year 4/
  1 in year 1)                  .345           .294               .447


P(1 in year 4/
  0 in year 1)                  .172           .205               .297
                                                                      —16a




                                   Table 4


              Correlation Natrix for Weeks Unemployed and Weeks
            Not Employed During the First Four Years Out of School




                                      Weeks Unemployed

  Jeeks Unemployed     Year 1        Year 2         Year 3        Year 4


  Year 1                1.00            .27           .20             .08

  Year 2                              1.00            .27             .2ô

  Year 3                                             1.00             .39

  fear 4                                                             1.00




                                      Weeks Not Employed
Weeks Not Employed     Year 1        Year 2        Year 3         Year 4


 Year   1               1.00            .54           .34             .2
 Year 2                               1.00            .46             .34

 Year 3                                             1.00              .47

 Year 4                                                              1.00
                                                                   —17




the pattern of decay is erratic. Adjacent year correlations

°12' a23, 034) show some stability, but hover at only about .3, a

figure roughly comparable to the correlation between weeks not employed

one or two years removed. The correlation between unemployment in the

first and third year (a13), shows evidence of slight decay, but
                                                                  a24

shows no such evidence. Then, dramatically, l4 falls to .08. The

unorthodox behavior of the unemployment figures reinforces once again

the earlier concerns about the quality of unemployment measure (at

least this retrospective measure) for this age group.

      Both the unemployment and non-employment correlations are more

stable than would be generated by a first order Markov process. The

stability suggests that individual differences are an important part

of the underlying process or that the process is of higher order. Unem-

ployment and non—employment are not events randomly distributed over

this population of young men. If early unemployment or non-employment

is nothing more than search and matching of workers and jobs, then for

some at least, the process is quite protracted. Since adverse employment

patterns are a problem of a sub—class of youngsters, programs to aid

them ought to be targeted to those with early problems.

      The critical question of this paper still remains: is the persis-

tence a reflection only of individual differences or is future employ-

ment causally related to past experience?
                                                                        18




II. THE IMPACT OF EARLY UNEMPLOYMENT ON FUTURE UNEMPLOYMENT --
    HETEROGENEITY AND STATE DEPENDENCE

      Persistence of labor market behavior has been noted in numerous

other settings, most notably in the labor force participation of

married women. A newly developing literature seeks to separate the

effects of individual differences in behavior --   heterogeneity   --

from changes in behavior induced by a previous event —— state dependence.

The unique character of longitudinal data allows one to control for

unobserved individual characteristics in a way that no strictly

cross—sectional data set does. Although there are serious concep-

tual problems with this formulation, the following model in contin-

uous time will help illustrate the methodology currently employed

in the literature. The problems will be considered later.



      Y.
       it
          =X.itt   +YY.
                     tit—l+& it+u.it


Here Y.t is the time person i was in a particular state during period

t (i.e. weeks worked), X. is a vector of exogenous variables, it is

an individual constant,     is a random component. This is simply

a model of a first—order Markov process with an individual component.

In this example, Sit is the control for heterogeneity,     is   the test

of state dependence. Such an equation cannot be estimated from cross—

sectional data because there will be more parameters than observations

since each individual is accorded his own intercept. Cross-sectional

estimates made without the inclusion of 5it will create upward bias

in the state dependence coefficient unless that part of      which is
                                                                         —19




correlated with           is fully captured by a linear combination of

the X's.

        By imposing restrictions on sit' one can estimate        from longi—

tudinal data. The individual component can be controlled using data

from previous years. The simplest assumption is to fix the individual

component over time, it =             To simplify the example further,

assume        =       = y and that Coy (U.t, U.i) = 0.      Simple differ--

encing eliminates the nuisance parameter (S.        Thus:


                               —
                                   x.1) +          - j—2    +     -
                        (X.


Of   course   all exogenous variables which are invariant over time are

also eliminated with this approach. Since the focus here is with the

state dependence parameter, y, this is a source of no concern. The

term              —      is   now negatively correlated with the error term,

so OLS results will be negatively biased. However, -2 and X1

can be used as instruments for this term and consistent results will be

generated. Note that absolutely no distributional restrictions are

imposed on the (S.    across   individuals since they are simply differenced

away.

                                              Heckman (l978a, l978b) has

developed an appealing and more general counterpart to this model for

the discrete case. Heckman's model transforms the dichotomous variable

into a continuous one by assuming the event occurs whenever a contin-

uous latent variable (y* ) crosses a threshold -- here assumed to be
                              it
                                                                                            —20




  zero., A dummy variable itd. is assumed to be one when Y. > 0 and zero
                                                                                     it
  otherwise.     Exogenous variables                  are allowed. Using a variance

  components error structure in Heckman's model, we can allow each indi-

 vidual to have his own             individual      component,              freely   varying over
 time for the moment. One case of Heckman's somewhat more general model

 is then:


                                k
           it      it t
                = X.          + E     y.
                                       it—j
                                           .   d.
                                                it—j
                                                       +    6. it      it
                                                                    + E.



 Setting   y.
            it—j
                   =   y
                        t—j
                             = 6, and assuming the 6. and the E• are
                              and 6,
                                i     it            1          it
 lid normal provides for an estimable model. Heckman offers a heuristic

 proof of identifiability which relies on the ordering of unconditional

probabilities. Suppose t = 2 and the Xs are constant over time. Then

 conditional on X. and 6., in the absence of state dependence, the
                                                                                             probability
of the sequence (1,0) (one in first period, zero in the second) is equal

to the probability of the sequence (0,1)                   .     In   the presence of state

dependence however P(1,0) < P(0,l). State dependence increases the

likelihood that persons who experience the event in the first period

will experience it again in the second. Therefore P(l,l) is increased

and P(l.,0) is reduced. P(0,l) on the other hand is unaffected since

the event was not experienced in the first period. This relation holds

for each individual; it must hold in aggregate. Thus simple run

sequences alone allow testing for the presence of state dependence

under particular functional form assumptions. Run sequences

covering more time periods allow testing of less restrictive functional

forms.
                                                                   —21




      Heckman suggests this approach can be usefully applied to a

variety of situations, including spells of unemployment. Several

features of the Heckman model make its usefulness in this and related

situations questionable. For purposes of this discussion, let us

divide early job history into only two states -- employed and not

employed. The fundamental problem is that the model breaks a con-

tinuous time event into artificial periods. When the chosen interval

is long relative to average length of stay in a state, there is

inevitably an assymetry in the definition of states. Often periods

are chosen to be one year long. A person is observationally reported

to have been in a particular state for that period if and only if he

or she experienced the state at any time during the period. In the

current example persons who experience time out of work any time

over a year receive l's, persons who do not receive 0's. Thus to be

in a state, one need experience only one week of non-employment, but

to be out of the state one need experience 52 weeks of employment.

If we simply re-define state 1 as having experienced any employment

a very different pattern of states emerges. Virtually everyone is

always in state 1. The presence or absence of state dependence may

depend on which state is accorded the special privilege of being

designated as the 1.

      On the other hand, if the periods are short relative to the

spells, then state dependence exists almost by assumption. If spells

tend to be longer than periods then the probability of being in the

state conditional on having been in it in the previous period is

high. Indeed, even if spells tend to be four or five times shorter
                                                                    —22




than the periods, one can predict with certainty that at least 20-25%

of persons who experience the event       one period will experience it

again in the next period simply because spells overlap.

      The arbitrary designation of time periods and states means an

observed data point (1,1) may represent a host of very different

histories. One person may have been in the state continuously for

two periods. Another may have been in it only a few days but those

days happened to overlap two periods. Still a third person might

have had several spells in the state in each period. These problems

represent more than just lost efficiency. They imply peculiar results.

The problem of overlapping spells is particularly troubling in the

current treatment. If spells last an average of 13 weeks, then one—

fourth of all spells in one year will overlap into another. This

implies that even if the spell has no long term effect, P(l,l) is

increased. Since the P(ll) >      P(l0)   there appears to be state de-

pendence where there is none. Although these problems are particu-

larly acute in the Heckinan formulation using years as periods, they

are also present to some decsree in the continuous model Presented

earlier, as we shall see below.

      One way to minimize these problems is to use point in time sampling.

At the start of each time period persons are interviewed and their current

state recorded. There is no asymetry in the definition of states in this

case. And if spells tend to be shorter than periods, overlap problems are

less serious. Of course, there is great loss of information in this approach.

More importantly since spells of employment frequently last several years,

the chosen periods may have to be quite long.
                                                                   —23




         Obviously, the notion of state dependence is a confusing one.

 In the next few paragraphs I present a non—tecimical discussion in

 an attempt to clarify some of the concepts. For a more technical

 treatment see Eliwood and Summers (in preparation) and Chamberlain

  (1978) and (1979).

         A complete analysis of heterogeneity and state dependence would

 treat each event in continuous time with a particular starting and

 ending date. We must separate two distinct types of state dependence.

 Once a person has entered a particular state —— say employment ——

 there is a tendency to remain there for some period of time. The

probability of remaining in some state is always higher than the prob—

ability of entering it from another if the time interval is short

enough. Virtually all persons who work one minute will work the next,

regardless of their underlying propensity to work over a month, year,

or decade. Traditionally this inertia has been captured with a Markov

model. Conditional on being in a state, a person has a certain escape

probability over a given period of time which may be quite independent

of his past history of spells or states.

        For example, a young black male teenager who is unemployed this

week could be far more likely to be unemployed next week than if he

had been employed this week simply because it is hard for young blacks

to find jobs. It could be that nothing about his work history or his

duration of current unemployment influences his ability to get

a job; yet being unemployed now indicates that he is less likely to be

employed next week. Unemployment doesn't change the individual per Se,
it   is just a difficult state for the teenager to escape. Heterogeneity
                                                                             —24




must imply that each individual has his or her own    escape   probability

from each state. Let us label this form of state dependence simple

Markov type persistence. The key notion is that it is what state one

is in that counts, not his past history. This persistence is unques-

tionably present in all human endeavors to some degree.

     If the force of escape from one or another state is influenced

by previous experience, then the second form of state dependence

experience dependence --   is present.   Exit probabilities may rise

or fall with time in the current spell. Work history may influence

the likelihood of employment when a teenager is unemployed. Experience

dependence corresponds most closely to the conception of state depen--

dence described in the literature. A person is actually changedr by

a particular event. Models which postulate that the accumulation

or depreciation of human capital or of information or even of signals

of worker quality alters the likelihood of work all imply an altered

force of escape from one state or another because of the individual!s

past experience. Ideally it is this form of state dependence that we

seek to capture.

      Simple Markov type persistence certainly is not uninteresting.

The distribution of forces of escape will strongly influence the con-

centration of unemployment across individuals. Macro-economic poli-

cies can alter escape rates and may provide great benefit to those

with otherwise very low rates of escape from unemployment. But if

experience dependence is not present, once a spell is over so is its

impact.

      Unfortunately the current models capture both Markov type

persistence and experience dependence simultaneously. Markov per-

sistence requires two heterogeneity parameters: the force of escape
                                                                                         —25




from each state. In the Heckman formulation this implies an indivi-

dual intercept 5. and an individual coefficient on the person's state

last period. This can be modeled (omitting the Xs):

                                  k
               = 6. + .d.     + E      y .di          + E
            it    1    1 it—i          t—j t—j              it
                                 j=2



Ii   the time periods are quite short, then 6. effectively captures the

Markov type probability of entering the 1 state; ip.,                     the   probability

of remaining in it.      With short periods dj captures the persons

most   recent state —— the "current state" while the state in "next period" is
being determined .     Markov   persistence virtually guarantees that .
will   be   positive as the period shrinks. Experience dependence requires
previous     job history --   not just the current state alter the probability
of entering or remaining in a state. Thus coefficients on dit2i dt3...

are non—zero. The             here capture this experience dependence. *
        Estimation   of this model is complicated by the fact that the

6. and , are highly correlated with d.                and the d.                since high
 1                                             it—i                      it—j
values of the individual components increase the likelihood that any

d..= 1. Estimating the equation assuming                    =    1'   may substantially

upward bias the 1t—j coefficients because the omitted term (                         —



is   positively correlated the d.t. Previous work using this model

have over—estimated experience dependence for two reasons. First,

the coefficient on the once lagged d.t inevitably reflects not only

experience dependence but also Markov persistence. Second, because

the coefficient on d.ti is constrained to equality across individuals,



*
  Actually p1 captures both the experience dependence from period t-l
plus the Markov type probability of remaining in state 1. This is of
no serious concern i the erios are short. If periods are long,
asyrr'etric definition oZ periods irplies a serious loss of efficcncy.
                                                                    —26




the         also capture some Markov type persistence. Heterogeneity has

simply not been properly controlled for.

      The continuous model described at the beginning of this section

also inadvertently captures some Markov type persistence in the state

dependence parameter. Suppose weeks worked is the dependent variable.

Then it is tempting to regard 5. as the expected weeks worked in year

t given an individual's two escape probabilities. However, even in

the presence of Markov persistence alone, the individual's expected

weeks worked will be greater if he begins the period working than if

he enters without work. Last year's weeks worked helps predict the

person's state at the end of that year and therefore at the start of

the current year. Anyone who worked 52 weeks in year t—l was working

at the start of year t. He will certainly be expected to have more

weeks worked in year t than an identical individual who begins year t

out of work. Even conditional on 5., weeks worked in one year is

correlated with weeks worked in the next because they help predict

the person's state at the start of the next period. The correct

model is thus:



      Y. =    5. + 1P.b. + yy.    + U.
       it      1    3it      it—i    it



Where b±t is now a dummy variable capturing the person's state at the

beginning of year t. In this model . 'and i. are reflective of the two

Markov escape probabilities and y is a measure of true experience

dependence. Even if we know c5. with certainty, we could not estimate

this equation because .   varies   with each individual and is highly

correlated with b. and Y.
                 it     it—i
                                                                                —27




      When we difference, however, the advantages of this continuous

formulation become clearer:



                     =
                          p(b b.ti)
                               -            +        -              +       —




There is only a bias problem for persons who change their beginning

state from one period to the next. Otherwise (b.              -   b.    ) = 0 and
                                                         it        it-i
p. vanishes. One cannot estimate the equation for these persons only

because h is correlated with U.
         IL                           itl    and conditioning on it will

introduce bias.* But in the present sample, nearly 90% of all persons

are observed in the same state at the start of any two consecutive

years, so the bias on y may be quite small.

      Including b. —       b.i     (using biti as an instrument) will reduce the

bias, but will not fully eliminate it. At the same time y will not fully

capture experience dependence because 6. and             are average yearly

probabilities which will in part reflect some experience dependence if

the underlying forces of escape are high. In the presence of these offset-

ting "biases", I regard y as a rough measure of experience dependence. Any

better measures require complete work histories and present serious

methodological problems.

      In this continuous model, identification was achieved with the

imposition of three important restrictions: 6it =
                                                              6i'       =   . and
Cov(U. , U.    ) =   0.    If any of these restrictions are false, spurious
     it   it—l


*
  Actually it can be proven that if we assume complete stationarity
(exclude all Xs), we can legitimately test the null hypothesis of no
state dependence by conditioning on bii b. =
                                                                                                                   —28


 state dependence can be generated. Probably the most serious concern

 for this group is non-stationarity of the individual components 6. and

 . If      weeks worked is the endogenous variable,                                              and . might be

 seen as that part of maturity, ability, or labor force attachment not

 captured by the Xs. Since these may grow or decay over time, it seems

 desirable to free up the individual components. Although we cannot

 let the components decay or grow at different rates, a model allowing

 6it =            and it =                  can be estimated using four years of data.

 We solve for                in the third year equations and substitute it into

 the fourth.



         Y. =
         13
                   A
                       3 i
                           6. + A3 b.
                                    i i3
                                         + y 3 Y.i2                + X,
                                                                      i3 3
                                                                                 + U.i3


 So


                                  1
           =      -b,13 +A 3(Y.
                       i                   13
                                                 -       y 3y.i2 -        i3 3
                                                                                  - U.
                                                                                        i3



Substituting into the equation for



              =                                      +             + A4                A4
                  A4i.        (b.4 —      b.3)                              i3 -       A       13i2 +



                                i4    4                   i3   3
                                                                    +u i4                 i3
                                                A3                                A3



 The effects of the first term have been discussed earlier. The only

other problem is that Y.                    is correlated with the error term; Y.                                  is
                                      i3                                                                      ii

not however, and serves as a natural instrument for Y. .                                                If   we constrain

  =       we can obtain estimates of y and                                             althou:hwe cannot tell which

is which since they enter the equation symetrically.
                                                                —29




      The restriction Cov(U., U.1) = 0 helps to highlight an important

distinction between state dependence and serial correlation. In the absence

of strong X's which change over time, there is no meaningful empirical

distinction between serial correlation and state dependence. However,

in the presence of X's the distinction is important. State dependence

implies that a change in X will cause a change in Y not only in the

present period but in future periods as well, because the initial

increase in Y induces future increases in Y. If serial correlation is

present, a change in X will have its full force immediately, with no

damped response into the future. In the case of unemployment, one

might ask whether a weak labor market now induces more unemployment

in the future even when the labor market regains its strength. If

the answer is yes, then state dependence may be present. Otherwise,

state dependence probably is not present. Unfortunately, it is likely

to be virtually impossible to capture both serial correlation and a

non—stationarity of individual specific constant. The only reasonable

approach I can see is to assume that both serial correlation and non-

stationarity are captured using a time specific coefficient on the

individual effect. These models then were used to estimate the long

run effects of unemployment.
                                                                    —30


    Empirical Results

          Before performing the more complicated tests for state dependence

described above, we might try to find "natural experiments" which would

reveal it much more simply. Local unemployment rates vary dramatically

over time and across locales. One natural experiment would be to

test whether persons who enter a weak labor market which later turns

strong, fare less well than those who enter a strong market which remains

strong. A unique feature of the "Parnes data" is the availability of

an area unemployment rate for most persons in each year. The rate for

small local areas about the size of an SMSA was derived from a 12—month

average of monthly local unemployment rates from the Current Population

Survey. Presumably the area unemployment is only slightly correlated with

individual effects, so with a few controls for individual characteristics,

we might simply test the importance of lagged unemployment rate in equations

with both current and lagged unemployment rates. If entering a weak labor

market left long—term scars, then the lagged rate should be negative and

significant. Unfortunately the area rate behaved very poorly. Even in

equations without the lagged rate, the coefficient on the current rate,

though usually of the correct sign, was rarely significant and was highly

unstable. When the lagged rate was included, the results were invariably

insignificant and occasionally even the sign on the current rate was perverse.

         Even though the area rates performed on this data, this experiment

should be performed on other samples if possible. Ultimately, a conclusion

resting on such a simple methodology would be the most compelling test for

the long—run effects of short—run macro policy.*



*  For one analysis of the long—run performance of cohorts entering weak
labor markets see Plantes (1968).
                                                                —31




      The techniques described in the previous section were applied to

weeks worked and to weeks unemployed. Weeks worked was chosen over

weeks not worked only because it seems conceptually easier to deal with.

Obviously since weeks not worked is simply 52 less weeks worked the

results would be identical except for the constant term and a sign

change on the coefficients of the exogenous variables if the alterna-

tive variable was used. There were 298 observations in the final

sample.

      There is a purely statistical problem associated with the use of

the various controls for heterogeneity in equations predicting weeks

worked or weeks unemployed. Both are limited dependent variables

they cannot exceed 52 nor fall below zero. The importance of the problem

is most evident in the case of weeks worked. As weeks worked approach

52 the estimate of state dependence will approach zero if controls are

made for heterogeneity. Statistically the limited variable will induce

an artificially negative correlation between once lagged weeks and the

error term. The result follows from the fact that if lagged weeks are

large the positive end of the distribution of the error term is likely

to be truncated. Intuitively once weeks worked approaches 52, regard-

less of the true strength of state dependence, the next years' weeks

cannot be pushed above 52. This problem is of greater concern in later

years when more and more of the young men approach 52 weeks employment.

There are well known methodologies to correct truncated dependent var-

iables. These typically do not apply to situations where a lagged

dependent variable is correlated with the error term for reasons other

than truncation. Heterogeneity further complicates the problem. No
                                                                   —32



attempt was made to develop the appropriate truncation corrections for

these equations. If we view the solution to the truncation problem as

the inclusion of a truncation correction variable, the problem is unlikely

to be particularly acute in the difference equations. In these situations

only the change in the truncation variable is omitted, and these changes

will be relatively small, particularly as persons approach 52 weeks.

Actually, persons who remain at 52 weeks in all three years impart no bias

at all in the absence of exogenous variables. They simply provide no infor-

mation since     —       =0   *

     The wage rate normally appears in labor supply equations. At the same

time human capital theory suggests that work experience will be associated

with higher wages as individuals invest in on the job training. To prevent

the wage variable from capturing any effects of increased investment, the

variable LWIt reflects the wage at the beginning of period t while WW equals

weeks worked during year t. To eliminate potential bias, the various equations

(because weeks worked in year t—l and therefore      alters the wage in year

t) the wage variables were always instrumented with LWIt       and LW.2 in
                                                           l

equations controlling for heterogeneity. All strictly exogenous variables

are measured at the beginning of each period.

     Table 7 presents the results of regressions of weeks worked and weeks

unemployed on the once lagged counterparts. The only correction for hetero-

geneity is the inclusion of a few personal characteristics like age, race,

and level of schooling. As anticipated, lagged values of weeks worked and

weeks unemployed have sizeable coefficients and small standard errors. As

in previous examples in this paper the results for weeks worked are far

more stable than those for weeks unemployed.


* See Myer & Wise (1979) for a treatment of the 52—week truncation problem
in the absence of heterogeneity. These authors do not use difference
equations.
                                                                        —33


                                          Table 5

                   Definitions of Variables Used in Regressions



       — Age at start of year t
AGEt

       — Area unemployment rate at start of year t


BLACK — Race dummy (1 = non—white)

       —
EMt        Employment dummy (1       employed) at start of year t


       — Log of wage at start of year t
Lwt

       —   Marriage dummy (1 = married) at start of year t
MARt

SCHOOL — Years of school completed


SMSAt —    SMSA   dummy (1 =   resides   in SMSA) at start of year t


SOUTHt — South dummy (1 =      resides   in South) at start of year t


       — Unemployment dummy (1 =
UNt                              unemployed) at start of year t

       —   Weeks worked in year t
ww
       —   Weeks unemployed in year t
wuNt

Dxxxx — Change in variable xxxx
                                                                        —34


                                      Table 6

        Means & Standard Deviations for Variables Used in Regressions




                                       MEAN             S.D.

AGE 2                                   18.8            1.98
AREA 2                                   4.33           1.72
AREA 3                                   4.22           1.85
AREA 4                                   4.59           1.93
BLACK                                     .383           .487
EM 2                                      .899           .301
EM 3                                      .932           .251
EM 4                                      .946           .225
LW 2                                      .673           .491
LW 3                                      .826           .442
LW 4                                      .947           .433
MAR 2                                     .292           .455
L&R 3                                     .446           .498
MAR 4                                     .507           .500
SCHOOL                                 11.2             1.51
SMSA 2                                    .634           .482
SMSA 3                                    .664           .473
SMSA 4                                    .668           .472
SOUTH 2                                   .446           .497
SOUTH 3                                   .432           .496
SOUTH 4                                   .422           .495
UN 2                                     .060            .238
UN 3                                      .050           .219
TiN 4                                    .037            .189
WW 1                                   43.4            12.77
WW 2                                   45.2            11.45
'WW 3                                  47.1             9.78
WW 4                                   47.2            10.64
WUN 1                                   2.53            6.28
WUN 2                                   2.88            7.27
WTJN 3                                  2.33            6.33
WUN 4                                   2.41            7.44
                                                                          —35


                                    Table 7

              Regressions of Weeks Worked and Weeks

                     Unemployed on Once Lagged Values

                                        DEPENDENT VARIABLES
                       Weeks Worked                      Weeks Unemployed
              WW4           WW3           WW2            WtJN4     WON3          WIJN2

              (t=4)         (t=3)         (t=2)         (t=4)      (t=3)         (t=2)

BLACK        —.442           .596        —1.54           .370      .328          1.25
             (1.31)        (1.16)         (1.40)        (.945)    (.847)         (.961)

SCHOOL         .348          .239             .541      —.364    —.497          —.073
              (.431)        (.384)            (.450)    (.310)    (.278)         (.306)

               .140          .048             .442      —.154    —.369            .005
AGE2
              (.326)        (.293)            (.355)    (.235)    (.211)         (.242)

SMSA        —2.55          —1.78            .910         .824    —.331           1.08
       t
             (1.33)        (1.19)         (l.37)        (.943)    (.867)         (.932)


SOUTHt      —.082            .298          3.48         —.768    —1.01          —2.23
            (1.38)         (1.26)         (2.33)       (1.00)     (.914)        (103)

            2.94             .667          1.45        —1.25     —1.11          —1.36
MARt
            (1.22)         (1.09)         (1.43)        (.875)    (.789)         (.967)


AREAt         .193          —.236         —.464         —.148      .042           .356
             (.308)         (.291)            (.372)    (.222)    (.211)         (.255)

              .686          2.54           1.31         —.741     1.00          —1.18
LWt
            (1.64)         (1.54)         (1.49)       (1.16)    (1.12)         (1.01)

              .378           .399              .354
             (.062)         (.046)            (.049)

WUN                                                      .359      .163           .300
      t—1
                                                        (.067)    (.051)         (.065)

SEE         9.54            8.44          10.1          6.87      6.12           6.89

R2            .23            .28               .25       .18       .10            .13
                                                                       —36



       When all years are estimated as a system and the coefficient on

lagged weeks unemployed is constrained to equality over all three years, the

coefficient is .27; the coefficient on weeks worked, .39. The results again

suggest substantial persistence of early experience. Still, even without

controlling for heterogeneity, the coefficient on weeks unemployed is low.

Even if this were the correct estimate of state dependence, a 26—week spell

of unemployment would induce less just two extra weeks of unemployment two

years later. An equal spell without work would induce a four week spell two

years later according to these results. With appropriate corrections for

heterogeneity, state dependence estimates should fall to even lower levels.

       One   control   for heterogeneity is differencing. This eliminates any

stationary person effects. The second is to include the state at the begin-

ning of each period. Difference equation results are displayed on Tables

8 and 9.     In equations (1) and (2), twice lagged weeks unemployed and weeks

employed, and once lagged lag wage, and beginning state dummies, serve as

the principle instruments to the lagged differences on weeks unemployed,

weeks worked, lag wage, and beginning states respectively. The equations

also include changes in residence, marital status, and area unemployment rate.

The personal characteristic variables remain to capture any systematic changes

in the dependent variables.

      Efficiency can be gained, however, with the use of three stage

least squares because both error terms contain the residuals from the third

year. Equations (3) and (4) are the unconstrained three stage least squares

results. For these equations weeks worked and weeks unemployed in the first

year were used as the primary instruments. Finally, in equation (5) the

coefficients on all variables shown were constrained to equality across the

two years.
                                                                              —37




                                             Table   8

                    Difference Equation Results for Weeks Unemployed




                                      METHOD AND DEPENDENT VARIABLE
                              IV                   3SLS**         Constrained 3SLS**
                      (1)           (2)          (3)      (4)           (5)
VARIABLE
                     DWUN4         DWUN3       DWUN4     DWUN3     DWUN4, DWUN3

DSMSA
          t          —4.51          0.28       —4.41      0.48         —1.89
                     (1.78)        (1.94)       (1.88)   (1.94)         (1.29)

DSOUTHt              —2.75          2.18       —2.89      2.07         —0.26
                     (4.99)        (4.61)       (4.91)   (4.59)         (3.32)

DMARt                —0.43          1.30       —0.78      1.33           0.69
                     (1.57)        (1.24)       (1.65)   (1.24)         (0.97)

DAREAL               —0.68          0.06       —0.64      0.07         —0.35
                     (0.36)        (0.46)      (0.38)    (0.46)         (0.28)

DLWt                  7.34          1.12        7.24      0.51           1.15
                     (3.07)        (2.20)      (5.15)    (1.99)         (1.77)

DUN
      t               2.06         —2.45       —2.21     —2.14         —1.39
                     (2.67)        (2.20)      (6.99)    (2.20)         (2.04)


DWUN                 —0.05         —0.002      —0.09     0.001         —0.04
          tl         (0.07)        (0.102)     (0.07)    (0.10)         (0.09)




Standard errors in parentheses

All equations include year dummies, AGE2, BLACK, and SCHOOL.
*    Instruments    include all past and future values of
                                                             t—2' WUNt_2.
**    Instruments    include all past and future values of SMSA, SOUTH, MAR, AREA,

     l' WUN1.
                                                                                —38




                                             Table 9

                    Difference Equation Results for Weeks Worked




                                         METHOD AND DEPENDENT VARIABLE
                            IV*                      3SLS**        Constrained 3SLS**
                    (1)            (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)
VARIABLE                                                              DWW4, DWW3
                    DWW4           DWW3         DWW4        DWW3



DSMSAt              4.36           4.54          5.61       3.77          3.97
                   (2.66)         (2.60)        (2.75)     (2.58)        (1.79)



DSOUTHt            13.75           1.64         15.57       1.75          7.31
                   (7.50)         (6.17)        (7.18)     (6.10)        (4.56)



DMARt              —0.69          —1.75         0.76      —1.59         —1.22
                   (2.36)         (1.68)        (2.40)     (1.67)        (1.35)



DAREAt              0.47          —0.12         0.48      —0.12          0.25
                   (0.53)         (0.62)        (0.54)     (0.62)        (0.39)


DLW                 1.06          —1.98        —3.14      —1.06         —0.54
     t
                   (4.54)         (2.68)        (7.72)     (2.65)        (2.39)


DEM                 3.54           4.92         3.75       5.34          4.63
     t
                   (3.18)         (2.40)        (7.35)     (2.39)       (2.22)



DWWt1               0.19           0.12         0.08       0.14          0.13
                   (0.10)         (0.08)       (0.25)      (0.08)       (0.07)




Standard errors In parentheses.

All equations include year dummies, AGE2, BLACK, and SCHOOL.
*   Instruments   include all past and future values of SMSA, SOUTH, MAR, AREA,


  t—2' WUNt2, LW1,
** Instruments include all        past and future values of SMSA, SOUTH, MAR, AREA,

    W1, WUN1, LW2, 2
                                                                    —39




      The results in the unemployment equations are quite striking. All

evidence of state dependence is eliminated. The coefficients on the

lagged change in weeks unemployed are rarely positive and never signif i-

cant. Indeed, there is even a hint in the results of negative state

dependence. Persons with unusually high unemployment one year will

have unusually low unemployment the next. Note also the poor performance

of the change in beginning state dummies, DUNt. The standard errors

are always quite high and in four of five cases the sign is incorrect.

Very few persons change states so DUNt is virtually always zero and its co-

efficient is derived using instrumental variables. These facts no doubt ex-

plain a large part of the perverse results. Nonetheless there appears to be

relatively little Markov persistence in unemployment not captured by 6.

Even without controlling for non—stationarity or serial correlation then,

persistence of unemployment —— as distinguished from non—employment —— can

be entirely attributed to heterogeneity not state dependence.

      The results for weeks worked are quite different. Although corrections

for heterogeneity substantially reduce the coefficient on the lagged

dependent variable, some experience dependence remains. The experience

dependence parameter varies from .08 to .19 across years and specifications.

In the constrained 3SLS equation its value is .13 and is nearly twice its

 standard error in spite of being derived using instrumental variables. Un-

 less the results are due to serial correlation, this coefficient indicates

that persons who work an extra 30 weeks one year will work an additional 4

 during the next as a direct result of this extra employment.

        There is also strong evidence for the presence of Markov persis-

 tence. On average, persons who are working at the beginning of a year

 are expected to work an additional 5 weeks more in that   year   than if
                                                                      —40




 they had been out of work. Excluding this parameter does seriously upward

 bias the experience dependence parameter. In the constrained 3SLS equation

with this omitted, the dependence parameter is 0.21.

        In sharp constrast to the results for unemployment then, controls

for heterogeneity do not eliminate the experience dependence estimate and

the beginning state variable performs well. This is perhaps the most

conclusive evidence that the retrospective unemployment rates have little

meaning. Unemployment as measured here does not beget unemployment.

Non—employment begets non—employment. Or, even more convincingly,

employment begets employment. The results suggest real gains from work.

       One disappointment in the results is the poor showing of the

exogenous variables. Most were insignificant in the constrained

three stage equations. The SMSA, SOUTH and MAR variables were not

expected to perform well as few persons moved or got married. But the

performance of the area variable was unanticipated. Its sign was often

incorrect; its magnitude was usually low; and its standard error was always

high. The lack of strong exogenous variables prevents certain isolation

of serial correlation and state dependence. It is possible that the results

are evidence only that shocks persist not that a terminated spell has

lasting effects. Corrections for non—stationarity, however, should cap-

ture much of the effects of serial correlation.

       A second surprise was the very weak performance of the wage in

all equations and specifications. Even in the equations which don't

control for heterogeneity (Table 7) the coefficients on LW are quite

small and never significant. At most a 10% increase in wage increases

weeks worked by a trifling 2 days In the difference equations, the

standard errors are inevitably quite high and most signs are incorrect.

Using the change in wage rather than the absolute level does little to
                                                                    —41




 improve the performance of this measure. Although perplexing, these

 results are strongly verified in the next section. Measured wage of

 course may be quite different from potential wage if the youngster is

 investing in on—the—job training.

      Non—stationarity because of some forms of serial correlation or

changes in work attachment might be a source of serious bias in the results.

Sharply changing employment rates resulting from rising or decaying hetero-

geneity unrelated to employment could be spuriously picked up as experience

dependence. Including age, race, marital status, and an intercept in the

difference equations captures systematic changes and helps to minimize the

problem. Corrections for non—stationarity requires four years of data. Thus,

non—stationarity can only be tested between the third and fourth year.

      Table 10 presents the results for weeks unemployed and wteks worked

designed to isolate the effects of non—stationarity and state dependence.

Once again the unemployment equation behaves badly, WUN3 failing even to

change sign. The weeks worked equation, however, performs surprisingly

well. Although the standard error in the twice lagged weeks worked is

large, so too is its magnitude. The coefficients imply a non-stationarity

parameter (ratio of the individual effects in year three and four) of 0.76

and a state dependence parameter of 0.11. (although the specification

allows either parameter to be 0.76 or 0.11, it is clear from context

which is which.)   The heterogeneity parameter does show some decay

 (capturing some serial correlation no doubt), but the experience

dependence parameter is nearly identical to that derived in the con-

strained 3SLS specification.
                                                                  —42
                                   Table 10

                  Instrumental Variable Equations Allowing

                  Non—Stationarity of Individual Component

                                      DEPENDENT VARIABLE
                                     Ww4             WIJN4
SMSA 4                               4.42            —4.03
                                    (2.71)           (2.08)
SMSA 3                              —5.67             4.70
                                    (2.59)           (1.99)

SOUTH 4                             15.37            —3.92
                                    (6.65)           (4.96)

SOUTH 3                            —16.97             4.47
                                    (6.84)           (3.10)

MAR 4                                2.01            —2.76
                                    (2.42)           (1.75)

MAR 3                                1.23             0.25
                                    (2.29)           (1.66)

AREA 4                               0.30             0.04
                                    (0.50)           (0.39)

AREA 3                               0.31             0.08
                                    (0.54)           (0.39)

LW4                                 -7.13            11.96
                                    (6.67)           (5.23)

LW3                                  1.65            —7.08
                                    (4.34)           (3.45)

                                     3.64              ——
DEM 4
                                    (3.01)

Ww 3                                 0.87              ——

                                    (0.19)

WW 2                                —0.084
                                    (0.098)

DUN 4                                                —0.04
                                                     (3.03)

WUN 3                                                 0.43
                                                     (0.20)

WLTN   2                                              0.081
                                                     (0.072)
                                    10.5              7.84
SEE
Equations also Include BLACK, SCHOOL, AGE 2.

Instruments include SMSA 4, SMSA 3, SOUTH 4, SOUTH 3, MAR 4, MAR 3, AREA 4, AREA   3,
BLACK, SCHOOL, AGE2, 2' WW], WUN2, WUN1, LW3, LW2, EM3, EM2 UN3, UN2.
                                                                   —43




        This analysis illustrates the critical importance of controlling

for heterogeneity. Controls eliminated all of the apparent state depen-

dence in unemployment equations. They reduced by two-thirds the depen-

dence parameter in the weeks worked equations. Previous studies which

used only additional demographic variables to control for heterogeneity

have seriously overstated the true long-term impact of teenage unemploy-

ment on future labor market performance.

        The conclusion then is that working does have some benefit beyond

the current year. Someone working an extra 30 weeks this year will

perhaps work an extra 4 in the next. This result does not distinguish

between voluntary and involuntary time out of work. Work may improve

skills, open new options for employment, or simply increase work

attachment.

        Nonetheless, in absolute terms the long—run impact is relatively

small. Even 30 weeks out of work has virtually no impact after one or

two years. For this group of youngsters there is no evidence of a long-

term cycle of recurring periods without employment induced by an early

episode out of work. Experience dependence yes, but a serious "permanent

scar" no.

        These estimates are not perfect. There are potential biases in

both   directions.   Nevertheless, I find the evidence that teenage non-

employment exhibits short-term state dependence quite compelling. There

are, however, three important caveats. First, this evidence is from a

group of teenagers who entered the labor force in extremely favorable

times. In this period it may have been the case that jobs were readily

available for most youngsters. The seventies has brought a substantially
                                                                 —44




worse job outlook. In this environment the effects of employment and

the lack of it may be very different. Second, this is not a random

sample of young persons. Some of the long term non—employed may have been

excluded from the sample. These persons may gain and lose more from

being in or out or work. Finally, the sample here is too small to

separate effects on specific groups. It may be that one can isolate

stronger effects among blacks, or low income persons.

     These concerns notwithstanding, the current evidence is clear.

Teenage non-employment has real but short lived adverse effects on

teenage employment prospects.
                                                                            —45




III. THE IMPACT OF WORK EXPERIENCE ON WAGES

      The second potential cost of being out of work is that the lost

experience will translate into reduced wages. In the long run, reduced

wages could be a far more important cost of unemployment. Lost exper-

ience could travel with the worker over his life. Each job may serve

as a stepping stone to another. Lost experience at least delays the

start of the young worker's climb. Worse, it may track the worker into

a less desirable chain of jobs. This final section attempts to separate

the cost of lost experience from differences in individual earning cap-

acity correlated with work experience.

      Assessing the true impact of work experience in a particular year

apart from heterogeneity is a very complex problem. The triangular

structure of wages whereby work experience influences wages which in

turn influences future work experience, in combination with the direct

experience dependence from work experience creates a hopelessly tangled

collection of heterogeneity terms with coefficients which vary over time.

      The problems can best be understood by starting with a multi -

equation system. Let LW.t be the natural log of wages of individual i
at the start of year t,              a vector of exogenous variables, and WW

be weeks worked in year t. One model of wages and employment is:


                          t-l
(1)   LW. = X.
        it     it t   +
                          j=l
                                a      WW.
                                    tt—j lt—j
                                                + A.
                                                    it + c.it

(2)   WWj, =          +
                                it_i    +
                                             LW.t   +
                                                        6it   +
                                                                  tbt   +
                                                                                    —46




       Here equation (1) is just a straightforward human capital type

wage equation; equation (2) is just the labor supply relation from

the previous section.                 is a heterogeneity term in the wage equation,

.it   and   'I'.
              it
                   are the individual component in the weeks worked model.

Note that tt—j is almost certainly not going to be constant across

weeks worked in different years since the flattening profile suggests

diminished investment over time.

       Only lagged weeks worked appear in the wage equation. Thus the

system is triangular and a reduced form equation can be derived in a

straight—forward fashion. If we assume                  =           = c5   and        =

and if we condition on WWj1, the reduced form equation will have the

following form.




                                                            tilt
                   t                           t                            t
       LW. =
            it     .
                        ijj
                       X. .A. + B NW. + C ó, + E D 'Y.d.
                                    t ii      ti    .
                                                                   + E X. + E F U. +
                                                                     ti             tit

                           t
                           Z G c.
                          j =2
                                    tit


The coefficient on WW.1 in the correctly estimated reduced form equation

captures the full impact of early unemployment on the wage in year t.

Previous authors have estimated equations of this type in the past but

have included few controls for heterogeneity or Markov persistence.

       The reduced form equation helps point out the dual biases present

in OLS estimation of this equation. Early experience may be correlated

with the individual component in wages, A., ("abilitytt), upward biasing

the coefficient on NW. .             This   bias grows over time because A. affects
                                                                                i
                               il
                                                                   —47




wages each year which alters future weeks worked which in turn influences

future wages. At the same time, early experience is correlated with

later experience in part because of the individual components of exper-

ience, ES., 'Y, ("work attachment" and "ease of finding a job"). Since

experience yields positive benefits, the coefficient on WWj is

further biased because early experience inappropriately captures some

of the effects of later experience. This effect also grows over time,

      each year brings new experience correlated with first year's

experience.   (In practice, of course, most workers eventually hit roughly

52 weeks employment each year so the correlation is not perpetual.)

Thus, previous estimates of the long—term impacts of early employment

experience may be severely biased. One other feature of the equation

should be noted. The equation includes all X's between year 2 and

year t. Exclusion of these is yet another source of potential bias.

      Yet even this rather complicated rL-todel leaves much to be desired.

Human capital theories su';gest persons may se]ect di:fc.rent shaped pro-

files. Persons with early unemployment and non—employment may have

flatter schedules. Blue-collar workers have slower wage growth than

their white—collar counterparts. If the return to experience is sys—

teinatically lower for persons lacking some early work experience, the

coefficient will be further biased upward. Similarly, the individual

components may not be stationary over time, introducing even more bias.

      Even ignoring the inadequacies with the current model, however,

it is virtually impossible to get consistent estimates of the coeffi-

cient on weeks worked in the first year. Simple differencing does not
                                                                   —48




 eliminate the heterogeneity components since the coefficients on all

 are changing over time. Equally troubling, WW.1 is fixed over time.

 Differencing yields only the change in its coefficient, not its over—

all magnitude. The only hope for estimation is to find an instrument

correlated with WW.
                  ii but partially uncorrelated with 3., '1'., or A.. One
                                                       1   1      1

such instrument might be the area unemployment rate in year 1. It is

not currently in the equations and the inclusion of race and residence

dummies along with schooling may eliminate most of its correlation with

the individual effects. Unfortunately, we have already seen that the

area rate performed poorly in weeks worked equations. Thus it is an

unlikely instrument.

      Although isolation of the full long-term impact of non-employment

in this data set is infeasible then, a more modest attempt can be made

to isolate the impact of heterogeneity. Let us concentrate solely on

equation (1), the regression of log wages on an individual constant and

weeks worked in previous years. If we treat weeks worked in each year

as exogenous, then simple differencing eliminates the nuisance parameter

and leaves the last weeks worked parameter intact. Thus,


                         t-i
(1)
       it    it t
      LW. = X.   '   +   Z t• .ww t—j.
                         •l
                                            + A. + .
                                                 1    it

(1') LWt — LW±1      =
                         X8'      —
                                      x1'_                 — _—j     i—    +




                       tt—l
                               WW.
                                 it-i
                                        +E.it   -E.it—i
                                                                    —49




      As long as the weeks worked are strictly exogenous,        11the coef-

ficient on the weeks worked in year t-l represents its impact in that

year. One can also difference wages separated by two years. In that

case, the coefficients on the last two years of experience could be

captured.

      The exogeneity assumption however is highly suspect. Even if

we assume that t—l was uncorrelated with £it the presence of LWt1

in the labor supply equation determining          guarantees that

Cov(WW1, it—l > 0.         OLS estimates of the difference equation will

then understate the true impact of        on wages. In the previous labor

supply results the coefficient on LWt1 was often small, occasionally of

wrong sign and invariably insignificant. Still, without stronger evidence of

exogeneity, we must be concerned that OLS estimates will be biased.

      There are two reasonable approaches to this problem. First Sims

(1972) has suggested a very simple methodology to test for exo-

geneity ——   simply   regress the dependent variable on all past and future

values of the independent variable. Strict exogeneity in the absence

of heterogeneity implies that the coefficient on future values will
be zero; those on past values, non—zero. If causality is uni—directional,

past values of the independent variable will influence the dependent

variable, but the current dependent variable will not influence future

values of the independent variables. Unfortunately, even if the indepen-

dent variable is strictly exogenous, in the presence of heterogeneity

the expectation of the future coefficients will be non-zero if the

future values are correlated with any part of the heterogeneity not

captured by other variables in the equation. (See Chamberlain (1979)).
                                                                 —50




 The common sense notion is that any variable partially correlated with

 an omitted stationary heterogeneity term will have a non—zero coeffi-

 cient even in equations where the variable would otherwise have a zero

 coefficient, because it will be serving as a proxy for the omitted

 variable. If weeks worked in year 2 is capturing heterogeneity in

 the year 2 wage equation, it ought to capture the same heterogeneity

in year 1. Essentially, Sim's is a test for true causality as opposed to

spurious correlation due to endogeneity or omitted variables.

     If, as seems likely, the Sim's test fails, we are forced to seek

an instrument for it-l in equation (1'). If we assume that impact

work experience in some year j raises wages in years t—l and t bya

equal amount, a     = a     and we can withdraw WW. from the equation
               tj      t—lj                      iJ
and use it to instrument WW. .   WW.
                           it      it—2 for instance, might serve as
an effective instrument.

     Many authors have previously sought to remove heterogeneity or

"ability" bias from wage equations. (See for example Chamberlain (1978a),

Griliches and Mason (1972)). These efforts typically were not aimed at

deriving the coefficient on work experience as distinct from age, nor

did they focus particularly on the very early years of experience. None-

theless it would be surprising in light of all the previous efforts if

we did not find a substantial effect of work experience on wages.

Empirical Results in Wage Equations

     To roughly replicate previous studies of the effects of unemployment

on wages, wage equations were first estimated for 1975 and 1973 with no

experience variables included other
                                                                 —51




 than weeks worked in the first year. The data base was the same

 sample of young men who left high school in 1965 to 1967. The results

were similar to those reported by other authors. The coefficient on

    was .00452 on 1975 and .00478 in 1973. Both coefficients were

quite significant. If the values actually reflected the true effect

of early non-employment on future wages, the impact is staggering.

Youngsters missing out on 26 weeks employment experience in their

first year out of school are left with 12 percent lower wages even

ten years later! Cumulated over a lifetime, the cost could be enor-

mous. These results are not purged of heterogeneity, of course. The

large size of the possible losses thus makes the separation of the

true impact quite important.

      At the very least, the results do show dramatic persistence in

wages for persons with early time not employed. Even if non—employment

had no important impact of its own, early unemployment can be used

to single out persons who will do poorly in the future. They could

be the recipients of special aid. The result is also important

because it suggests early experience could be used as a signal of

"quality" or "ability" by employers. This is not to say that employers

in 1975 look at what happened in 1966, but employers in 1967 or 1968

could. And employers in the next year can look back to 1968 and so

forth. In a market with great uncertainty, those persons who genuinely

tried but failed to get work may be inadvertently classed as poor

workers. It may take these workers some real time to recover from

this early adverse signal.

      The issue at hand, however, is whether this early experience or
                                                               —52




lack thereof actually has ill effects. The previous section described

why the only possible hope of capturing the very long-term effects

was with an effective instrument on WW. The area unemployment rate

in year 1 was suggested. As expected, however, instrumental variable

equations behaved poorly. The results were erratic; standard errors,

very high. Thus, I chose to focus more narrowly on the effects of

experience in the first four years of experience.

      Table 11 presents regression results of wages at the end of each

of the first four full years out of school as a function of weeks

worked in previous years. These were estimated as seemingly unrelated

equations since the error terms will almost certainly be correlated.

With only 271 observations, the results are plagued by rather high

standard errors. Nonetheless the coefficients on past weeks worked are

quite sizeable. Furthermore, the results seem quite stable until

year 4 when collinearity seems to be excessive. The numbers suggest

that each year of experience is associated with a 10-20 percent wage

increase in these first four years. Although reserving some concern

for the low significance of some estimates, I shall concentrate on

determining whether these high point estimates appear to be the result

of heterogeneity or state dependence.

      The Sims test for true causality is to include future work

experience in current wage equations. Strict exogeneity implies

zero coefficients on future variables so that the coefficients on

2' WW3, and WW4 would be zero in the LW2 regression; WW and WW4,

in the LW3 regression, and so forth. (Recall that LW is wage at the
                                                                             —53




                           ThBLE 11 :    Wage Equations for the

                             First Four Years Out of School




                                              - Dependent Variables -


                 LWAGE2             LWACE3         LWAGE4          LWAGE5
                  (t=2)             (t=3)           (t=4)          (t=5)


SCHOOL            .040              .051            .046           .060
                  (.017)            (.014)          (.015)         (.014)

                  .040              .038            .018           .027
AGE2
                  (.017)            (.011)          (.012)         (.011)

BLACK           —.114             —.125           —.124           —.070
                  (.053)            (.045)         (.048)          (.045)

SMSA             .135              .145            .171            .138
    t
                 (.048)             (.039)         (.041)          (.038)

SOUTH           —.275             —.218           -.197           —.264
          t
                 (.055)            (.045)          (.047)          (.044)

MAR
      t
                 .078              .105            .078            .085
                 (.046)            (.033)          (.035)          (.034)

AREA
    t
                 .010              .005           —.003           —.012
                 (.013)            (.009)          (.008)          (.007)

                 .0030             .0036           .0034           .0049
                 (.0019)           (.0017)         (.0019)         (.0017)

                                   .0028           .0035           .0010
                                   (.0018)         (.0021)         (.0020)

                                        ——         .0043           .0019
WW3
                                                   (.0020)         (.0022)

WW4                                                                .0017
                                                                   (.0017)

INTERCEPT       — .675            —.742           - .433          -.487
                 (.258)            (.221)          (.237)          (.226)


All equations estimated as seemingly unrelated equations.
                                -
                                                                 —54




beginning of year t or end of year t-l). Table 12 displays wage equa-

tions for years 2,3, and 4, when weeks worked in year 1 to 4 are included

in each regression. The results are striking. In spite of a high degree

of multicollinearity, in each of the equations the coefficients on past

experiences remain strongly positive. The coefficients on future ex-

perience tend to be small or of incorrect sign. Incredibly neither

endogeneity nor heterogeneity may seriously bias the coefficients on

2' WW3 or WW4. A likelihood ratio test that the coefficients on future

values are zero is not rejected.    Twice the natural log of the likelihood

ratio is 7.7 while the critical value of x(6) is 12.6. A similar test

that the coefficients on past values are zero is overwhelmingly rejected.

(Likelihood ratio =   126.3.)
      This evidence for the one—way causality of weeks worked on wages

is quite surprising, although the very weak performance of the wage

variables in the labor supply equation portended this exogeneity. The

minimal bias resulting from heterogeneity is perhaps even more remark-

able. It should be remembered though, that these results in no way

indicate that heterogeneity is absent. They show instead that the

portion of heterogeneity correlated with 2' WW3 and WW, is fully

captured by WW1, SCHOOL, AGE, and the other controls. The coefficients

on these latter variables are presumably biased by the presence of

heterogeneity.

      The very powerful conclusion from this exercise is that at least

in these four years the coefficients are a good reflection of the

causal relationship between experience and wages. Not surprisingly the

difference results confirm these findings. Differencing eliminates any
                                                                                  —55




                      TABLE 12     :       Wage Equations with Weeks Worked

                    in First Four Years Included in All Regressions*




                                       -   Dependent Variables -
                       LWAGE                   LWAGE        LWAGE
                               2
                                                      3          4
                       (t=2)                   (t=3)         (t=4)



WW1                    .0031                   .0036         .0034
                       (.0021)                 (.0018)       (.0019)

WW2                   —.0005                   .0025         .0032
                       (.0026)                 (.0022)       (.0023)

WW3                    .0014                   .0014         .0047
                       (.0031)                 (.0026)       (.0028)

WW4                   —.0019                 —.0015          .0009
                       (.0026)                 (.0022)       (.0024)




*
    All   equations include SCHOOL, AGE, BLACK, SMSAt SOUTHt,
                                                                              AREAt.
All equations estimated as seemingly unrelated equations.
                                                                —56




stationary effects correlated with weeks worked. If heterogeneity were

a serious problem we should expect the coefficients on work experience

accumulated between the differenced years' wages to fall. At the same

time, endogeneity would induce a negative correlation between this

experience and the error term causing a further fall.

      Since the coefficients in year 4 showed that multi-collinearity

may be excessive, I will concentrate on the first three years' wage

equations. (The results for year four are quite similar.) Table 14

presents the estimated coefficients in three difference equations:

In the first column, first year wages are subtracted from those of the

second year. The second column presents results of the regressions

on the difference in wages between years 2 and 3. The final column

provides differences between years 3 and 1. Once again, the data

strongly suggest that heterogeneity and endogeneity are relatively

small parts of the measured association between experience and wages

in the second and third years. The impact of weeks worked in year 1

is neutralized in all of the difference equations as would be predicted,

since the coefficient represents the difference in the effects of exper-

ience on wages in two future years. The coefficient on weeks worked

in the second year is effectively zero in the second equation, again

as predicted. However, the coefficients on weeks worked in the second

and third years in equations where those effects were not differenced

out remain quite large. The coefficients are much more stable across

equations than they were in Table 11. Their magnitude is if anything

greater and their significance is increased. The results are thus highly

supportive df a causal relationship between experience and wages. The
                                                                                     —57




                            TABLE 13     Differenced Wage Equations*




                                              -
                                                   Dependent Variables -
                            -
                  LWAGE3        LWAGE2     LWAGE4 - LWAGE3          LWAGE4 - LWAGE2

                   (t1 =   3, t2 = 2)       (t1 =    4,   t2 = 3)   (t1 =   4,   t2 = 2)




WW                    .0002                       —.0001                   .0002
    1
                       (.0019)                     (.0016)                 (.0020)

                      .0035                        .0006                   .0040
                       (.0022)                     (.0020)                 (.0025)

WW                                                 .0041                   .0040
                                                   (.0021)                 (.0021)




*
    All   equations include: SCHOOL, AGE2, BLACK, SMSAt1I SMSAt2I SOUTh,

                                 SOUTh, MARti MARt2. AREAt1. AREAt2.
All equations estimated as seemingly unrelated equations.
                                                                 —58



increase in the significance is reassuring that the effects of experience

are not purely spurious.

           One possible problem may be that we have tested the wrong

model. Jobs with the highest wage growth may have very stable employ-

ment requirements. This model would imply that if a Sims type test was

performed using the change in wages on the left hand side, future weeks

worked would enter significantly since workers would presumably remain

with their jobs. Note also that past weeks worked would likely enter

significantly since there is a good chance that persons with good jobs

now, as measured by wage growth, had them in the previous year. Neither

result was prominent in the data. Moreover, it is quite possible that

the largest single year wage changes will be associated with job changes.

Presumably some young men find new jobs offering better pay. The movers

probably have fewer weeks worked than the stayers. These persons down-

ward bias the results.

      The results presented here strongly suggest that in the first few

years out of school, experience increases wages by as much as 10—20 percent

per year. The biggest cost of being out of work therefore may well be

the wages. These data do not reveal whether this is the result

of the accumulation of general or specific human capital or even

if they merely reflect signaling. Nor do they reveal what skills

might be gained from early experience. They do reveal, however, that

lost work experience really can be quite costly.

      These data do not allow good tests for a catch-up effect. It

is possible that the loss in wages due to previously lost experience

is compensated for when the individual finally gets a steady job.

Interaction terms simply make the results unstable. This is an important
                                                                —59




possibility which merits attention in future work.

      The results here imply that early experience increases wages

by 10-20 percent. I regard these wage equations as preliminary results

requiring verification from other sources. Still, they provide surprisingly

strong evidence that at least in the short run, work experience really

does make a difference. Just how long the effect persists requires

other analyses. Ultimately, the final conclusion awaits the availability

of a good area unemployment rate measure so that WW1 can be properly

instrumented.
                                                                   -60




           Conclusion: Permanent Scars or Temporary Blemishes?



       The first part of this paper examined the early pattern of labor

market performance of young men. Several important conclusions arise.

       •The early years of labor market experience are times
      of substantial change. Employment rates rise, as do
      participation rates. There is considerable evidence of
      weak labor force attachment early in many young men's
      careers.

       •Although the distinction between time out of the labor
      force and time unemployed is conceptually appealing, the
      division is not accurately captured in this retrospective
      data. Unemployment rates behave erratically over time for
      this group. All of the results in this paper suggest that
      time not employed is a far better measure of the labor market
      performance of young men.

       •Even though there is a general improvement in employment
      rates for these young men over time, early labor market
      patterns persist. Young men with poor records early will
      typically have comparatively poor records later.

      The next section revealed that much of the persistence in employ—

ment patterns could be directly attributed to heterogeneity.

      • Controls for heterogeneity eliminate at least two-thirds
      of the observed persistence in employment, but evidence of
      experience dependence remains. That is, even controlling
      for individual differences in the propensity to work, exper-
      ience dependence remains. However the absolute magnitude of
      the effect is small. Even a six month spell out of work
      tends to generate only an additional 3 to 4 weeks out of
      work one year later. There is no evidence in this data that
      time out of work sets off a long term cycle of recurring
      "non—employment."

      Finally, the effects of work experience on wages was examined.

Apparently, neither heterogeneity nor endogeneity induce important

biases in the estimated impact of work experience in the second, third,

and fourth years out of school on the wages of youngsters in the first
                                                                     —61




 few years afterward. The impact of early experience on wages is quite

 large.

          • Early work experience has a sizeable impact on wages.
          Controlling for individual effects, experience in the
          second, third, or fourth years out of school tends to be
          associated with wage increases of between 10 and 20 per-
          cent a year.

          The data did not allow testing for the possibility of catch-up,

 nor to test how long these wage differentials persist.

          There is a strong asymmetry in the problem of isolating the real

 effects of early labor market experience on future employment and wages

 from the differences in wages and employment that are the natural result

of differences in people within the labor market. There are many reasons

to expect unobserved differences in people will be correlated both with

employment and wages. Thus a finding suggesting that early experience

has real impact is always suspect. On the other hand, a finding of no

impact is considered quite convincing since the deck was stacked against

such a conclusion. The results in this paper lead me to the former more

suspect finding. Early experience really does seem to make a differ-

ence, particularly on wages. Even after rather elaborate controls for

heterogeneity, both wages and labor supply seem to be directly related

to past work experience in the short run, although the effects on labor

supply is quite small.

      As with all research, many caveats remain. This research was con-

ducted on a small select sample in a period of tight labor markets,

quite unlike the present situation. it may be that these findings are

peculiar to this group or this era. No separate analysis has been done

for the central city poor. The cleanest experiment -—     testing
                                                                  —62




whether past unemployment rates predict future wages and employment,

could not be performed. The ultimate answer to the question of the

long—term impact must await these results. Until such time as high

quality local uneniployemnt data are available, we will have to rely

on statistical methods of removing heterogeneity.

       In this group of young men the heavy cost of time out of work

was the impact of the lost work experience on wages. The data does

not show whether working generates better work habits, or instills

general or firm specific skills, or even just creates positive signals.

Policy makers should keep in mind, however, that many forms of public

employment may not generate the desirable human capital or worker quality

signals. Employers may regard public employment quite differently than

private employment. The challenge for public policy is to design aid

programs which help young people accumulate the important labor experience,

rather than simply provide programs which makes the government the em-

ployer of last resort.
                                                                     —63



                                REFERENCES


 Becker, E. and S. Hills, 1979, "Teenage Unemployment: Some Evidence
 of the Long Run Effects", Journal of Hunan Resources, forthcoming.

 Chamberlain, C., 1978, "Omitted Varible Bias in Panel Data: Estimating the
 Returns to Schooling", Annales de l'INSEE, No. 30—31, April — September 1978.

 ___________ 1979, "Heterogeneity, Omitted Variable Bias and Duration Depen-
 dence", HIER Discussion Paper No. 691.

 Clark, K. and L. Summers, 1979, "The Dynamics of Youth Unemployment", NBER
 Working Paper no. 274.

 Ellwood, D. and L. Summers, "Markov Persistence vs. Experience Dependence — A
 Continuous Time Framework", in preparation.

 Crilliches, Z. and W. Mason, 1972, "Education Income and Ability", Journal
 of Political Economy Vol. 80, No. 3.

Heckman, J., l978a, "Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation
System", Econometrica No. 46.

___________ 1978b, "Sample Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data
Developed and Applied to Test the Hypothesis of True State Dependence Against
the Hypothesis of Spurious State Dependence", Annales de l'INSEE No. 30—31.

Hecknian, J. and R. Willis, 1977, "A Beta—logistic Model for the Analysis of
Sequential Labor Force Participation by Married Women", Journal of Political
Economy No. 85.

Lillard, L. and R. Willis, 1977, "Dynamic Aspects of Earning Mobility", NBER
Working Paper No. 150 (revised).

Meyer, R. and D. Wise, "High School Preparation and Early Labor Force Experi-
ence", [this volume].

Plantes, M.K., 1978, Work Experience, Economic Activity and Lifetime Earnings:
An Intercohort Analysis, unpublished PhD dissertation, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

Sims, C., 1972, "Money, Income and Casualty", American Economic Review Vol. 62.

Stevenson, W., 1978, "The Relationship Between Early Work Experience and Future
Employability", in Adams, A. and C. Mangum — The Lingering Crisis of Youth
Unemployment, Upjohn Institute for Empirical Research.
