                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      ENERGY EFFICIENCY, USER COST CHANGE, AND THE
           MEASUREMENT OF DURABLE GOODS PRICES



                    Robert J. Gordon


                  Working   Paper No. 1408




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                      November 19T9




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the
Conference on Research in Income and Wealth, May 3, 19T9,
in Washington, D.C. This research is supported by the
National Science Foundation and is part of the NBER's
research in productivity. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. I am grateful to Gerald Goldstein,
Zvi Griliches, Robert Hall, Dale Jorgenson, and Sherwin
Rosen for helpful discussions, and to Ross Newman for
research assistance.
                                                 NEER Working Paper 408
                                                          Iovember 1979




               Energy Efficiency, User Cost Changes, and
                the Measurement of Durable Goods Prices


                                Z½BSTRACT



      This paper develops the theory of price measurement when quality

change is mnonproportional,t yielding increases in the user value of a

given product in a different proportion than the increase in production

cost associated with the quality improvement. The theoretical section

demonstrates that "nonproportional" quality change is treated consistently

by properly defined input and output price indexes; that both types of

indexes should he based on quality adjustments that use the criterion of

user value rather than production cost; and that if improvements in energy

efficiency are embodied in a good by its manufacturer, the prices of new

models should be adjusted for the user value of these cost savings.

      The proposed approach is applied in a case study of the commercial

aircraft industry. In contrast to the official price index for aircraft

that rises at a 2.5 percent annual rate between 1957 and 1972, a new index

is developed that declines at a 7.1 percent annual rate over the same

period. The new index implies that output and productivity in the aircraft

industry grew much faster than previously believed between 1957 and 1972,

while total factor productivity in the airline industry grew much less

rapidly. The proposed quality adjustments for individual aircraft types

are corroborated by price ratios observed in the used aircraft market.



                                                Professor Robert J. Gordon
                                                Department of Economics
                                                Northwestern University
                                                Evanston, IL 60201

                                                312/492—3616
                                     CONTENTS



  I. INTRODUCTION
                                                                              1

               User Cost Changes and the Quality Change Debate                1

               Nonproportional Changes in Cost and Value                      3

               Plan of the Paper
                                                                              6

 II. CENTRAL CONCEPTUAL issues
                                                                              8
               Input   and Output Price Index Concepts                        8

              Measuring the Input Price Index when Quality Change         11
                   is Nonproportjonal

              Measuring the Output Price Index when Quality Change        16
                   is Nonproportjonal

III. A MODEL INCORPORATING OPERATING COSTS
                                                                          21

              Energy Embodiment and Separability                          21

              Adapting the Input Price Index to Incorporate
                   Nonproportional Changes in Net Revenue                 24

              Implementatjo of Operating Cost Adjustments                30

TV. A CASE STUDY OF INNOVATION IN THE COZvffiIERCIAL
                                                     AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY   36

              General   Procedures                                       36
              Index of Sale Prices of Identical Models                   38

              Quality   Adjustments Based on    Net Revenue Data         40

              A New Deflator for Conimercjal Aircraft                    47

              Possible Biases in the New Index: Evidence                 50
                   from the Used Aircraft Market

 V. CONCLUSION
                                                                         55

              Potential for Application to Other Products                55

              Implications for the Measurement of Output                 57
                   and Productivity

    FIGURES
                                                                         69
    TABLES
                                                                         75
                                                                       1

                        I.   INTRODUCTION




User Cost Changes and the Quality Change Debate

     Energy price increases in the 1970's have induced producers to supply
more energy—efficient automobiles, appliances, aircraft engines, and

structures. Higher labor costs and technological advances have resulted

in reduced maintenance requirements for many types of durable goods.

Other changes in efficiency, particularly those associated with environ-

mental legislation, have had an adverse effect on user cost. Users value

the savings in energy consumption and repair costs that new, more effi-

cient models make possible, just as they would pay to avoid a shift to

less efficient models. Yet the literature on price measurement has

concentrated on the dimensional or performance characteristics of goods

and contains little explicit discussion of the procedures by which price

changes should be measured when new models embody changes in operating

costs.

     The proper treatment in price measurement of changes in energy

efficiency and other aspects of user cost is related to the more general

problem of adjusting for quality change. Data on the real output of

consumer and capital goods, on real capital input, and on productivity

at both the aggregate and industry level require accurate price deflators

that are adjusted for changes in quality.1 Just as a price increase due

solely to larger size or improved performance should not be allowed to

raise the aggregate price index, but rather should be subject to a

quality adjustment, so a price increase due solely to an engineering
                                                                        2

 change that improves fuel economy should be subject to a similar quality

 adjustment rather than being treated as an increase in the aggregate

price level.

     Quality adjustments for changes in energy efficiency and other

changes in user cost raise an important conceptual issue already familiar

from the debate on quality changes in dimensional or performance character-

istics of goods: should the criterion for quality adjustment be production

cost or user value? Under the production (or resource) cost criterion,

goods are considered of equal quality if they cost the same to produce.

A difference in price between two models of a product would be adjusted

for any difference in quality by subtracting from the price of the more

costly model the amount by which its production cost exceeds that of

the cheaper model. Under the user—value criterion, goods are

considered of equal quality if they provide the same value to the user.

A difference in price between two models would be subject to a quality

adjustment based on the relative value of the two models to users,

without regard to differences in the production cost of the two models.

     In many cases the production—cost and user—value criteria lead to

the same result. A competitive market leads to the production of "quality,"

e.g., dimensional or performance characteristics, up to the point at which

the real marginal cost of producing each characteristic is equal to the

present value of its marginal product. A quality change resulting from

a shift in the marginal value product of a characteristic, due to a

change in product price or in the quantity of other inputs, takes place

up to the point where the higher marginal value product is balanced by a
                                                                      3

higher production cost. In such cases quality adjustments based on the

production cost and user—value criteria are identical, and either method

yields the same price deflator.

     No new problems are posed for price measurement when there are

changes in energy efficiency or other elements of user cost that take

the form of proportional changes in production cost and in the present

value of marginal product net of operating costs. A change in electricity

prices, for example, tends to induce firms to produce more energy—efficient

refrigerators, up to the point where the added production cost of

insulation and other energy—saving devides is balanced by the present

value of energy savings to users. The adjustment of a price difference

between old model A and a more efficient model B can be handled by com-

paring production cost, and this difference in cost represents the differ-

ence in user value as well.

     In such cases the normal "specification pricing" procedure of the

U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) can handle changes in operating

efficiency easily and routinely. If refrigerator model A is replaced by

model B which consumes less electricity but is otherwise identical, and

if the manufacturer states that the entire price difference between the

two models is due to the higher production cost of the better efficiency

characteristics of model B, then the BLS would correctly record an absence

of price change. What, then, justifies an entire paper devoted to the

subject of the treatment of user cost changes in price measurement?


Nonproportional Changes in Cost and   Value

    Numerous examples of quality change occur in which production cost
                                                                          4

does not change in proportion to user value, thus creating a difference

between measures of quality change based on the production—cost and user—

value criteria. In the past such quality changes have been misleadingly

labelled h!costless,vt but in fact are better termed "nonproportional."

Examples of quality changes that have increased user value by a greater

proportion than production cost include the increased calculation ability

of electronic computers of given size and resource content; the superior

performance of the jet aircraft engine compared to the propeller engine it

replaced; improvements in the picture quality of color TV sets without

increases in cost; and improved fuel economy of automobile engines of

given size and performance characteristics. These examples of nonpropor—

tional quality changes suggest that improvements in performance character-

istics rarely occur without simultaneously involving changes in operating
cost ——   the   computer, jet aircraft, home appliance, and automobile industries

all achieved savings in energy and maintenance requirements at the same time

that performance innovations occurred.

     The central issue in the quality change debate is the treatment of

nonproportional quality changes which cause the production—cost and user—

value criteria to yield divergent price deflators and output indexes. The

traditional position of the official government agencies ——    both   the BLS that

compiles the underlying price series for individual commodities, and the

Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) that combines these series into aggregate

price deflators and output indexes —— has been to support a production—cost

criterion of quality adjustment. This has the implication that some nonpropor—

tional quality changes are ignored:
                                                                       5

          "Also, new technology sometimes results in better quality

          at reduced or no increase in cost. When no satisfactory

          value has been developed for such a change, it is ignored,

          and prices are compared directly" (U. S. Bureau of Labor

          Statistics, 1977, p. 12).

Because of Edward Denison's previous support and advocacy of the production—

cost criterion, this position has sometimes been called the ttBLS—BEA—

Denison" position. 2

     The contrasting position, often associated with the names of

Jorgenson and Griliches and advocated in my own previous writing in the area

of ualjty change, has been that user value should be the criterion for

quality adjustment in those situations where quality change occurs but

production cost and user value do not change in proportion.3 Jorgenson

and Griliches recommended the measurement of capital, both as an output

of the capital—goods producing industry and as an input to the production

process, using relative marginal products as a criterion of comparison:

          "If the marginal product of tractor services measured in

          horsepower hours always move in proportion, but when measured

          in tractor hours fail to do so, tractor services should be

          measured in horsepower hours" (Jorgenson and Griliches, 1967, p. 259).

Proponents of the user—value criterion often point to the computer industry,

where improved performance has been achieved without proportional increases

in cost, as an important example in which the production cost criterion

leads to an understatement of increases in quality and in real GNP, together

with an overstatement of increases in the aggregate price 1evel.
                                                                         6

     Recently Jack Triplett (1979), building on the earlier theoretical

work of Fisher and Shell (1972), has set forth a new intermediate position,

that both criteria of quality measurement are correct, but in different con-

texts. The production—cost criterion is correct for the construction of an

ttoutput price index,' and the user—value criterion is correct for the con-

struction of an ttinput price index." TriplettTs analysis is examined below

and appears to be misleading. When production cost and user value move in

proportion, his input and output price Indexes also move in proportion, and

there is no need to distinguish between them. But when a quality change

occurs that increases user value more than production cost, Triplett's own

definition of the output price index leads to a real quantity measure that

moves proportionally to user value, not production cost. It is indeed

fortunate that the input and output price indexes lead to identical criteria

for quality adjustment, since differing criteria of quality adjustment would

introduce inconsistency between the net investment component of output and

changes in capital input, violating the age—old definition of zero net

investment as the level required to keep real capital input "intact.


PLan of the Paper


     A preliminary conceptual section sets the subsequent theory in the con-

text of recent debates in the area of quality measurement. Among the topics

treated are the choice between the production—cost and user—value criteria

when the two lead to divergent
                                 results, the distinction between input and

output indexes that is central to the work of Fisher and Shell (1972) and

Triplatt (1979), the conditions necessary for the prices of individual goods

to be adjusted for changes in user cost, and the implications of the approach
                                                                         7


for productivity measurement at the aggregate and industry level.

     The theoretical analysis of operating cost changes involves a simple

model in which producers' durable equipment varies along two dimensions, a

composite performance characteristic, and a composite operating cost charac-

teristic. Firms design each vintage of equipment to have a level of operating

efficiency that is optimal, given the expected prices of operating inputs.

The model is used to analyze problems of extracting information on "true"

price changes from observed changes in the price of a unit of equipment when

changes in performance and operating efficiency characteristics occur.

Changes in specifications can lead to proportional or nonproportional changes

in cost and user value, and can respond both to changes in technology and

to changes in the expected prices of energy and other inputs.

     The model can be applied not only to the measurement of price changes

for new models, but also to the analysis of changes in the prices of used

models. Changes in operating characteristics, and in the prices of operating

inputs, can alter both the prices and the service lifetimes of used assets.

As a result the relative price of used and new assets may change, an effect

that must be taken into account in any attempt that uses price data on used

assets as a proxy for the unobservable transactions prices of new goods.

     The ideas in the theoretical Section are applied to the detailed practical

problems involved in measuring the prices of an important type of producers'

durable equipment —— commercial aircraft. An application of the theoretical

index formula yields a new deflator for the commercial aircraft industry that

is radically different from the present official deflator. Although the new

index mirrors the 6.2 percent annual rate of increase in the official index
                                                                       8


between 1971 and 1978, during the period 1957—71 its annual rate of increase

is minus 7.5 percent annually, as opposed to the official increase of plus

2.6 percent per year. Among the major implications of the new index is that

productivity growth in the aircraft industry has been previously understated,

and total factor productivity growth in the airline industry has been over-

stated.




                    II.   CENTRAL CONCEPTUAL ISSUES


Input and Output Price Index Concepts

     In a recent paper Triplett (1979) has made fisher and hel1Ts (1972)

distinction between input and output price indexes the centerpiece of his

analysis of quality change. Measures of real capital used as a productive

input should be calculated using an input price index, according to Triplett,

and measures of the output of the capital—goods producing industry should be

calculated using a output price index.

     We begin by assuming that output (y) is produced by a vector of input

characteristics (x). Since the primary focus of this paper is on the measure-

ment of capital input and of the output of capital goods, henceforth we ignore

labor input. One may think of    as ton—miles per truck per year and of x as

including horsepower and truck size, or of   as the calculation services

provided by a computer and x as including its memory size and ability to per-

form multiplications per unit of time. The flow of output that can be produced

by a single unit of the durable good containing the vector of performance

characteristics x can be expressed in .a conventional production function:
                                                                       9




            (1)      y = y(x),          >0 xx<0

where y represents the partial derivative of      with respect to x.


       The producers durable good is manufactured under competitive supply

conditions, according to a cost function that exhibits constant returns in the

quantity of goods produced, and diminishing returns in the number of embodied

units of the performance characteristic:6



             (2)    V(x) =    Cc(x),     c>O, c>O.

Adopting the convention that lower—case letters represent t1realt variables

and upper—case letters "nominal" variables, we use c to represent the real

unit cost function, C to represent shifts in the cost of producing a given

product due to changing profit margins and/or input prices, and V to stand

for the total value of each unit produced.

       The criterion of comparison upon which the input price index (P) is

based is that prices are compared holding constant output at a given level (y* ).

The index is defined as the ratio of the cost CV) of obtaining the optimum

(minimum—cost) combinations of the vector of input characteristics sufficient
                          *
to   produce output level y in the reference and comparison—period input price

regimes, with the periods designated respectively by the subscripts "0" and



                              V(x)     Cc(x)
                     Pt =        *           *.
                              V(x0)    C0c(x0)
                                                                        10



The optimal set of input characteristics (x) is defined by the demand

functions for the characteristics at the given output level (yX) and the

differing input prices:

                    *           *              *        *
          (4)      x        x(y ,C)    and
                                              x0     x(y ,C0).


Because a change in input prices (C) between regimes can cause substitution

in the quantities of the various input characteristics, the input price index

allows for such substitution.


     In this discussion the inputs into the production function are the

individual characteristics of goods, the vector x, so that a quality change

involves a change in the quantity of one or more productive characteristics,

which in turn must change the level of output. Since any such quality change
                                                       *
would thus violate the criterion of constant output (y ) on which the input

price index is based, price measures must be adjusted "for changes in

characteristics that result in changed output, and exactly to the extent that

they do change output. For an input—cost index on characteristics, this is

equivalent to saying that quality change is to be assessed on a user—value

criterion" (Triplett, 1979, p. 30).

     In contrast to the input price index, the output price index uses as a

standard of comparison that prices are compared holding constant the economy's

endowment of productive factors and its production technology. Now we write

the output symbol (y) as representing a vector of output characteristics.

Triplett defines the output price index P as the ratio of the revenue (R)

obtained from the optimum   (maximum—revenue) combination of output character—
                                                                      11


istics in the reference and comparison—period output price regimes, holding

constant
                                        *                        *    *
           both input quantities (x ) and production functions [y y(x 11:
                                    *
                                 R(yt ,P t)
              \1        DY   —
                             —
                                    *
                                 R(y0,P0)

Note that the numerator and denominator of the output price ratio differ both

in the price regime and in the quantities of output characteristics (y) that

are optimal, given the fixed input quantities (x ) and the fixed production

functions that establish the various output combinations that can be produced

from those inputs.

     A quality change now implies an increase in one or more output character-

istics.7 If we assume that the resources devoted to increasing quality are

obtained by decreasing the output of some other good, to remain on the same

production possibility frontier the output price index must be adjusted for

the resource cost of the added output characteristics. "The quality adjust-

ment required is equal to the resource cost of the characteristic that

changed, for only with that adjustment do we price a set of outputs that can

be produced with the resources available in the reference period" (Triplett,

1979, p. 33).


Measuring   the Input Price Index when Quality Change is Nonproportional
     The idea of nonproportional quality change can be introduced by
                                                                     allowing
for a shift term (ii)   in   the production function:


            (6)         y = y(x,.i),                    y>O.

This leads to the symmetrical introduction of the same shift term into

demand function for input characteristics. Now, instead of (4), we have:
                                                                      12


           (7)
                     x      x(y,c,p),        x>O, x<O.


 Substituting this new input demand function into the characteristic cost

 function (2), we can write a new expanded expression for the cost function:


            (8)       V(yt,Ci) =      Cc{x(y,C,p)j.
     In this framework the total change in input cost consists of four terms:


          (9)        dV =   dC[c + Ctcx] + Ct[cxdy + cxdp].



These terms represent, respectively, the direct and indirect substitution

effect of changing input prices, the effect of changing input requirements due

to changing output (xdy), and the effect of technical change in altering the

input requirements necessary to produce a given level of output (xdp). Since

the input price index (P) is the ratio of (8) evaluated for the comparison

period to (8) evaluated for the reference period, holding the output level

constant at y, the change in P can be written as the total change in cost

minus the contribution of changing output:


                     dPX     dV—Ccxdy            dC[c+CcxJ+ccxdp
           (10) —              *
                                 txy         =        txC
                                                         *
                                                            txp
                      pX      V(y ,C0,i0)           V(y ,C0,ji0)



The change in an index of the real quantity of input characteristics (dQX)

would be equal to the proportional change in the number of units of capital

(du/du), plus the change in cost per unit (dV/V), minus the input price index:
                                                                                  13



                                du   dV dPX       du     Ccxdy
             (11) dQx—x     =   —+———--—
                                      x
                                         = —±                *
                       Q        u    V    P        11   Vy
                                                         I
                                                                 ,L0,0.


     We   note that the input price index in (10) responds to a nonproportional

quality change (di>0) by indicating a decrease in price when dC =           0,   since a

positive value of d.i would be multiplied by the negative derivative x that

indicates the decline in input needed to produce the fixed output level y .                It
does not matter whether the nonproportional quality change takes the form of in-

creasing the quantity of output that can be obtained from a given quantity of

input characteristics, as in this example, or the form of reducing the cost of

producing a given quantity of input characteristics. A pure cost reduction

can be represented in this framework by introducing a shift term (X) into

the cost function, replacing (8) with:


            (12)     V(yt,C,X) =      Cc[x(y,C),x].
This alternative form yields an expression for the change in the input price

index that is identical to (10), with the final term in the numerator replaced

as indicated here:



             (13)     —
                      dPX

                       pX
                            =
                                dC[c+Ccx]+CcdX
                                      XC   t A

                                     V(y,C0,X0)

     Figure 1 illustrates the measurement of changes in the input price

index in th presence of nonproportional quality change. In the top frame the

two upward sloping lines plot the unit cost function (equation 8) for two

different   values of the quality change parameter      Initially,        output level y
                                                                                           *
                                                                           14


is produced at an input unit cost of V0 at point A. The technological shift

represented by the higher value of i   raises   the marginal revenue of input

characteristics relative to their cost, and raises the level of output, depicted

by y1 in the diagram. The unit cost of the durable good (V1) could be either

higher or lower than in the initial equation (V0).


     According to equation (10), the change in the input price index is

equal to the change in unit cost (minus line segment Ac) minus an adjustment

factor equal to the change in output (CB) times the marginal cost (CD/CB) of

building extra input characteristics capable of producing the extra output

along the new supply schedule. Thus the change in the input price index is

—AC —CD = —AD, that is, the vertical downward shift in the supply schedule

itself. Note that the change in the index of real input quantity (equation 11)

is measured by the change in output times the marginal cost of producing

extra output under the new supply conditions. Thus the "user value" criterion

for the measurement of quality change is something of a misnomer, since the

input quantity index multiplies the change in output by marginal cost, not

marginal product.

     If the quality change takes the form of a downward shift in the cost

function for input characteristics, as in equation (13), the bottom frame of

Figure 1 applies. Because these two representations of technical change lead

to the same input price index and corresponding quantity index, the precise

definition of an "input characteristic" is arbitrary in principle. For instance,

one could define "y" as computer services and "x" as a vector of physical

characteristics of electronic computers, e.g., dimensions of the unit, in

which case it is clear that technical change (di) has taken the form of in—
                                                                            15

  creases in output (y) per unit of input.
                                               As an alternative, one could define
      as a vector of performance characteristics
                                                    that directly yield computer
  services, e.g., multiplication speed and memory size, in which case technical

  change (dA) has taken the form of a reduction in the cost of
                                                                   producing a given
  quantity of the input characteristic. The
                                                second alternative, however, makes
  price measurement more straightforward.

       This occurs because the practical task of measurement involves
                                                                          adjusting
  observed changes in price
                               per unit (dv) for changes in quality. When the
  quality change takes the form of
                                     reducing the cost of providing a given
 quantity of input characteristics
                                      (dx), the adjustment factor——the
                                                                         marginal
 cost of producing inputs sufficient to yield the extra observed
                                                                 output——can
 be rewritten:



                     Cc[x(y,C) Xtlxy(Y,cc1y =
                                                          Cc[x,A]dx.
 The right—hand
                  expression is the marginal cost of
                                                       additional input character-
 istics times the observed
                              change in the quantity of
                                                          characteristics. Several
 alternative methods of
                          estimating the marginal cost are
                                                             available, depending
on the nature of the change.

     For instance, if an auto manufacturer were to make
                                                        automatic transmission
standard at no increase in
                           price, and the BLS had information
                                                              either on the
price of automatic transmission
                                when it was an option, or a manufacturer's
estimate of the cost of
                          producing an automatic transmission, then the present
BLS specification
                    pricing methodology would be adequate to measure the
marginal cost. Often, when
                               quality change involves continuous rather than
discrete change, e.g., a change in automobile
                                                acceleration and dimensions, or
                                                                      16

in computer performance, it is more convenient to use the hedonic regression

technique to estimate the shadow price of a given characteristic, i.e., its

marginal cost. Clearly the proper technique to use in each case is inde—

pendent of whether the nature of the quality change is "cost—increasing" or

"nonproportional.".

     When technological advance takes the form of a shift in the production

function (dp) rather than a shift in the real cost function (dx), price

measurement is more difficult, because observed changes in output cannot be

attributed solely to observed changes in input. For instance, ima2ine that


computer services (y) depended on calculations per second (cps), and that

the input characteristic (x) is defined as a given—sized "computer box." If

a technological change raised the cps that could be obtained from a given—size

"box," then the output of computer services might increase while the number (or

size) of the boxes might decrease. Measuring the adjustment factor by

multiplying the marginal cost of a box by the observed change in the number of

boxes would yield an adjustment factor having the wrong sign, and the erroneous

conclusion that the input price index had increased more than the observed

change in the unit price of a computer box, rather than less. In this case

the practical solution is to redefine x as cps rather than a computer "box."

Thus for practical measurement purposes x should be defined as those attributes

of durable goods that directly produce output, thus minimizing the role of

shifts in the production function linking   to x.



Measuring the Output Price Index When Quality Change is Nonproportional

     We now turn to the output price index and ask whether it gives an con-

sistent treatment to an identical technological innovation.   We imagine that
                                                                                        17


the input price reduction depicted in the bottom frame of Figure 1 occurs

because of a cost—saving technological innovation in the electronic computer

industry. In this case, what happens to the output and price indexes for

the value added of the computer industry, a component of real GNP? The

nonproportional quality change can be introduced into the discussion of

output price indexes by allowing the same                shift      term (X) to enter the

production function of the computer industry. A vector of output character-

istics (y) is now produced in an amount that depends on the quantity of input

characteristics (x), the relative prices of output characteristics (P), and

the shift term (X):


            (14)       y = y(x,P,X),
                                                          >0' y>O.

The output price index is now the ratio of revenue in two periods when

output prices are allowed to change, holding constant the level of resources

(inputs) and production technology:



                               =   R(y,P) =             _____________
             (15)      P
                           t          *                         *
                                   R(y0,P0)             P0y(x ,P0,A )



The total change in revenue between the reference and comparison
                                                                 periods is
the total derivative of the revenue function:


                      dR
                      —=           dP[y +   p yJ +
                                             t           PtX
                                                           [y dx      +
                                                                          ydA}
             (16)                                   *
                       R                                        )
                                            P0y(x       ,P0,A


where   the terms represent, respectively, the direct and indirect substitution
                                                                                   18

 effects of changes in the output price, the effect on real output of increasing

 input usage, and the effect on real output of the technological shift itself.

     The change in the output price index (15) consists of only two of the
                                                      *                     *
 four terms in (16), since both input usage (x ) and technology (x )              are   being
held constant:


                      dP        dR —
            ( 17 )          —
                            —
                                        P{y
                                           *
                                               dx +
                                                     ydJ   —
                                                               dP{y +   Pyp]
                       P
                                                   *               *
                                      P0y(x ,P0,X )            P0y(x    ,P0,X )



The corresponding quantity index based on the output price index consists of

the residual change in revenue:



            (18) dQ               t
                                P [y dx +
                  —         =                  ydXJ
                                      x*     *
                       QY         P0y(x ,P0,X )


     What is the relationship between changes in the output price index and

input price index defined by (13)? We previously concluded that the input

price index is based on a tuser value criterion, because it subtracts from

the change in unit price (dv) all changes in quality that alter the ability

of a good to produce output, whether or not the quality change requires an

increase in production cost. Triplett (1979) has concluded that the output

price index is based on the "production cost" criterion and thus includes

quality changes in real GNP only to the extent that they raise production

cost. Yet this conclusion is clearly erroneous, since the output quantity

index in (18) includes in real GNP both "cost—increasing" changes in quantities

of input characteristics (dx) as well as nonproportional quality changes (dx)

that shift the quantity of output characteristics that can be produced by a

given quantity of input characteristics.
                                                                        19

       Figure 2 illustrates the calculation of changes in the output price index

and quantity index when there is a technological change represented by a shift

from      to X1. The increase in the output that can be produced by the initial

resource endowment raises output directly by the term ydX in equation (18),


and indirectly by raising the marginal product of inputs and hence the demand

for inputs (the term ydx). If the higher level of output is to be sold, the

output price (P) must drop, as indicated along the appropriate industry

demand curve. The downward sloping total revenue line in Figure 2 is drawn

on the assumption that demand is price inelastic. The upward sloping lines

indicate the revenue that would be obtained from varying levels of output

if the price level were fixed. Starting from an initial equilibrium at point

A, the innovation—induced increase in output leads to a new equilibrium at

point B, where the price level has dropped from P0 to P1, and total revenue has


declined from R0 to R1. According to equation (17), the change in the output

price index is measured by the change in revenue (minus the line segment Ac)

minus the new price level (cD/CB) times the change in output (CB), or the

distance —AD.

       Now the connection between Figures 1 and 2 becomes evident.   When we con-
sider the output of a capital good, e.g., an electronic computer, a pure

technological shift causes a decrease in price measured by the vertical dis-

tance AD in Figure 2. We note that this vertical downward shift AD also

appears in the bottom frame of Figure 1 as the change in input prices as

viewed by the user of the electronic computer. Once again, the input and out-

put price index concepts are equivalent and do include in both real GNP and in
                                                                    20

real capital input technological shifts that raise the output capacity of

capital goods relative to their production cost.

     The model is equally applicable to "resource—using" or "cost-increasing"

quality change. Imagine an upward shift in the demand for computers, without

any change in technology. The previous equations are appropriate for measur-

ing price and output change if we set the dX terms equal to zero. In the

bottom frame of Figure 1, imagine an initial equilibrium at point D, where

the lower supply curve meets an initial demand curve (not drawn). Then let

the demand curve shift upward sufficiently to move the new equilibrium

position to point B. The change in unit cost (dV) is exactly offset by

the increase in the marginal cost of the additional characteristics, leav-

ing the input price index as measuring shifts in the price of producing a

given output; in this case there has been no such shift. The same conclusion

applies to the output price index, which would be measured as unchanged,

since the price of utilizing the initial level of resources has remained

unchanged.


     The major conclusion of this section has been that both input price

indexes and output price indexes treat quality change consistently. This has

always been recognized as true for "resource—using" quality change, where an

increase in quality requires an increase in production cost, and the user—value

and production—cost criteria lead to the same measures of prices and real out-

put. The novelty in this section is the demonstration that "nonproportional"

quality change is also treated consistently by properly defined input and

output indexes. Thus a technological change that raises the user value of a

durable good relative to its production cost will be measured •u exocl tho
 same way in indexes of the real output of the
                                                 industry producing the durable
 good and of the real capital input of the
                                             industry using the durable good.

      This consistency between output indexes of investment goods and input

 indexes of capital goods is absolutely essential to allow adherence to the

 basic underlying definition of real net national product (NNP) as the sum of

 consumption and the change in capital input net of depreciation. In his

 recent theoretical examination of the NNP concept, Weitzman argues that the

 conventional concept is correct, albeit for the wrong reason:

                    a standard welfare interpretation of NNP is that it is

           the largest permanently maintainable value of consumption

          the naive interpretation of the current power to consume at a

          constant rate gives the right answer, although for the wrong

          reason. Net national product is what might be called the

          stationary equivalent of future consumption, and this is its

          primary welfare interpretation" (1976, pp. 159—60).

As Weitzman Shows(p. 162), a "windfall" improvement in the productivity of
                                                                           cap-
ital goods that increases their ability to produce future consumption goods

(without requiring the sacrifice of current consumption goods) should be

treated as increasing current NNP, exactly the same conclusion as our finding

that a correctly measured real output index increases in response to user

value, not production cost, when quality change is flonproportjonal.



             III. A MODEL INCORPORATING OPERATING COSTS


Energu Embodiment   and Separability
                                                                   2
    Some recent research on the production technology of energy use, e.g.,

Hudson and Jorgenson (1974), assumes that energy enters the production function

symmetrically with labor hours (h) and capital input (x)


          (19)        y = y(h,x,e),
                                          h>0'

Thus changing relative prices, in particular the rising relative price of

energy observed during the 1970s, can cause substitution both between energy

and capital, and energy and labor. Because the price of labor influences the

amount of labor used per unit of capital, there is no presumption in this frame-

work that changes in energy efficiency call for adjustments in the prices of

capital goods. Indeed, Triplett (1979, p. 38) has claimed that "one cannot

'adjust' the price of trucks for some measure of the value (to the operator)

of fuel savings over the truck's lifetime, without making stringent (and

generally unrealistic) assumptions about the way that trucks and fuel enter the

firm's production or cost function."

    Yet Triplett's position appears to prevent the consistent treatment of

performance—increasing and energy—saving technological change in the measure-

ment of prices, output, and productivity. The previous section shows why a

technological shift in the performance of a capital good per unit of resources

used in capital—goods—producing "Firm A" should be treated as an increase in

real investment and real GNP. Now let us assume that another capital—goods—

producing "Firm B" achieves a technological improvement in one of its

products, yielding energy savings to users of equal value to the performance

improvement achieved by Firm A. Should not the criteria for price measurement

be designed to treat both types of technological change symmetrically?
                                                                       23

     In order to adjust the price of a capital good for changes in energy

efficiency, it is necessary to assume that energy usage is "embodied" in

capital goods, and that the production function (19) can be rewritten in the

separable form:


          (20)          y =   yh,k(x,e)],

where k(x,e) is a subfunction with two inputs, performance characteristics

(x) and energy (e), which produces capital input (k). Berndt and Wood (1979)

describe the subfunction as follows:

          "For example, consider the production of industrial process steam

          of given specified physical characteristics. In such a context

          utilized capital services (k) refers to the quantity of steam

          produced per unit of time using capital . .   . and   fuel inputs.

          This assumption of a separable utilized capital subfunction implies

          that the optimal e/x ratios . . . depend solely on (the prices of

          x and e and not on the other input prices) or the level of gross

          output y."8

     Is this assumption of separability, which is essential to the discussion

of price measurement in this paper, a reasonable one or, as Triplett claims,

arbitrary and "unrealistic"? Three arguments can be presented to support

the procedures proposed here:

          1. Berndt and Wood (1979) have re—examined previous econometric

studies in an attempt to reconcile disparate findings regarding the degree

of substitution or complementarity between capital and energy. In these

reconciliations "separability has played a prominent role" (p. 350), and
 their own empirical evidence (1975) appears to support the separability

 assumption.

            2. The study below makes the assumption not only that the pro-

 duction function is separable, but that technology is "putty—clay," so that

energy usage is "designed in" when the capital good is built. In some

 industries the assumption that energy requirements are embodied in capital

 goods seems more reasonable than in others. The ability of a user to improve

 the energy consumption of an automobile, commercial airplane, electricity

generating plant, or appliance is relatively minor compared to the latitude

available to the manufacturer. Thus, a Cadillac owner might improve his gas

mileage from 14 to 15 miles per gallon by careful driving habits, but to

achieve 40 miles per gallon he would have to buy a Chevette or Honda.

            3. Although users can alter energy consumption even when tech-

nology is putty—clay, e.g., an automobile driver can save gasoline by careful

avoidance of sudden starts, the techniques described below involve measuring

an energy requirements function that holds constant the characteristics of

users. In addition performance characteristics are held constant, yielding

a function translating energy into performance that can fairly be said to

be under the control of the capital—goods manufacturer.


Adapting   the Input Price Index 'o Incorporate Nonproportional Changes in Net Revenue
     We now assume that the production of output (y) requires not only the


acquisition of durable goods having productive input characteristics (x),

but also involves a variable operating cost, the consumption of other inputs

(e) times their price (S). In the present discussion e may be taken to
                                                                          25

represent the yearly consumption of energy of a capital good having performance

characteristics x.     The energy requirements function is taken as given by the

equipment user, reflecting our assumption of a separable putty—clay technology:


           (21)          e = e(x,a),               e>O, e<O,

where the parameter a represents a technological shift factor that can alter

 the energy consumption of a given set of input characteristics.

     The net revenue (N) of the durable good user consists of gross revenue

 less variable operating cost. Gross revenue is the output price times the

production function (equation 6 above) that allows for technical change, and

operating cost is the price of the operating input (S) times the consumption

of operating inputs (e):


               (22)       N = Py(x,p)      —   Se(x,a).

An expression for real net revenue (n) can be obtained by dividing (22) by

the output price:


               (23)       n =    y(x,t)   —   se(x,y),

where S   is   the real price of the operating input (s =      S/p).
     Recall that the input price index was previously defined as the ratio for

two time periods of the nominal cost of inputs that are capable of
                                                                       producing
                             *
a given level of output (y ).      A natural extension of this concept in the

presence of variable operating costs is to hold constant between the two periods

the level of real net revenue (n *). This criterion reflects the assumption

that users of durable goods do not care about the gross output produced,

but rather about the net revenue that the durable goods provide. Thus a user
                                                                         26

is   assumed to be indifferent between 10 units of real net revenue obtained from

a situation with 15 units of output and 5 units of real operating cost, and

an alternative situation with 16 units of output and 6 units of real operating

cost, holding constant his investment in capital goods.

      The introduction of variable operating costs makes the demand for input

characteristics depend on real net revenue (n), the vector of prices of

input characteristics (C), the real price of operating inputs (s), and the two

technological shift parameters (i and   cr):9



            (24)        x = x(nt,C,s,p,cT),          x>O, x>O, x<0, x<0.

Comparing the arguments here to the previous input demand function in equation

(7) above, we note that real output has been replaced by real net revenue,

and that the two parameters of variable operating cost have been added (s and a).

The signs of the derivatives of (24) assume that the firm is operating in the

region in which additional net revenue requires extra input to produce more

gross output.'0 An increase in operating cost requires an increase in gross

output (and hence capital input) to yield any fixed level of net revenue;

hence the derivative is positive with respect to the relative price s and

negative with respect to the technological parameter .    As before, a

technological advance represented by a positive shift in i reduces the quantity

of capital input required to produce a given level of output and (holding

constant operating cost) to yield a given level of net revenue.

      When the new input demand function in (24) is substituted into our

original input characteristic cost function (equation 2 above), we obtain an

expanded equation for the cost function:
                                                                                27




            (25)
                                                 =


Now the input price index is defined as the ratio of the cost function in

the comparison period to that in the reference period of producing the same

real net revenue, holding constant the relative price of operating inputs:


                                     *

                           P =
                                  V(n            t ,t)
             (26)                    *
                                  V(n ,C0,s0,.i0,cr0)



The decision to hold constant the relative price of operating inputs (s)

in the numerator and denominator reflects the desire to limit changes in the

input price index to factors internal to the firm manufacturing the durable

good——its input prices and profit margin (C) and the level of technology

built into the good (p,cr).       In this way changes in the relative price of an

operating input like energy are not treated as changes in the price of capital

input.

        Now the change in the input price index can be written in two equivalent

ways:


                        dV — C c [x dn + x ds]
(27)
             dPX
                    =         t X fl      S          =          t
                                                         dC[c + C c x + C c [x dp + x da]
                                                                    XC    txi        a
              Px
                         V(n,C0,s0,0,a0)                         V(n,C0,s0,0,a0)
        The extended model incorporating operating costs can be illustrated in

Figure 3, which repeats the axes of Figure 1. The upward sloping schedule

plots equation (25) and shows the increasing unit cost of input characteristics

required to generate additional net revenue. The initial equilibrium position,

where the quantity of output is chosen to make marginal net revenue equal to

marginal cost, is shown at point A.
                                                                        28


      We consider first the proper treatment in price measurement of an im-

 provement in quality that occurs when an equiproportionate increase in the

 prices P and S relative to C leads users to demand higher—quality capital
                                                                                  a
 goods.   Because the higher prices P and S shift the nominal marginal net

 revenue schedule upward, the equilibrium position shifts from A to B. If

 the manufacturer reports to the BLS that the entire addition to the price of

 the good from V0 to V1 is due to the higher cost (CA) of raising the speci-

 fication of characteristics embodied in the good, the BLS would correctly

 conclude that there has been no price change. We note that the manufacturer's

cost estimate does not represent simply the effect of higher x holding

constant operating cost, but rather the net extra cost of raising x while

allowing energy consumption to increase along the e(x) function. There is

no- danger that the substitution toward greater operating cost will be mis-

interpreted as a change in input price, as long as the marginal cost (CA/CB)

of the extra quantity of input characteristics is correctly measured.

     Does the general formula (27) for the change in the input price index

correctly conclude that there has been no price change? From the change

in the cost of the durable good (CA) is to be subtracted the marginal cost

(CA/CB) of the extra input characteristics required to raise real net revenue

by the actual observed amount (CB). Thus the observed change in input cost

(CA) minus the correction factor (CA) equals zero.

     A second case, a reduction in the relative price of energy, is illustrated

in Figure 4. A decrease in the price of energy from S0 to S1, while the

product price is held constant at P0, shifts the unit cost schedule


rightwards, since a smaller nominal operating cost must be deducted from
                                                                       29

gross revenue for any given quantity of the input characteristic x, thus

raising net revenue for any given value of V. The new equilibrium position

is assumed to shift from point A to B. The input price index subtracts from

the observed change in price (CA) the marginal cost (CD/CB) of the extra

input characteristics required to raise real net revenue by the observed

amount (CB) adjusted for the effect on input cost (+AD) of lower energy prices

(ds) when real net revenue is constant. Once again, the observed change in

input cost (CA) minus the correction factor (—CD + AD) equals zero.

     As an example of this second case, we note that lower relative gasoline

prices in the l95Os and 1960s induced firms and consumers to shift to larger

automobiles that consumed more fuel.1' But if an automobile with given

horsepower had maintained its previous fuel consumption along a fixed e(x)

schedule, then no change would be imputed to the price of automobiles as a

result of this substitution toward greater fuel consumption. In our discussion

of the automobile example below, however, we find that during this period the

fuel requirements function was not fixed.

     As a third example, let us consider a technological innovation that

allows a given quantity of the input characteristic (x) to be used with a

smaller consumption of fuel. To simplify the illustration in Figure 4, it

will be assumed that the shift takes the special form of reducing the marginal

energy cost of a change in input quantity by the same amount as the decrease

in the relative energy price examined in the previous two paragraphs


          (28)                   =
                      s0e(x,o)       s1e(x,cy0).
                                                                        30


Now the lower schedule in Figure 4 is relabelled to correspond to the new,

more efficient energy consumption schedule in which 01   replaces

     In this third case, as in the first two cases, the equilibrium position

moves from point A to point B. But now the input price index registers a

decline in price, instead of no change in price. From the change in the

unit cost of the input characteristic (dv = CA) is subtracted the marginal

cost (CD/CB) of the extra input characteristics required to raise real net

revenue by the actual observed amount (CB). Thus the observed change in

input cost (CA) minus the correction factor (CD) equals the change in the

input price index (—AD).

     A final example, not considered here in detail, would involve an in-

crease in the productivity of the input characteristic (d.i). For a change that

increases net revenue by the same amount as in the previous example, the

resulting calculation of the change in the input price index would be exactly

the same. Thus a central feature of this treatment of quality change is that

technological changes achieved by manufacturers of durable goods are handled

identically, whether they take the form of improvements in productive

capacity or of reductions in operating cost.


Implementation of Operating Cost Adjustments

     In each of the cases considered in the previous section, the observed

change in unit cost of a durable good was adjusted for changes in net

revenue caused by a shift in either an exogenous price or technological

parameter. In each case the adjustment involved determining the marginal

cost of whatever extra quantity of input characteristics would have been
                                                                               31


required to yield the observed increase in net revenue in the absence of the

observed parameter shift. How is this adjustment factor to be measured in

practice?

     The discussion of measurement can usefully be set in the context of a

competitive firm that uses capital goods to produce net revenue. Its user

cost of capital multiplies the unit price of a durable good (V) times the

interest rate r (representing some combination of borrowing costs and the

opportunity cost of the firtn's own funds), plus a geometric depreciation rate

5 that measures the rate of decay with the asset's age of the stream of

services that it provides. The capital market is assumed to set only a

single interest rate that each firm takes as given.12

     Firms using the durable good are price takers in both input and output

markets. They have no influence on the price of the durable assets they

purchase (V), on the price of the output they produce (P), or on the price of

operating inputs (S) or cost of ownership (r+6) they must pay. They simply

choose the level of output that maximizes yearly profit (TI), the difference

between nominal net revenue (from equation 22) and the user cost of capital:


            (29)    11 =   N — (r-hS)V   =   Py(x,.i)   —   Se(x,a) — (r+cS)V(x).

     The only choice variable in the simplified structure of (29) is the

quantity of input characteristics (x). If all producers and users of the

durable asset are identical, then there will be a single model produced that

embodies enough of the durable input characteristic to equate its real

marginal cost of production to the present value of its real marginal net

revenue:
                                                                                     32

                                      y (x,u — se                   n (x,s,p,c)
           (30)          v(x) =                       X (x,a)
                                                           —    =
                                             r + s                   Xr +

 where v(x)        V(x)/P. The fact that the market usually provides numerous

 varieties containing different quantities of input characteristics has been

 explained by Rosen (1974) as resulting from the different tastes of consumers

 and technologies of producers.13

      Figure 5 illustrates the equilibrium described
                                                                    in equation (30), with
 the real unit cost of durable goods
                                             on the vertical axis and real net revenue

 on the horizontal. As in Figures 3 and 4, the purchase of additional input

 characteristics raises both unit cost (v) and net revenue (n), but the

 response of net revenue exhibits diminishing
                                                        returns, both because of dimin-
 ishing returns in the production function
                                                     relating output to input character-
 istics, and also because of the increasing marginal cost of producing input

characteristics. When the technical level of
                                                         operating efficiency is represented
by o, the initial equilibrium occurs at point A, where the v(n,o) function

is tangent to a straight line having the
                                                 slope l/(r+5). (The v() function
also depends on C/P, s, and     ji,   but   these parameters are held constant in the

present discussion of adjusting capital input prices for changes in operating

efficiency, de).

     If the level of operating efficiency were to shift to the improved

level represented by a1, the firm would move to a new equilibrium position

at point B, where the new v(n,a) function
                                                     again has the slope l/(r+S). The
change in the input price index, as in Figure 4, is the observed change in

unit cost (dv =   line   segment CA) minus an adjustment factor equal to the ob-
served change in net revenue (dn = CB)
                                       times the marginal cost of producing
                                                                          33


input characteristics capable of providing that amount of net revenue, the

slope CD/CB. Although points A and B can be observed, and thus dv and dn can

be measured, point D cannot be observed directly. How can the slope CD/CB

be calculated in practice in order to compute the quality change adjustment

factor AD?

      As Figure 5 illustrates, the problem of estimating point D arises

because of the curvature of the v(n,cy) function.   If the function were a

straight line, then the unobservable point D would coincide with point D',

which lies along a ray from the origin to point B having the
                                                               slope v1/n1.

But, as long as there are either (a) diminishing returns in producing net

revenue in response to an increase in the quantity of input characteristics or

(b) an increasing marginal cost of producing input characteristics, then the

curvature of the function will always make point D' lie above point D, and

will make the segment AD' an underestimate of the required quality adjustment,

segment AD.

      Since the exact form of the function is unobservable, and because data

are unlikely to be available to estimate it in many cases, the estimation of

the quality adjustment factor must inevitably be based on some assumption about

the function. Consider, for instance, the particularly simple relationship:


             (31)      v =

where the curvature of the function depends on the parameter a. Technological

changes that alter the position of the function are represented by shifts in

the    parameter.

      To use this function in the estimation of changes in input price, we
                                                                                         34

 first rewrite the basic formula (27) for a comparison in which the price of

operating inputs (ds) is held constant:
                             x
                        dp                 dv—vdn
            (32) —                    = __________
                         p                   V0


where the real unit cost (v) of the capital input replaces nominal cost (V) on

 the assumption that the output price can be held constant while comparing the

new and old types of durable goods. Converting (32) from continuous to dis-

crete changes, we obtain:


                                                  —              -
            (33)
                                               {v(n1,a1)  v(n0,a1)}
                                       = __________________________
                             __T;z
                              p
                                                         v(n0,y0)


                                       =    v(n0 'l
                                                           —1.
                                            v (n0 ,




When the assumed functional form (31) is substituted into the general formula

(33), the resulting expression depends only on observable variables and the

VtcurvatureTt   parameter:


            (34)
                                  x
                                       =     1 0       — 1 =
                                                               vn n        — 1.
                              p
                                           0n0                   01 (0)
                                                                      1


To make sense of the right—hand side of (34), imagine first that the v(n,a)

function is linear, i.e., that a                      1, so that the second term in parentheses

becomes unity. Then the remaining expression states that the T!realfl price

change will be zero if both unit cost and net revenue grow in proportion in
                                                                        35


the shift to the new model, (v1/v0) =              This is the case of "resource—
                                        (n1/n0).
using" or "cost—increasing" quality change. A nonproportional quality change,

as illustrated in Figure 5, would raise net revenue relative to cost and

would   result in an estimated change in the "real" input price index that is
less than the observed change in price of models that remain identical.
    When the v(n,a) function is nonlinear, then c. > 1, and the second term in

parentheses in (34) becomes a fraction less than unity, corresponding in Figure

5 to the fact that the unobservable point D lies below point D'. There seems

to be no alternative in the estimation of equation (34) to making an arbitrary

assumption about the value of the c parameter, or to presenting results for

several alternative assumptions regarding the curvature of the v(n,) function.

        It is important to note that (34) is to be used to calculate a quality

adjustment when comparing two different models, while holding constant output

prices and the prices of operating inputs. Since this means in practice that

the net revenue performance of two models must be compared in a particular

year when both are in operation, equation (34) must implicitly be holding

constant any factors that change the cost of manufacturing a given model in

the given year of comparison, i.e., changes in profit margins and/or the prices

of inputs into the manufacturing process. Thus for practical measurement (34),

which computes the price change involved in the shift from one model to another,

must be combined with an index of changes in the cost of producing identical

models. Thus changes in the nominal input price index is equal to changes in

the real input price index plus changes in the cost of producing identical

models:
                                                                          36

                            x                      *
            (35)       —
                       AP

                        Px
                                =
                                    Ap
                                      x
                                              tX
                                          AC[C c (x )]

                                     Px      C0c(x)

 Thus, if there is a 10 percent annual increase in the price of identical

 models, and all quality change is resource—using as in Figure 3, the quality—

 change adjustment in equation (34) will be zero, and the nominal input—cost

 index in (35) will be recorded to increase at a 10 percent annual rate. But if

the real quality—change adjustment were minus five percent, then the increase

in the nominal input—cost index would be reduced to a .5 percent annual rate.



      IV. A CASE STUDY OF INNOVATIONS IN THE COMMERCIAL AIRCRAFT INDUSTRY


General   Procedures

     Most empirical work in the quality change literature in the
                                                                 past two
decades has involved the estimation of hedonic regression equations in which

the price (unit cost) of durable goods is the dependent variable. More

recently the appearance of new econometric studies has become less frequent,

while the list of critical interpretations has been growing.15 In none of

this literature, however, is there any significant discussion of the treatment

in price measurement of changes in operating efficiency.

     This oversight is easily understood in the context of our present

simplified model of the production and operation of durable goods. At any

given level of technology (a constant), operating cost and particularly

energy consumption tends to be a function of the quantity of
                                                                 input character-
istics (x) embodied in each durable good.      Any given cross—section hedonic

regression of price on the quantity of input characteristics can provide no
                                                                      37

useful information about the effect on price of changes in energy efficiency,

if the fuel consumption and input quantities are collinear, and if shifts in

the level of fuel efficiency take place on all models at the same time.

     There is another and perhaps more fundamental reason why the traditional

hedonic regression approach cannot identify the value of changes in fuel

economy, even if shifts in the level of fuel efficiency do not take place

simultaneously on all models. As we shall see in the aircraft examples below,

the net revenue advantage of new, more fuel—efficient models has not been

fully reflected in a higher price, but rather the small price differentials

set by firms have transferred the benefits of the efficiency advantage to

the airlines and ultimately to their customers in the form of lower prices

and lower load factors. Thus the dependent price variable in the hedonic

regression does not exhibit sufficient variation to allow the analyst to

 capture the full value to users of improvements in fuel
                                                           economy.

     The aircraft example in this section is provided to suggest practical

methods of implementing the rather general and abstract measurement framework

outlined earlier in the paper. The basic formula for quality adjustment,

equation (34), requires the comparison of the observed change in the price

of a new model with the extra net revenue that the new model provides relative

to the old model, holding constant the prices of output and operating inputs.

Because data on changes in net revenue are required, ideal testing grounds

for the methodology are regulated industries in which the government requires

the publication of detailed information on the operating costs of given pieces

of capital equipment.

    The case study of airlines presented below can be duplicated for other

regulated industries, Particularly for the generating plants used by electric
                                                                      38
utilities.   Other types of capital goods, e.g., automobiles, raise different

problems of estimation, because no data are available on the output of automobile

 services to consumers, and thus the level of net revenue cannot be calculated.

 The conclusion to the aircraft case study suggests means of dealing with the

 problemsof quality adjustment in other industries.


Index   of Sale Prices of Identical Models

     The commercial aircraft industry has all the qualifications to be a

perfect case study of our methodology. The major customers of the U. S.

commercial aircraft industry are the U. S. airlines, which have been subject

to government regulation throughout the postwar period and have been required

to make available to the public incredibly detailed information on traffic

by route, as well as operating costs by airplane type and station location.

Further, the airline production function clearly meets the separability

requirement discussed above; the predominant determinant of fuel consumption

per airplane seat—mile is the basic design of the manufacturer, and the

pilot has only minor latitude to alter fuel consumption by varying speed and

shutting dom engines while taxiing.

     Finally, the dramatic nature of the transition from piston airplanes

to jet aircraft makes the aircraft example an interesting one. This innova-

tion simultaneously increased gross revenue by raising aircraft size and

speed, while reducing operating costs per seat—mile. In fact, any estimate of

the value to users of the transition to jet aircraft will inevitably be too

conservative if it concentrates solely on the net revenue of the airlines

and omits the value to users of the time savings made possible by increased

speed, and the comfort value of reduced vibration. Yet this paper eschews the
                                                                         39
 :hee   sobjective areas in tee b1ei   that   a careiui crearment ot objective

revenue end cost date is suiLeec to escab tish      the   presence a previously
unmeasured   quality change.
      The existing National Income Accounts deflator for the aircraft category

of   purchases of producers' durable equipment is compiled by the U. S. Civil

Aeronautics Board, Bureau of Operating Rights.16 Since airlines are required

to report regularly the historic cost for each individual aircraft in their

fleet, and since these aircraft are identified on C. A. B. Form 41 by their

month of acquisition and exact type (e.g., Boeing 707—331—B), the C. A. B.

has been able to construct an aircraft price index by measuring the year—to—year

change in the unit price for each type of equipment delivered in both of two

adjacent years. Because only identical pieces of equipment are compared in

adjacent years, the   index ignores any "true" price change involved in the
transition   from one aircraft type to another. As an example, the substantial

price reduction involved in the switch by Douglas in 1958—9 from the manufacture

of the DC—7 to the DC—8 is completely ignored, and the price index for the

years of transition is based only on price changes for planes that were manufac-

tured in both of the adjacent years. Thus the C. A. B. index corresponds to

the dC/C term in equation (35). Because the C. A. B. methodology ignores

technical change, it is not surprising that the 1956—77 increase in the official

deflator is 97 percent, little different from the 117 percent increase of

the aggregate GNP deflator displayed for the same period.

      The methodology proposed above adjusts changes in prices of identical

models by comparing changes in price per unit across model changes with changes

in the net revenue provided. Unit prices of commercial aircraft are obtained

from the same source as the official deflator, C. A. B. Form 41.17 Because
                                                                     40

only a sample of prices has been collected for the period 1946—78, rather than

all of the information available at the C. A. B., we first display as the lower

solid line in Figure 6 an index constructed from our sample of price data using

the C. A. B. methodology. Because different airlines paid different prices

for the same aircraft, our index compares only identical plane types purchased

by the same airline in successive years. For the years 1957—77 our solid—line

index tracks the C. A. B. index (dashed line) extremely well, with respective

annual rates of increase of 3.41 and 3.55 percent. Before 1957 our index

exhibits a slower rate of increase than the official deflator, which is extra-

polated by the B. E. A. for the earlier period when the C. A. B. index is

unavailable, by using a collection of producer price indexes that are unrelated

to aircraft manufacture.'8 Thus our index indicates that during the interval

1946—57 aircraft prices increased less than the prices of the products used

by the B. E. A. in its proxy index, with annual rates of increase of 3.55 and

5.81 percent, respectively.


Quality   Adjustments Based   on Net Revenue Data


     The technique of price measurement proposed in this paper adjusts price

differences between models of a given product for changes in net revenue

yielded by new models. Holding constant the prices of unchanged models, if a

10 percent increase in the price of model B compared to model A is accompanied

by a 10 percent increase in net revenue, no quality adjustment is required to

an index of the prices of identical models. But a disproportionate increase

in net revenue made possible by embodied improvements in technology is valued

by users and should be subject to a quality adjustment.
                                                                      41

      Table 1 presents the basic data required to compute the net revenue

yielded by the most important types of commercial aircraft manufactured

during the postwar period. Twelve comparisons appear in the table, involving

 fifteen different aircraft models, including long—range, medium—range, and

short—range models. In size the aircraft range from the small, two—engine

piston short—range Convair 440, with 44 seats, to the large wide—bodied long—

range turbofan Boeing 747, with 317 seats and capable of providing 28 times

the annual capacity. In chronological time the aircraft models span the

entire period 1946—78, beginning with the staple of early post—war air travel,

the Douglas DC—6, and continuing through the planes that have carried the

vast majority of U. S. air travelers in the late l970s——the Boeing 747,

Douglas DC—b, Boeing 727—200 and 727—100, and the Douglas DC—9—30. The major

types of aircraft that are excluded (to limit the time devoted to the analysis)

include planes that are virtual duplicates of those analyzed here, and a few

planes that had short production runs or have been used mainly by local—service
carriers. 19


     Table 1 is divided into three sections, according to the range of the

various plane models, to correspond with a central fact of aircraft operating

economics——both revenue and cost per seat—mile are extremely sensitive to the

average "stage length," or "length of hop." A very short flight mainly con-

sists of expensive take—off and landing operations, with a slow average speed,

whereas a long flight amortizes the take—off and landing over a multi—hour

flight segment at cruising speed. Thus every comparison in Table 1 represents

an attempt to compare the revenue and operating costs of planes flying the

same stage length, in order to hold constant this crucial operating variable.
                                                                     42

     Three basic figures are estimated in Table 1 for the two planes in each

comparison——total annual available seat—miles C'asmTs"), revenue per seat—

mile, and cost per seat—mile. To control for the varying routes and operating

practices of the airlines using each plane, annual utilization (column 1) is

held constant for each pair of planes, and speed is held constant when both

planes in a comparison are jets. The number of seats, of course, is allowed

to vary, since this is a major determinant of the differing productivity of

the various plane types. The product of the first three columns is annual

available seat—miles (column 9).

     The fourth column displays the average stage length used for the calcula-

tion of revenue and operating costs. In the comparisons designated by the

superscript "b", the actual recorded stage length of the second—listed

("newer") plane is chosen, and published cost curves are used to adjust the

operating costs of the first—listed plane. For the comparisons designated by

the superscript "e", arbitrary stage lengths of 250, 500, or 750 miles are

employed to allow the use of the careful comparative study of Straszheim

(1969), which provides a detailed cost breakdown of several major plane types

for these standard stage lengths. In all comparisons the revenue figures

refer to the particular year and stage—length selected, with column (5)

recording gross revenue per revenue passenger—mile, and column (6) recording

revenue per available seat—mile after deducting from revenue the "overhead"

costs of aircraft and traffic service, sales, reservations, advertising, ad-

ministrative, and depreciation of non—flight equipment.

     The measurement of revenue for a particular stage length and year in

column (5) must be handled with extreme care. Published fares overstate the
                                                                        43

 true revenue received by the airline, because of various categories of dis-

 counts that are available. Further, each aircraft, stage length, and year

 differs in the fraction of first—class and coach traffic carried.   The method

of revenue estimation employed in the construction of Table 1 takes as its

point of departure a yield curve for 1971 constructed by Douglas and Miller

 (1974, p. 90) that is adjusted for the incidence of discount fares. Then the

revenue yield for earlier years is based on changes in observed average first—

class and coach yields, adjusted for changes in the slope of the yield curve

(over time the price of short—haul flights has increased substantially

relative to long—haul flights). The mix of first—class and coach fares is

available for each plane separately from C. A. B. records.

     The aircraft operating cost figures in column (7) exclude all capital

costs, since our basic formula calls for the calculation of net revenue

available to tcover1! capital costs. The major categories of operating cost

included are flight crew wages, fuel, insurance, and aircraft maintenance

expenses. The operating cost estimates marked with the superscript "b"

are based on the actual recorded experience of the U. S. domestic trunk air-

lines, with the costs of the first—listed plane type adjusted to correspond

to the stage length of the second—listed plane type (thus the costs of the

second—listed plane type are those actually recorded in C. A. B. records).

The operating cost estimates marked with the superscript ttetl are based on

Straszheim's comparisons, in some cases adjusted for wage changes between

Straszheimts year of study (1969) and the comparison year.

     Finally, adjusted revenue minus operating cost provides an estimate of

net revenue per available seat—mile (column 8), and this figure times annual
                                                                     44


seat—miles provides the basic computation of annual net revenue, needed for

the comparison in equation (34) with the price of each plane type. We

note that Table 1 makes each pairwise comparison for a single year, thus

holding constant output prices and the prices of operating inputs, particularly

fuel and the wages of flight crews and maintenance labor. The plane that

appears to have provided the highest level of net revenue per available

seat mile is the short—range Douglas DC—9—30, while the highest absolute

level of net revenue is provided by the largest plane, the Boeing 747.

     Table 2 combines these net revenue estimates with data on the sales

price of the various plane types to allow computation of the quality adjust-

ments using equation (33) developed above. The prices are the same as those

used in the development of the price index for identical models displayed as

the lower solid line in Figure 6. In most cases the "old" and "new" models

being compared were not actually constructed simultaneously, requiring the

adjustment of the "old price" for changes in the price of identical models

between the year of its disappearance and the first sales year of the new

model. In this way the sales prices of the two planes in each comparison

are computed for the same year, thus allowing the price of output and operating

inputs to be held constant.

     One indication of the enormous profitability of the jet planes, compared

to the piston planes they replaced, is given in column (4), which shows the

ratio of net revenue in the comparison year to the replacement price of the

plane in the same year. Because most airlines depreciated their piston planes

over short seven or eight year intervals, it is apparent that the DC—7B and

the Convair 440 barely covered depreciation expense, much less any interest
                                                                         45
 cost or allowance for profit. On the other hand, some of the jets appear to

 have been extremely profitable, especially the stretched" long—range DC—8—6l

 and short—range DC—9--30.

      An interesting pattern in column (4) is the deteriorating profitability

 of a given model over its lifetime.
                                         For instance, the n/v ratio for the
 DC—8—61 declined from as much as .475 in 1967 (line 4) to .238 in 1972 (line

 1). Similar declines occurred for the
                                           Boeing 727—100 (from .225 in 1963 to
 .173 in 1968), the Lockheed Electra L—188 (from .388 in 1959 to .243 in

1963), and DC-9—lO (from .340 in 1965 to .314 in 1967). Of course this

pattern makes sense if new models are
                                         continually introduced and allow the

reduction of average operating costs and fares, while the costs of operating

any given model are driven up by rising wages.

     As discussed above, these estimates of
                                               the quality adjustment factor
require an assumption to be made regarding the curvature of the function link-

ing the price of the aircraft to their
                                          capability of earning net revenue,
holding technology constant. There appears to be no direct way of estimating

this function by examining the cross—section of planes built at any given

time, because the planes built in the long—range,
                                                     medium—range, and short—run
categories are really separate products that defy comparisons. Further, at any

given time, typically only the most advanced plane in each category is con-

structed. In lieu of any direct evidence on the curvature of the v(n,a) func-

tion, the curvature parameter has been assigned a value of 1.2 in Table 2,

implying diminishing returns in the provision of net revenue from increases in

aircraft size (the assumed elasticity of net revenue to increases in cost is

1/1.2 =   0.833).   The resulting correction factor for curvature is listed in
                                                                            46

column (7); if the assumption of diminishing returns is incorrect, then the

real price reductions in column (9) would be smaller. On the other hand, if

the T!trueu function were to have a greater degree of curvature, then the real

price reductions would be correspondingly greater.

     Ironically     the first comparison between the "stretcbed" DC—8—61,
manufactured during     1966—69 and in continued use today, indicates that the

introduction     of the controversial wide—bodied DC—lO—lO represented a "quality
deterioration,"     in the sense that the price of the new model increased sub-

stantially more than the net revenue it was capable of providing. Thus the

quality—adjustment formula indicates a "real" price increase of 10.8 percent.

All of the other comparisons indicate a quality improvement in the transition

from the old to the new model, requiring the downward adjustment of the infla-

tion rate recorded by the C. A. B. index recording the change in prices of

identical models.

     It   is   not surprising that the largest indicated quality adjustments in

column (8) are for two piston planes, the DC—TB and Convair 440. A con-

siderably smaller adjustment is indicated for the transition from the medium—

range DC—6B to the turboprop Lockheed Electra (L—188). It is well—known that

the DC—7 series was a particularly inefficient airplane, representing the

ultimate level of resources that could be usefully employed, given the obsolete

piston—engine technology. The DC—7 may well have been incapable of making a

profit at the time of the introduction of jets in 1959, only six years after

the first commercial flight of the DC—7 in 1953; this interpretation is con-

sistent with the precipitous decline in the prices of used long—range air-

craft during the period 1958—62.
                                                                           47
         Among the other transitions between models documented in Table 2, we note

    that the medium—range piston DC—6B, although not as inefficient relative to

    subsequent aircraft as the DC—7 and Convair 440, nevertheless was much less

    efficient than the tttransitjon" turboprop Lockheed
                                                          Electra. Further, the
 Boeing 727—100 represented very little further technological improvement

 over the Lockheed Electra, at least from the point of view of the airline

 operators; thus the subsequent disappearance of the Electras must at least

 partially reflect the favorable verdict of passengers regarding the speed

 and comfort of the Boeing 727.

        We note that the transition from the
                                               first—generation to second—genera-
 tion jets has resulted in efficiency improvements that in some cases are

almost as important as the earlier transition from the pistons to turboprops

and first—generation jets. Particularly important was the "stretching" of

the DC—8, DC—9, and Boeing 727, yielding roughly a doubling of net revenue

at only 10 to 25 percent additional
                                        resource cost. In contrast, the shift to
the wide—bodied DC—b and 747 does not appear to have represented a major

breakthrough in operating economics, and this fact is reflected below in the
failure of our aggregate
                            quality adjustment for aircraft to exhibit
a major decline in the final 1970—71 transition
                                                    period.

A   New Deflator for Conwiercjal Aircraft
       The changes in "real" price in column (8) of Table 2
                                                            can be used to
create adjustment factors for each aircraft included in the comparisons.

Because the current National Income
                                       Accounts deflator uses 1972 as its base
year, the aircraft produced in that year are treated as having adjustment
                                                                      48

factors of 1.00. These planes include the long—range DC—l0—l0, the Boeing

747, the "stretched" Boeing 727—200, and the "stretched" DC—9—30. Then

earlier planes are attributed quality relatives based on the change in 'real"

price in column (8) of Table 2 between them and their successors.

    How should these "quality relatives" for individual planes be combined

into a "real" price—change index to be combined (as in equation 35)

with the existing index of price change for identical models? First, prices

and numbers of units sold were obtained for every important type of plane

produced by U. S. commercial aircraft manufacturers and sold to U. S. air-

lines Cboth domestic and international) during l946_78.20 Then a method had

to be devised for weighting together the changes in the "real" price index

for individual planes when a transition was made from an old model to a newer

model. Neither the conventional Paasche nor Laspeyres methods could be used

to weight the relatives, since there were no years when all of the planes in

a given group (long—, medium—, or short—range) were manufactured simultaneously.

Instead, a variant on the Divisia index method was employed. Changes in

quality relatives from one plane to a succeeding model were not weighted by

sales in the transition year, because often sales of a discontinued model in

its last year, or sales of a new model in its first year, were too small to

properly represent the importance of the particular plane. Instead, the

weights for planes involved in the transitions were based on their nominal

sales during time intervals spanning periods when a particular group of

planes was manufactured simultaneously. As an example, in the long—range

group the transition in 1969—71 between the DC—8—6l, and Boeing 707—100 and

707—300, on the one hand, and the Douglas DC—lU—lU and Boeing 747, on the

other hand, was handled by weighting changes in quality relatives between the
                                                                        49

individual old and new models by sales of each of the three old models during

the entire 1966—69 period when they were all manufactured simultaneously.

The resulting average change in the quality relative was phased in partially

in 1970 (when the 747 was first delivered) and partially in 1971 (when the

DC—lU was first delivered), with the weight on each year in proportion to the

relative sales of the two new models in the 1970—75 interval.

     The resulting indexes of changes in the quality relatives for the three

major groups of planes were in turn weighted together to form an aggregate

index of these changes, using as weights the nominal sales of each group in

the three years surrounding the change.21 These methods of weighting help to

smooth out the final index and protect it from spurious changes due simply

to the fluctuating nominal sales of different types of planes. Any index

based on weightii. the levels of the quality relatives by current year sales,

as opposed to weighting changes in the quality relatives by sales over an

interval, tends to give the appearance of marked year—to—year fluctuations in

quality that in fact did not occur.

     Table 3 and Figure 6 illustrate the final index that results from these

calculations. In Table 3 the two sources for the current official National

Income Accounts deflator for aircraft are shown in columns (1) and (2), and

our new index for identical models purchased by identical airlines is

displayed in column (3). The aggregate index of the weighted average of

changes in the quality relatives is added together with the changes in

column (3) for 1946—57 and 1977—78 and column (1) for 1957—77, as in equation

(35) above. When the resulting sum of previously unmeasured quality change

(dpx/pX) and the price change of identical models (dc/c) is added together

to create the nominal input price—change index (dPX/P5, we obtain the index
                                                                     50

displayed in column (4). The timing of the newly measured quality change is

apparent in column (5), which displays the ratio of the new index based on

equation (35) to the existing C. A. B. index from column (1).

     As might have been expected, the most dramatic drop in the average ad-

justment factor in column (5) occurred in 1957—60, as a result of the replace-

ment of the piston DC—6 and DC—7 series by the turboprop Lockheed Electra

and pure jet Boeing 707 and 720, and the Douglas DC—8. Then the average

adjustment factor remains essentially constant until 1966, when the first of

the short—range DC—9—l0 aircraft was phased in. Further rapid reductions

occur in 1967—69, when the "stretched" second—generation jets replaced their

earlier counterparts. Only a relatively small reduction in the adjustment

factor is recorded in 1969—71, when the transition to the wide—bodied DC—b

and Boeing 747 occurred.


Possible Biases in the New Index: Evidence from the Used Aircraft Market

     The new index in column (4) of Table 3 is radically different from the

official deflator. We naturally are led to ask——which should we believe? The

official deflator, based on the prices of identical models, excludes any com-

parison between successive models that are not identical. Implicitly this

procedure involves treating successive models as differing in quality in

exact proportion to their prices (adjusted for price changes in identical

models). Thus if Douglas discontinued producing the $1.6 million DC—7 in

1958 and began producing the $4.4 million DC—8 in 1959, and other identical

planes sold in both years remained unchanged in price, then the official

deflator treats one DC—8 as equal to 4.4/1.6 (or 2.75) DC—Vs. In contrast,
                                                                    51

our index imputes a 7b percent reduction in price to the transition, based on

the observation that the new plane yielded 7.89 times as much net revenue and

on an assumption about the nonlinearity of the technology relating net

revenue to price.

     To choose between the indexes, we are aided by the ample data available

on the prices of used aircraft. If users considered a new 1959 DC—8 to be

identical to 2.75 1958 DC—7's, we should see something like that ratio

between the price of the two planes on the used aircraft market. On the

other hand, if our new approach is more appropriate, we should find that a

DC—8 was valued at an amount equal to 10 or ii DC—Vs. The first year in

which both planes were sold simultaneously on the used market was 1966, and

the observed price ratio was not just 10—to—i, but rather 22—to—l.22 In the

same source the price spread between the Lockheed Electra and Douglas DC—6

is not the 1.7—to—i dictated by actual prices, or the 3.5—to—l indicated by

our quality adjustment, but rather 7.8—to—l.

     Scattered evidence is also available to indicate that users concurred

in our evaluation of the poor operating economics of the first—generation

jets relative to the second—generation jets. For instance, in 1971 Eastern

was willing to sell a fleet of 15 Boeing 720's for $2.1 million each in order

to buy the same number of Boeing 727—200 models for about $6.5 million each

(note the comparison in Table 2, line 8). At the same time Eastern was able

to sell its DC—8—61 aircraft at about 90 percent of the purchase price, while

being forced to sell Lockheed Eiectras at 30 percent of the purchase price

and Convair 440 aircraft at less than 10 percent of the purchase price.23

    Quite recently a reasonably comprehensive report has compared prices of
                                                                       52

 used aircraft in 1977. In Table 4 are listed the ratios of used price to the

 new price in the most recent comparison year (as listed in column (2) in

 Table 2), as well as our "quality relatives" derived from column (8) of Table

 2. Several interesting features stand out in Table 4. First, we note that

 the top—listed plane in each category has a used/new relative of about 1.38.

In the case of the DC—lU, where the new price refers to 1972, this used/new

ratio corresponds closely to the 37 percent increase in the official deflator

between 1972 and 1977 (Table 3, column 1), indicating that used and new

planes are regarded as perfect substitutes. For the other top—listed planes,

the new prices refer to 1968 and 1967; since the NIA deflator increased by

about 60 percent between 1968 and 1977, theused market indicates that the

used versions of the Boeing 727—200 and Douglas DC—9—30 were not regarded in

1977 as perfect substitutes for new planes.

     There is no reason why the ratios in th& two columns of Table 4 should

correspond exactly. The year of the used price-quotations is later than the

year of the comparisons of successive modelsin Table 2; the fact that the

used market undervalues the older planes incomparison to our quality

relatives may simply indicate that the older planes become progressively

less profitable over time. A plane that the market overvalues in relation to

our comparison is the DC-.9—lO; the source to Table 4 indicates that this model

is relatively scarce, due to the expansion of the local—service airlines. The

DC—8—6l seems to be valued by the used market as much less efficient than the

DC—lU—lU, in contrast to our conclusion. This verdict of the market appears

to stem from the fact that, according to the source for Table 4, this model

has been affected adversely by U. S. government anti—noise regulations, being

"one of the most difficult aircraft to hush."
                                                                     53

     Passenger comfort is another factor that may explain why the used—air-

craft market tends to establish greater differentials between old and new

models than our comparison. This paper explicitly avoids any attempt to

attribute dollar values to the value of consumer comfort or time. Neverthe-

less, one reason that the new wide—bodied jets may hold their value relatively

well is the greater degree of comfort they offer. The seating configurations

for the DC—b—b and Boeing 747 used in Table 1, column (3) allow for wider

seats than for the "narrow—bodied" jets. Subsequent to the date of our

comparison most U. S. airlines have added an extra row of seats to all of their

wide—bodied aircraft, thus reducing seat width to the narrow—bodied standard.21

And, of course, the greater speed and comfort of jet aircraft induced a

shift of passengers in the 1958—60 transition era that inevitably had to

depress the used market for piston aircraft, independent of their operating

cost disadvantage.

     The used—aircraft market seems to provide no evidence that our comparisons

exaggerate the true quality differences among old and new models and in fact,

indicates that our comparisons may understate these differences. If we

review our comparison techniques to ask whether there is any consistent tendency

that might understate the differences among old and new models, our attention

is drawn to the amazingly high ratios of net revenue to aircraft price

arrayed in Table 2, column (4). Imagine that the real interest rate is 3

percent, and assume that aircraft are depreciated over 10 years at a 10 percent

straight—line rate (many airlines use lives of 14 to 18 years). Then the

cost of capital would be 13 percent, and yet the net revenue percentages for

some of the newer models in Table 2 range as high as 50 percent. It is
                                                                      54

possible that the sources used in Tables 1 and 2 may systematically over-

state revenue or understate costs, leading to exaggerated estimates of net

revenue. If this tendency were uniform, all net revenue figures would be

squeezed and the older planes would be pushed closer to break—even status, thus

increasing the relative net—revenue advantage of the newer models. One

systematic source of bias in our estimates is imparted by our assumption that

future prices and costs are assumed to be the same as in the present. This

conflicts with the observed tendency of net revenue to decline over the life

of a plane, as operating costs rise relative to revenue yield. A slightly

different conceptual framework in which the input price index held constant

discounted expected net revenue (over the life of the plane), rather than

actual first—year net revenue, would yield narrower margins for all planes

and thus increase the advantage in Table 2 of the more profitable models.

     Another important source of conservatism in our estimates is the

decision to use the same utilization rates for the old and new models (see

source notes to Table 1, column 1). The actual utilization rates for piston

aircraft were uniformly lower than for jets, allowing them to earn even less

net revenue than indicated in Table 1. Similarly, revenue yields on jets

were higher than on propeller aircraft during the 1959—63 period due to the

imposition of a "jet surcharge't on fares, while Table 1 conservatively

assumes that the propeller models had the same revenue yield as the jets that

replaced them.
                                                                         55

                                V.   CONCLUSION


Potential for Application to Other Products

     My own   previous   research and that of others suggests that there is a

considerable potential for applying the techniques developed in this paper,

and other related methods, to the construction of new price deflators for

types of equipment other than commercial aircraft. Another regulated industry,

the generation of electricity, creates many of the same opportunities for

improved measurement as in the case of airlines, because of the detailed

operating data available. A preliminary analysis (Gordon, 1974) indicates

that the manufacturers of generating equipment achieved improvements in

operating cost during the 1947—70 period that were extremely large relative

to the value of the equipment, although there was a marked deceleration in

this form of technological innovation after 1962. Just as in the aircraft

case the new deflator declines markedly during the 1947—70 period, unlike

the official deflator which in the case of electric generating equipment

increases by a factor of 2.5.

    Another appealing field of application is the whole range of consumer

durables, including appliances and automobiles. Just as the operating costs of

commercial aircraft were reduced by innovations that lowered fuel consumption

and real maintenance input per unit of output, so consumer appliance manufacturers

have evolved new models with lower energy and maintenance requirements than

their predecessors. Color television sets require less electricity and have

drastically lower repair frequencies than previously. Refrigerators and air

conditioners use less energy, while air conditioners have become lighter and
                                                                     56

easier to install per unit of cooling capacity.25

     Econometricians have devoted more attention to quality changes in

automobiles than in any other single product. At least two studies are now

available that measure the extent of technical improvement in the level of

automobile fuel consumption over time. Long ago Fisher, Griliches, and Kaysen

(1962, p. 446) created an index of the fuel usage of a constant—quality 1949

automobile and found a 12.8 percent improvement between 1949 and 1961. Using

a different methodology to hold constant the quality attributes of automobiles,

Wilcox (1978) has found an improvement similar to that of Fisher, Griliches,

and Kaysen for their 1949—61 period (16.2 percent) and a further 12.5 percent

improvement during the 1961—68 interval. Subsequently there was a deteriora-

tion in fuel economy that Wilcox relates to Federal environmental legislation.

     Row can the value of the savings in operating cost in the appliance and

automobile examples be converted into adjustments to the official price

indexes for the same goods? Since no net revenue data are available, a

different approach is required. In the above analysis we asked "how much

was the change in the price of the capital good needed to yield the same net

revenue?" Instead we could ask "how much would the price of the capital good

have to be reduced to yield the same saving as the present value of the ob-

served operating cost saving involved in the shift between the old and new

model?" Wi1cox paper on automobiles estimates that improved fuel efficiency

during the 1949—68 period was equivalent to a 10 percent reduction in the

price of new automobiles, enough to eliminate about one—third of the observed

inflation in new automobile prices over that interval.
                                                                        57


Implications   for the Measurement of Output and Productivity
     Since   real output for an individual commodity is measured as a residual

by dividing nominal product by the appropriate price index, any conclusions

reached above regarding the prices of durable goods have their counterpart

in symmetric conclusions regarding the real output of durable goods, as well

as the productivity of those industries. The new deflator developed for the

aircraft industry in Table 3, column (4), can be applied to the official

national income accounts figure on nominal purchases of aircraft as producers'

durable equipment to yield a new real output series. In contrast to a

1957—72 annual growth rate of the official real aircraft output series of

6.2 percent, the new output series grows at an annual rate of 16.9 percent.

Productivity growth in the aircraft industry would also be increased at a

corresponding rate. And, while labor productivity in the airline industry

would not be altered, any index of the growth of total factor productivity

in the airline industry would be much slower with a capital input series

derived from the new deflator than with the existing official deflator.

This shift of total factor productivity improvement from the airline industry

to the aircraft industry makes sense, since it was the aircraft industry

that invested the research and development resources to obtain the tehcnologi—

cal advances that made more modern aircraft possible (all these statements

treat aircraft engine and fuselage production as occuring in a single

industry).

     Since this paper contains only a single detailed case study, it is im-

possible to determine whether aggregate official figures on real investment or

real GNP are subject to minor or major revisions. The aircraft industry is so
                                                                     58

small that acceptance of our new deflator would raise the 1957—72 growth rate

of real producers' durable equipment purchases from 4.52 Only to 4.63 percent

per annum. Any major impact on real investment data, not to mention real GNP

data, would require a finding that corrections for nonproportional quality

change apply to a broad range of industries. Thus a conclusion regarding

the importance of potential revisions must await a more comprehensive study.26

    While we are not yet in a position to assess the aggregate quantitative

significance of the new measurement techniques proposed in this paper,

nevertheless it is apparent from the aircraft example that the potential for

revision in the official deflators for durable goods may be considerably

greater than from the first round in the 1960s of econometric studies using

the hedonic regression technique. Because improvements in operating efficiency

by definition occur for durable goods, but not nondurable goods or services,

a more comprehensive study would presumably yield the conclusion that the

price of durable goods relative to other goods has declined in comparison to

the relative prices registered in the national accounts.

     Finally, critics may protest that the process of correcting for changes

in operating efficiency is inevitably so subjective that the resulting

deflators have a wide margin of error. The detailed analysis of the airline

case does indeed confirm that the estimation requires numerous steps, any one

of which might be wrong, and also requires an arbitrary assumption about the

shape of the function linking aircraft net revenue to capital cost. In

contrast to our findin that the new 1972—base deflator in 1957 is about four

times the official deflator, another investigator might find a ratio of three

or six. Yet it would be unwise to reject the new index as subjective while
                                                                                 59

 clinging rigidly to the existing deflator, because the latter is based on the

 equally subjective evaluation that successive models of aircraft differ' in

 qua lity    in   exact proportion   to observed differences   in price. Among   the many
 pieces     of evidence that deny the validity of this assumption is the observed

 behavior of the prices of used aircraft. In fact the existing national income

 accounts are riddled with subjective decisions, including the
                                                                        continuing
 adherence to the unbelievable procedure of setting permanently at unity the

 price index for producer purchases of electronic computers.

      Finally, it must be recognized that any attempt to correct durable goods

prices for changes in operating efficiency requires acceptance of the production

separability assumption outlined at the beginning of Section III. It must

be assumed that improvements in fuel efficiency are achieved by manufacturers

of the durable good and not by their users. Yet some assumptions are required

to perform any kind of measurement work, and the most crucial assumptions

employed in this paper can be validated by various pieces of outside evidence.

Berndt and Wood (1975) provide evidence to support the separability

assumption. The notion that users care about operating efficiency seems to

be be validated by the behavior of prices in the used aircraft market, not to

mention the response of the prices of various types of used automobile models

to changes in the price of gasoline.          Similarly, the verdict that electronic

computer prices should be based on prices per unit        of   computer service, and not

on the production price per computer, is validated by the rush of users to

shift to new—model computers with higher performance/price ratios. It may now

be appropriate for critics to drop the accusation that new techniques of

measurement are inherently subjective and to admit that the limited scope of
                                                                     60

quality adjustments in the present official deflators for durable goods

conflicts with ample evidence that real—world users place a positive value

on improvements in performance and operating efficiency.
                                                                            61
                                   REFERENCES

 Avmark Inc. in cooperation with
                                     Lockheed—Georgia Co. Cor,nercial Aircraft
       Fleets. Third Edition. Lob, Mont.         1976.

 Berndt,   Ernst R., and   Wood, David 0. "Technology, Prices, and the Derived

       Demand for Energy." Review of Economics and Statistics 56 (August 1975),

       pp. 259—68.


                                          "Engineering and Econometric Interpreta-
       tions of Energy—Capital
                                  Complementarity." American Economic Review 69
       (June 1979), pp. 342—54.

 Denison, Edward F. "Theoretical Aspects of
                                                Quality Change, Capital Consumption,
      and Net Capital Formation." In Conference on Research in Income and

      Wealth, Problems of Capital Formation.      Studies in Income and Wealth 19,

      Princeton: Princeton University Press for NBER, 1957.

________________      "Some Major Issues in Productivity Analysis: An
                                                                      Examina-
      tion of Estimates by Jorgenson and
                                             Griliches." Survey of Crrent
      Business 49 (May 1969, Part II), pp. 1—27.

________________      "Final   Comments." Survey of Current Business 52 (May 1972,
      Part II), pp. 95—115.

Douglas Aircraft Company, Inc. Annual Report. Fiscal years 1950—66.

      Santa Monica, California.

Douglas, George W., and Miller, James. C. III. Economic Regulation
                                                                   of Domestic
     Air Transport. Washington:       Brookings Institution, 1974.
Fisher, Franklin M., Grjljches, Zvi, and Kaysen, Carl. "The Costs of Auto-

     mobile Model Changes Since 1949."
                                            Journal of Political Economy 70
     (October 1962), pp. 433—51.
                                                                         62

Fisher, Franklin M., and Shell, Karl. The Economic Theory of Price Indices.

     New York: The Academic Press, 1972.

Gordon, Robert J. "Measurement Bias in Price Indexes for Capital Goods."

      The Review of Income and Wealth 17 (1971), pp. 121—74.     (a)


_______________     "A Rare Event." Survey of Current Business 51 (July 1971,

      Part II), pp. 83—6.    (b)

_______________     The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices. Draft of Monograph.

      National Bureau of Economic Research, 1974.

Griliches, Zvi. TIntroduction: Hedonic Price Indexes Revisited." In Price

      Indexes and   Quality Chane   edited by Z. Griliches. Cambridge: Harvard,

      1971, pp. 3—15.

Hudson, E. A., and Jorgenson, D. W.   tjj•   S. Energy Policy and Economic

      Growth, 1975—2000." Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 5

      (1974), pp. 461—514.

Jaszi, George. "An Economic Accountant's Ledger." Survey of Current Business

      51 (July 1971, part 2), pp. 183—227.

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Griliches, Zvi. "The Explanation of Productivity

      Change." Review of Economic Studies 34 (July 1967), pp. 249—83.

______________________________________       "Issues in Growth Accounting:    A

      Reply to Edward F. Denison." Survey of Current Business 52 (May 1972,

      Part II), pp. 65—94.

Muellbauer, John. "Household Production Theory, Quality, and the 'Hedonic

      Technique." American Economic Review 64 (December 1974), pp. 977—94.

Panel to Review Productivity Statistics. The Measurement and Interpretation of

      Productivity. Committee on National Statistics, National Research

      Council, Washington: National Academy of Sciences, 1979.
                                                                            63
Parks,    Richard W. "The Demand and Supply of Durable Goods and Durability."

         American Economic Review 64 (March 1974), pp. 37—55.

Rosen, Sherwin. "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentia-

         tion in Pure Competition." Journal of Political Economy 82 (January!

         February 1974), pp. 34—49.

Straszheim, Mahion R. The International Airline Industry.         Washington:
      The Brookings Institution, 1969.

Triplett, Jack E. "The Measurement of Inflation: A Survey of Research on

         the Accuracy of Price Indexes."   In Analysis   of Inflation edited by
      Paul H. Earl. Lexington, Mass.:       Lexington   Books, 1976, pp. 19—82.

                       "Concepts of Quality in Input, Output, and Productivity

      Measures: A Commentary on an Old Debate." Paper presented at the

      Summer   North   American meetings of the Econometric Society, Montreal,

      June 27, 1979.

U. S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Consumer Price Index:          Concepts and
      Content   Over the Years. RepOrt 517. Washington, 1977.

U. S. Civil Aeronautics Board. Handbook of Airline Statistics.
                                                                       Washington,
      1973.

U. S. Civil Aeronautics Board, Bureau of Operating Rights. "A Price Index

      for Air Frames and Engines, 1957—76." Unpublished
                                                              report, May 5, 1977.
U. S. Civil Aeronautics Board. Aircraft Operating Cost and
                                                                 Performance Report.
      Various issues.

U. S. Federal Aviation Agency. Direct Operating Costs and Other Performance

     Characteristics of Transport Aircraft in Airline Service. Various issues.

Watkins, Harold D. "Eastern Successful in Used Aircraft Sales.' Avzaticn

    Week and Space Technology (January     25,   1971), pp. 28—29.
                                                                    64

Weitzman, Martin L. "On the Welfare Significance of National Product in a

     Dynamic Economy." Quarter7y Journal of Economics (February 1976),

     pp. 156—62.

Wilcox, James A. "Automobile Gasoline Mileage and the Costs of Environmental

     Regulation." University of California working paper, October 1978.
                                                                         65
                             FOOTNOTES



     1For a general review of the central issues involved in the measure-

ment of real output for productivity analysis, see the Panel to Review

Productivity Statistics (1979, Chapter 5).

     2See especially Denison (1957), and his debate (1969) (1972) with

Jorgenson and Griliches.

     3See Jorgenson and Griliches (1967) (1972) and Gordon (197la) (1974).

     See Gordon (197lb) and Jaszi's response (1971, P 203).

     5The "capital intact" definition of zero net investment has never

been at issue in the debates between Denison and Griliches—Jorgenson,

since both parties to the debate apply the same criteria for quality

adjustment to capital input and to the investment component of real GNP.

A central paper supporting the "capital intact" criterion of zero net

capital formation is Denison (1957).

     6The assumption of costs that are constant in quantities, but increas-

ing in quality characteristics, has been adopted by most previous papers in

this literature, including Parks (1974) and Rosen (1974).

     7The vector of output characteristics (y) might be imagined to consist

of m—l homogeneous goods, plus "mth" good that in turn consists of n separate

characteristics:

             =


Now quality change involves an increase in one of the characteristics of the

"mth" good. If resources and technology are fixed, this would in turn require

a reduction in the output of one of the m—l other goods.
                                                                       66


      6Berndt and Wood (1979, P. 344), with the notation of the present paper

substituted for that of the authors.

      91n what follows expected future values of the exogenous parameters are

 implicitly assumed to remain equal to their current values.

     101f the firm maximizes profit, which consists of net revenue less the

user cost of its capital stock of durable input characteristics, it must be

operating on the upward sloping segment of the net revenue function. This

is evident in Figure 5 below.

     11During the two decade period 1953—72, the nominal price of gasoline

in the CPI increased 34 percent, compared to 56 percent for the all—items

CPI, representing a reduction in the relative price of 14.4 percent.

     '2The depreciation rate should depend both on the built—in durability

characteristics of the good and the user—chosen intensity of repair and

maintenance services. In the simple version of the model considered here,

with only a single composite operating cost characteristic, the depreciation

rate is assumed to be fixed.

     13For some qualifications see Muellbauer (1974).

     1Imagine that point B lies along an extension of the ray OA. Then

the new level of net revenue per dollar of capital (V1B/0V1) would be the


same as before (V0A/0V0). Since the percentage user cost per dollar of capital

(r+ô) is constant, the rate of return on capital would remain constant.

     15Among the most important are Griliches' (1971) notes on technical

problems in the hedonic literature, and the debate between Gordon (l97la) (1974)

and Triplett (1976) on the extent of a significant quality bias in existing
                                                                        67
 official price indexes.

      16This description is based on U. S. C. A. B. (1977). This document

 was kindly provided to me by Don Eldridge of the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

      17To minimize the burden of copying the required data, prices for all

 planes during 1968—78 were based on Form 41 dated 12—31—78, and during 1946—67

 were based on Schedule B—43 dated 12—31—77. Data for the following sample of

 airlines were collected: American, Braniff, Delta, Eastern, TWA, United.

 Price quotations were obtained for 802 separate aircraft from the 1978 form,

 for 767 aircraft from the 1967 sheet.

      18Prior to 1957 the official deflator is based on a weighted average of

 the producer price index component indexes for diesel engines, fabricated

 metal products, metalworking machinery, and electrical machinery. None of

 these indexes contains any components manufactured by the aircraft industry.

      19More specifically, the excluded Lockheed L—lOll duplicates the Douglas

DC—1O; the Convair 880 and 990 were high—cost jets that had short production

 runs and were phased out by their main users by the end of the l960s; the

short—range piston Martin 404 mirrors the performance of the Convair 440; and

the Lockheed "Constellation" series (749, 1049, 1649) duplicates the Douglas

DC—6, DC—6B, and DC—7 series.

     20Major sources are Avmark (1976 and earlier issues) and Douglas

Aircraft annual reports.

     211f a change between models
                                    occurred in a group, say long—range aircraft,
between 1969 and 1970, this change was weighted together with the changes

recorded for the two other groups (medium— and
                                                 short—range) using the nominal
sales in the respective groups in 1969, 1970, and 1971.
                                                                        68

     22The source is Aircraft Exchange and Services, Inc., Market Reports

no. 145, April 11, 1966, P. 1. The average price quotation on the two DC—8—30's

listed is $4,000,000 and of the nine DC—7's listed is $183,000. Of course

the DC—7's were somewhat older, being manufactured between 1953 and 1959, but

this age difference cannot account for the price spread.

     23These price quotations are all from Watkins (1971).

     21In 1979 the average seat width on United's DC—8 aircraft was 16.89

inches and on its 747 and DC—lO aircraft was 17.00 inches, from United

brochure 'Great Seats in the Friendly Skies."

     25Some crude adjustments to the prices of consumer appliances for

savings in operating costs are contained in Gordon (1974, Chapter 6).

     26This study is underway. The draft monograph (Gordon, 1974) is

under revision to update the figures, to incorporate the measurement techniques

discussed in this paper, as well as other improvements suggested by reviewers

and critics.
                                            69


V
                    V(y,p.0)




     A
                        /   ,V(y,p.1)

V0
VI




0
         y*    y1                       y



V

                   V(y, X0)




V0
     A
                   , V(y,X1)
                   B
VI




0        *
     y        y1                        y

                               FIGURE 1
                                70



R

               R(F,y)




                    R(P17y)
R0

R,


                       R(P,y)



 0
     yo   Yi       y


               FIGURE 2
                                    71



V                 V(n)




          C       B
VI        T
     dV

V0




          1dn
0
          no ni                n




                         FIGURE 3
                                             72



                       V(n,s0,oö)

 V                                V(n,s,,o-0) or

                                 / /       V(n,s0,aj)


                           / /
                     "B
                       /
VI
      C
               -x
               /1
,vo
           /    I




           dn
 0
      no        ni                     n




                            FIGURE 4
                                               73



               r÷3
                     V(n,o-0)              V(n,cj)




                                 /
VI                                         B



                           /   /
     dV


                     /   /
V0




           D
                         dn

0
          no                         ni        n




                                FIGURE 5
                                                 74




                    • is B..E.A. Extrapolation
                       is C.A.B. Index
                        is New Index for Identical Models
00                      is New Index Based on Equation (35)



oo




100

80

60           .




40-

      1950       1960                  1970                   1980




                                      FIGURE 6
                                                  TABLE 1                             75

                                  Basic Revenue and Operating Cost Data
                                 For U. S. Aircraft Efficiency Analysis




                                                                     Rev.
                                                                    after Aircraft
                         Rev.                               Gross   Over— Operating                Annual
                         Hours                     Stage     Rev,    head   Cost
                Plane                                                                               Net
Comparison               pee-     Speed           Length    per      per    per     (6)    Annual Revenue
 and Year       Types    Year     (mph)   Seats
                          (1)      (2)     (3)
                                                  (miles)   rpm      asm    asm    —(7)     asin's ($   mil)
ng Range

 1. 1972      DC—8—61    3073      463    175.0     942b    .0682 .0176 .OO93'°    .0083 249       2.067
              DC—lO—lO   2836a 483a 224.6          1067     .0682 .0176 .0082      .0094 320       3.008
 2. 1972      B707—300B 3457       485    143.0    1429b .0601 .0169   0106b .0063 240             1.512
              B747—lOO   3146a 507a 317.1          1962   .0601 .0169 .0087  .0082 532             4.362
 3. 1967      B7O7—100B 3599       489    124.6    1166b .0546 .0159   0094b .0065 219             1.424
              DC—8—61    3990a 485a 195.5          1223   .0546 .0159 .0070   .0089 344            3.062
 4. 1967      DC—8—5O    3836      479    130.7     873b .0546 .0164   0086b .0078 240             1.872
              DC—8—61    3990a 485a 195.5          1223   .0546 .0164 .0070  .0094 359             3.375
 5. 1959      DC—7B      ____c 248d 791c 750e .0590 .0207 •0172e .0035   65                        0.228
              DC—8—50    3325c 410d 1208c 750e .0590 .0207 •0098e .0109 165                        1.799
 6. 1959      DC—73             c 248d 791c 750e            .0590 .0207    0172e .0035  60         0.210
              B707—100B 3084c 410d 1219c 750e .0590 .0207                  0098e .0109 154         1.679

edium Range

 7. 1971      B727—100   2537      433     96.2     556'D   .0797 .0242 •0149b .0093 106           0.986
              B727—200   2610a 429a 124.3          518      .0797 .0242 .0110  .0132 137           1.808
 8. 1971      B720       2576      451    116.6    847b .0797 .0242 ,0169b .0073 135               0.986
              B727—200   2610a 429a 124.3          518      .0797 .0242 .0110      .0132 144       1.901
 9. 1963      L—188      2409c 290d       75.1     500e     .0718 .0218 •0134e .0084        52     0.437
              B727—100 ___c 376d          96.2     500e     .0718 .0218 •0117e .0101        87     0.878
10. 1959      DC—6B             c 216d 655c 500e            .0708 .0248    0176e .0073      34     0.248
              L—188      Z4O9C 290d    751c 50Qe            .0708 .0248    0121e .0127      52     0.660
ott   Range
11. 1967      DC—9—l0    2621     378     66.6     280b     .0831 .0290 •0157b .0173        66     0.878
              DC—9—30    2047a 348a       97.4     257      .0831 .0290 .0117   .0173       96     1.660

12. 1965      CV-440            c 165d             250e     .0848 .0296    0242e .0048      19     0.091
              DC—9—10    2621c 375d       66.6     250e     .0848 .0296    0155e .0141      65     0.917
                                                                        76

                        TABLE 1 SOURCE NOTES BY COLUMN


(1)   Revenue hours per year, from C. A. B., Aircraft Operating Cost and Perform-
         ance report for the year in question (U. S. F. A. A. for 1963 and prior
         years). No figures are shown for piston planes, which are allocated the
         same utilization as the jet plane used in each comparison.

(2) Speed. All comparisons except those marked with superscript "d" are from
        the same sources as column (1). Those marked with superscript "d" are
        from Straszheim, p. 76.

(3) Seats. All comparisons are from the same sources as column (1). For
       those marked with superscript "c", figures from the 1963 U. S. F. A. A.
       document were used for 1959 as well.

(4) Stage Lngth. All comparisons except those marked with supeiscript T1e" are
        from the same sources as column (1). For those marked with superscript
        "e", operating cost comparisons are taken from Straszheim (1969), p. 86,
        for the stage lengths indicated.

(5) Fare data are based on a yield curve adjusted for discounts displayed in
        Douglas and Miller (1974, p. 90). For earlier years, e.g., 1967, the
        1971 data are multiplied by the following three ratios that, when
        multiplied together, adjust for the changing role of discounts and the
        gradually changing tilt of the yield curve: (a) the ratio of the 1967
        to the 1971 published fare for the stage length in question, from the
        Official Airline Guide; (b) the ratio of the 1971 to the 1967 published
        coach fare for the 740 mile stage length; (c) the ratio of the 1967
        coach yield to the 1971 coach yield, from the U. S. C. A. B., Handbook
        of Airline Statistics. First—class fare data are calculated by the same
        procedure independently and are weighted together with coach data using
        the ratio of first—class to coach—class revenue passenger miles for
        each year, from the Handbook of Airline Statistics.

(6) Gross revenue data are multiplied by two ratios to provide figures on net
        revenue attributable to a given aircraft per available seat mile:
        (a) load factor for the given plane in the given year, from the same
        sources used for column (1); (b) the ratio of direct cost to total cost,
        taken as a percentage (57.2) of the direct cost categories (flying
        operations, maintenance, depreciation, and capital costs) to total costs
        (also including aircraft and traffic servicing, passenger service,
        promotion and sales, general administrative, and depreciation of non—
        flight equipment), as given for the year ending 6—30—71 in Douglas and
        Miller (1974, Table 2—1, p. 8).

(7) Except for comparisons designated by the superscript ?eU cost figures
        (including flying operations and maintenance but excluding depreciation)
        were taken from the source of column (1). Comparisons designated by
        superscript !e!I were taken from Straszheim (1969, pp. 249—51), where the
        figures shown from 1965 were adjusted to the year shown by multiplying
        crew wages and maintenance expense by the ratio between the earlier year
        and 1965 of the BLS economy—wide nonagricultural average hourly earnings
         index.
                                                                           77
 (8) Column (6) minus column (7).

 (9) Column (1) times (2) times (3) (expressed in millions of asm's per plane—year).

(10) Column (8) times column (9).



Notes:   (a) Annual asm's (column 9) were calculated by using figures in
              columns (1) and (2) for the other plane in the comparison.

         (b) Cost per asm was calculated using the stage length of the other
              plane in the comparison, adjusting the stage—length shown for this
              plane by the cost curves illustrated in Straszheim
                                                                 (1969, p. 86).
         (c) Seat totals used for 1950 are those listed for the particular plane
              in the U. S. F. A. A. volume for 1963.

         (d) Speeds shown for the relevant stage length in Straszheim, p. 76.

         (e) Costs per asm adjusted from 1965 figures listed in Straszheim
              (1969, pp. 249—51) using the BLS average hourly earnings index for
              the nonfarm private economy.
                                                 TABLE 2                                 78


                        Comparisons of Purchase Price and Net Revenue
                            for U. S. Aircraft Efficiency Analysis




                                          Price Net                                             x x
                                          In    Rev, in                                       p /p
omparison      Plane     Original     Comp. Comp.                                n            (5)x(7)
md Year        Types     Price (Year) Year Year                   t lt
                                                           nt /v v /v n /n
                                                                    Ut it Ut
                                                                                 ().2
                                                                                  n1
                                                                                              (6)

                           (1)             (2)    (3)      (4)     (5)   (6)     (7)           (8)
ong Range

1. 1972 DC—8—61          7.7 (1969) 8.7           2.067    .238 1.736    1.455   .928          .108
            DC—lO—lO                      15.1    3.008    .199

2. 1972 B707—300B 6.7 (1968) 7.5                  1.512    .202 2.627    2.885   .809         —.263
            B747—lO0                      19.7    4.363    .221

3. 1967 B707—100B 5.7 (1967) 5.7                  1.424    .249 1.245    2.150   .858         —.503
            DC—8—61                        7.1    3.062    .431

4. 1967     DC—8—50      5.4 (1966) 5.6           1.872    .334 1.268    1.803   .889         —.375
            DC—8—61                        7.1    3.375    .475

5. 1959 DC—7B            1.6     (1958)    1.6    0.228    .143 2.750    7.890   .662         —.769
            DC—8—50                        4.4    1.799    .409

6. 1959 DC—7B            1.6 (1953) 1.6           0.210    .131 2.875    7.995   .660         —.762
            B707—100B                      4.6    1.679    .365



4edium Range

 7.   1968 B727—lOO 4.6 (1968) 4.6                0794a .173 1.130       1.832   .886         -.453
            B727—200                       5.2 1455a .280
 8. 1968 B720        3.7 (1961) 4.4 0794a .180 1.182                     1.927   .877         -.462
            B727—200            5.2  1530a .294

 9. 1963 L-188           1.7 (1959) 1.8           0.437    .243 2.167    2.009    870         -.062
            B727—100                       3.9    0.878    .225

10.   1959 DC—6B         1.1 (1958) 1.1           0.248    .225 1.545    2.661   .822         -.523
            L—188                          1.7    0.660    .388



Short Range

11. 1967 DC—9—10         2.7 (1966) 2.8           0.878    .314 1.107    1.891   .880          —.485
            DC—9—30                        3.1    1.660    .535


12.   1965 CV—440        0.6 (1957)          .65 0.091     .140 4.154 10.077      .630         —.740
              DC—9—1O                      2.7     0.917   .340
                                                                          79
                     TABLE 2 SOURCE NOTES BY COLUM
(1) U. S.   C. A. B. Form 41. 1967 and   earlier observations from Schedule B—43
        dated  December 31, 1967.

(2) Price in column (1) for the first plane listed is multiplied by the
        change between the year shown in column (1) and the year of the com-
        parison of the C. A. B. price index shown in Table
                                                           3, column (1).
        The price for the second—listed plane in each comparison is obtained
        for the comparison year from the same source as is listed in column (1).

(3) Table 1, column (10).

(4) Column (3) divided by column (2).

(5) The ratio of price in column (2) for the second—listed plane to the price
        in column (2) for the first—listed plane.

(6) The ratio of the net revenue listed in column (3) for the second—listed
        plane to the net revenue listed in column (3) for the first—listed plane.

(7) The inverse of column (6), raised to the 0.2 power.

(8) Column (5) times column (7) divided by column (6) minus 1.0.
                                    TABLE 3                                80

                          Alternative Price Indexes
                        for Commercial Aircraft, 1946—78

                                    (1972 = 100)


                                        New Index          New Index
         C. A. B.      B. E. A.         for                Based on              (4)
Year     Index         Extrapolation    Identical Models   Equation (35)        +(l)
            (1)              (2)           (3)                (4)                (5)

1946                     36.8             48.0               196.3
1947                     41.9             48.0               196.3
1948                     44.7             48.0               196.3
1949                     46.5             54.4               222.8

1950                     49.0             60.9               249.3
1951                     55.9             60.9               249.3
1952                     55.6             60.9               249.3
1953                     56.8             66.5               272.5
1954                     57.5             68.3               279.8

1955                     59.8             69.0               282.6
1956                     65.2             70.1               287.2
1957       68.5                           70.4               288.1              4.206
1958       69.6                           70.4               259.3              3.726
1959       72.1                           70.4               133.0              1.845

1960       72.3                           70.4               128.1              1.772
1961       73.2                           70.4               128.6              1.757
1962       75.5                           68.8               132.6              1.756
1963       78.7                           75.6               136.9              1.740
1964       77.1                           75.6               134.2              1.740

1965       78.7          -                77.8               137.1              1.740
1966       80.0                           78.6               119.9              1.499
1967       83.0                           81.0               116.4              1.402
1968       85.6                           4.2                106.0              1.238
1969       88.7                           88.7               105.4              1.188

1970       94.0                           94.0               103.4              1.110
1971       98.1                           98.9                98.1              1.000
1972      100.0                          100.0               100.0              1.000
1973      103.6                          106.0               103.6              1.000
1974      108.5                          109.0               108.5              1.000

1975      118.4                          119.5               118.4              1.000
1976      129.3                          122.1               129.3              1.000
1977      136.9                          137.7               136.9              1,000
1978                                     151.2               150.3




Source by column:   (1) and (2), U. S. C. A. B. (1977)
                    (3) and (4), see Table 2 and text explanation
                                  TABLE 4                                81

                    Comparison of Used/New Price Ratios
               and Quality Relatives for Commercial Aircraft
                                    1977




                                       Used/New           Quality Relative
                                            (1)                 (1)
 Long Range

            DC—10.-1O                       1.39               1.00
            Boeing 747—100                  1.19               1.00
            DC—8—61                         0.67               1.11
            Boeing 707—300B                 0.51               0.74
            Boeing 707—bOB                  0.35               0.55
            DC—8—50                         0.31               0.69


Medium Range

            Boeing 727—200                  1.38               1.00
            Boeing 727—100                  0.65               0.54
            Boeing 720B                     0.27               0.54
            Lockheed L—188                  0.23               0.51


Short Range

            DC—9—30                      1.37                  1.00
            DC—9—b0                      0.82                  0.52
            Convair 440                  0.08                  0.13




Source by column:

      (1)   Used Price from Bill Sweetman, "Airliner Prices Guide."
            Flight Internationals vol. 111, March 12, 1977, pp. 645—7.
            New Price is from Table 2, column (2).

      (2) Based on Table 2, column (8).
