NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON FORECASTING INTEREST RATES:
AN EFFICIENT MARKETS PERSPECTIVE

James E. Pesando

Working Paper No. 410

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
November 1979

The Research reported here is part of the NBERtS research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The author
is indebted to Michael Huberman for research assistance.

NBER Working Paper 410
November 1979

On Forecasting Interest Rates:
An Efficient Markets Perspective

ABTRACT

This paper reviews, from an applied forecasting perspective, the
properties of short— and long—term interest rates in an efficient market.
The paper emphasizes that efficient markets do not preclude economic agents

from successfully forecasting movements in short—term interest rates. For
brief forecast intervals, however, ex ante changes in long—term rates are
sufficiently close to zero that economic agents are not likely to improve

upon the no—change prediction of the martingale model. Economic agents, in
effect, are not likely to succeed in forecasting short—term movements in

long—term interest rates. An analysis of three sets of Canadian interest
rate forecasts provides results which are consistent with the theoretical

discussior, Further, these results parallel those obtained in recent
studies of recorded forecasts in the United States, although the authors of

these latter studies apparently failed to appreciate the nature of their
findings.

James E. Pesando
Institute for Policy Analysis
150 St. George Street
Toronto, CANADA
M5S 1A1

416/978—8621

1. INTRODUCTION

In view of the substantial empirical evidence which supports the
proposition that capital markets are efficient in their use of publicly
available information, surprisingly little attention has been directed to
the question of whether economic agents can successfully forecast interest

rate movements. Impressed perhaps by the early evidence in favour of
the random walk hypothesis,1 most sophisticated agents tend to regard

published forecasts of the future level of aggregate stock prices with

a healthy degree of skepticism. As yet, however, such skepticism does not
appear to extend to published forecasts of movements in either short— or
long—term rates of interest, nor is it clear to many whether or not such
skepticism is warranted.

At the theoretical level, the question of whether economic agents
can successfully anticipate interest rate movements in an efficient mar-

ket has received increased attention. Sargent (1976) and Pesando (1978)
have noted that long—term interest rates in an efficient market will
approximately follow a martingale sequence — and thus exhibit random walk
characteristics —

in

the absence of time—varying term premiums. As Mishkin

(1978) and Pesando (1979) caution, however, there is nothing in efficient
markets theory which requires that short—term rates follow a random walk.

Thus agents without access to inside information may well succeed

in forecasting movements in short—term rates, but are not likely to
succeed in forecasting short—run movements in long—term rates if the term
premium accorded long—term bonds is indeed time—invariant.
The purpose of this paper is to extract from these theoretical
results an appropriate perspective on the practical problem of forecasting

2

interest rate movements. The first section of the paper briefly reviews
the theoretical results, including the role of time—varying term premiums.

The second explores the closeness of the martingale approximation for long—
term rates in Canada, an exercise which bears directly on the usefulness

of the no—change prediction implied by the martingale model. The third
section examines the performance of a variety of recorded interest rate

forecasts in Canada in light of the preceding theoretical arguments. A
concluding section completes the paper.

2. THEORETICAL OVERVIEW

Let

denote the interest rate on an n—period, non—coupon

bond in period t ,
and

the information available to the market in period t,

the forward rate at time t for the one—period bond rate in

period t+i. If pure expectations govern the term structure, and if the
standard arithmetic approximation to the geometric average that links the
long—term rate to current and future short—term rates is satisfactory,
then — as noted by Sargent (1976) and Pesando (1978) —

the

ex ante change

in the long—term rate can be written as follows:

E(RIi) —

Rti

=

*

—

Ri,_i]

(1)

The term on the right—hand side of equation (1), which represents the non—

overlapping one—period rates, clearly approaches zero as n gets large.

If n,t represents the term premium accorded an n—period bond in period t,
then (1) becomes:

3

E(R,k_i)

*

=

—

+ E(lPn,tkt_i)

If

—

Ri,t_i]

—

(2)

this term premium is constant, then (2) reduces to (1) and hence the

martingale approximation emerges:

E(R,kt_l) R,t_
Equation

(3) indicates that the ex ante change in the long—term rate is

approximately zero if
of

n

is large, and hence that the optimal forecast

the long—term rate is simply its current value. For a ten—year bond

whose (annual) yield is being forecast on a guarterly basis, n equals
40 and the tuartingale approximation is likely to be close so long as the

short—term

rate is not "too nonstationary". If the yield on this same

bond is being forecast on a monthly basis, n equals 120 and the ex ante
change in the long—term rate will be even closer to zero. In

shorter

general, the

the forecast interval, the closer the martingale approximation.

Equivalently, it is short—run movements in long—term rates which will not
be predictable under the joint hypothesis of market efficiency and a time—
invariant term premium.

For coupon bonds, as noted by Pesando (1979), the expression analogous

to (1) is more complicated. Nonetheless, as illustrated later in this
study, the martingale approximation remains quite close for short—term
movements in long—term rates in the absence of time—varying term premiums.

4

Intuitively, the martingale approximation stems from the fact that over
the unit intervals (e.g. one quarter) in which agents typically forecast

interest rate movements, the percentage change in bond prices necessary
to equate the ex ante returns on short— and long—term securities (up to

a time—invariant term premium) is very small. As a result, the implied

exante changes in long—term rates are very close to zero. From this
perspective, the inartingale approximation for long—term rates is but a

specific illustration of the more general proposition that short—run
movements in speculative prices are not likely to be predictable.
Efficient market theory does not require, however, that the short—
term rate follow a martingale, nor does empirical evidence suggest that

this is the case. There is no arbitrage opportunity through which agents
could eliminate any serial dependence in the short—term rate and — as
emphasized by Modigliani and Shiller (1973) — an expectations solution"
to the term structure is consistent with any stochastic representation

of the short—term rate. Using end—of—the quarter data on 90—day Treasury
bills and 90—day finance company paper, so as to eliminate possible biases
due to time aggregation (Working (1960)), alternative time series models

can be fitted to the Canadian data. For the sample period 1957:1 — 1979:1,
an ARNA (1, 1) or an AR (2) representation is clearly superior to the mar—

tingale model for both short—term rates.2 The fact that the short—term
rate need not follow a inartingale sequence is "reconciled1' with the mar—

tingale property of the long—term rate when it is remembered that the

latter is only approximate. The long—term rate would exactly follow a

5

martingale

if and only if the short—term rate followed a martingale. In

this case, the ex ante capital gain or loss on long—term bonds would always
equal zero, and the long—term rate would simply equal the short—term rate
plus the time—invariant term premium.

The martingale approximation for the long—term rate is derived on
the assumption that the term premium accorded long—term bonds is time—

invariant. Is the existence of time—varying term premiums likely to

invalidate this approximation? The answer, of course, is moot, although
a convincing case can be made that the "forecastability" of movements

in long—term rates is not likely to be salvaged in this fashion. Those
who work in the capital asset pricing framework of modern finance theory
tend to treat the term premium — which is related to the covariance of
bond returns, and the return to the market portfolio — as constant over

time.3 Many —
of

if not most — of those who have conducted empirical studies

the determinants of term premiums have concluded that they may well

be time—invariant. McCulloch (1975) and Pesando (1975a) have presented
evidence that the term premium accorded long—term government bonds in

the United States and Canada, respectively, may be time—invariant. Mishkin
(1978) and Pesando (1978) have found empirical support for the joint hypothesis that the bond market is efficient and term premiums are time—

invariant. Attempts to enrich the traditional term structure equation of
Modigliani—Sutch (1967) or Modigliani—Shiller (1973) with additional variables to capture the spirit of the "preferred habitat" model have, on the

whole, been unsuccessful. Indeed, empirical support for the existence of
time—varying term premiums is largely confined to structural models of the
long—term bond market, such as those estimated for the United States by

6

Friedman (1977, 1979) and for Canada by Masson (1978).

In these models,

demand functions for long—term bonds are estimated for each major class
of investor, such as banks, life insurance companies and so forth. When
the aggregate of these demands is set equal to supply, the models yield

a (restricted) reduced—form equation for the long—term rate. Although
these reduced—form equations contain asset stocks, financial flows and

other variables associated with time—varying term premiums, the repeated
failure of researchers to find comparable effects in the traditional term

structure equations is rather disconcerting. Clearly, the careful and
successful inclusion of stock and flow variables into demand and supply
functions is not sufficient to guarantee that the implicit equation for
the long—term interest rate will better characterize its evolution than

will the traditional term structure alternatives. Transactors exogenous
to the model — such as investment dealers — may include Meiselman's risk—
neutral, well—financed speculators whose arbitrage activities at the margin

impose the expectations solution on the term structure. Indeed, the

succésfu1

performance of these models lii thi

ax

ante forecasting experi—

thent relative to the martingale alterrative ouid offer perhaps the most
imressive supportfor their successful incorporation oftime—vrying
tépreiniuiii.(SucheXPerimefltS couldbe cOnducted by extracting the
for the long—term intetest rate and then using otimal

impl{ed

titheerieS prCdictors oi the variabiésèxogenoti to the model to create
the e ante forecasts.) As yet, no such vdEnce has been offered in
supportof

evdflè
term

these models.

10 onclude,no

one hasyetprbduced convincing

cf thO existenc Of wellde1ineated ad prediätable timeVaying

premiums sufficient tO salvage on an

priori besi&the "forecast—

7

ability" of short—run movements in long—term interest rates on these
grounds.

Finally, the preceding discussion has implicitly assumed that agents

do not have access to inside information. Following Lucas (1976), there
also exists considerable doubt as to whether agents who might possess
inside information — such as central banks — can successfully forecast

movements in long—term interest rates. For central banks, the forecasting
exercise typically consists of the attempt to simulate the impact on long—

term rates of contemplated policy initiatives. There exists the fundamental
concern that standard simulation exercises may not provide the central
bank with reliable "forecasts" of movements in long—term rates conditional

upon hypothetical changes in policy instruments. If such policy initiatives
diverge from those which characterize the period over which the policy—
maker's macroeconometric models have been estimated, or alter the time
series properties of key variables (such as the short—term rate) which
drive expectations, then little faith can be attached to the implicit

assumption that the underlying structure of the economy will remain invari-

ant to the contemplated activity. In short, even agents with access to
inside information may have difficulty in forecasting short—term move—

ments in long—term interest rates, a result which provides a re—inforcing
perspective on the negative conclusion regarding the "forecastability"
of such movements contained in the prior discussion.

8

3. THE MARTINGALE APPROXIMATION: SOME EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE

Let Hnt denote the holding—period return on long—term bonds
in period t, c1 the (known) coupon to be paid during the period t,

the price of the bond at the end of period t and tl the information available to the market at the end of period t—l. Then:

I•'

—
—

E(PI
t tl )—Pt—l +cti

n,t t—l'

If

the bond is trading at par, so that

is simply the long—term

interest rate R,t_i then (4) can be written

E(H
n,tIt—l)
Let

=

E(PI
t tl)—P t—1

+ R

(5)

n,t—l

Pt—1

be the constant term premium accorded the n—period bond. Assuming

ip

that investors have a one—period horizon, and noting that Rl,t_l is the
ex ante return on holding one—period bonds, the relationship between the
ex ante returns on short— and long—term securities can

be

written as

follows:

Rl,tl + tn =

E(HIi)

=

E(PI 1)—P

1

+ Rn,t_i (6)

Implicit in (6) is the ex ante change in the long—term interest
rate necessary to equilibrate the two returns, up to the presumed time—

invariant term premium. Let x

represent

loss implied by (6), or (R1,_i +

—

the expected capital gain or

Rntl)•

Since the price of a

9

consol is just the coupon divided by the interest rate, the ax ante change

in the long—term rate if the bond were a consol (tRA) is simply:
=

tRA

(7)

1 + x ,t—l

If the long—term bond is trading at par, and if its term to maturity of
n—periods is sufficiently large so that its change during the period can
be ignored, then the larger change in the long—term rate necessary to
produce the same capital gain or loss is approximately:4

=

n,t

tR

1

*

co,t

(8)

1

—

(l+Rn,t_l)tl

Note, in general, that the unit
determination of

of

observation is crucial to the

and hence ARA .

For quarterly data, for

example, the interest rates in (6) are expressed as quarterly rates,

and the implicit capital gain or loss is only one—fourth of that required

in the case of annual data. The smaller the unit of observation, cet.

the

smaller is the required capital gain or loss and hence the smaller

the ax ante change (expressed at an annual rate) in the long—term interest

rate. Since economists traditionally forecast macroeconomic variables
on a quarterly basis, the unit of observation will be standardized at one
quarter in the subsequent analysis.

Matching data on 90—day Treasury bills with long—term Government
of Canada bonds, and 90—day finance company paper with long—term corporate
bonds,5 the ax ante changes in the long—term rates can

be

calculated in two steps

10

using (7) and (8).6 A representative term to maturity of 17 years was
deemed to be appropriate for both of the long—term bond indexes. The
time—invariant term premiums in (6) were set equal to the average spreads
between the corresponding long— and short—term rates during the sample
period 1957:1 —

Canada

1979:1.

bonds, and
The

These premiums equalled 136 basis points for

13,8 basis points for corporate bonds.

results

of these calculations, summarized in Table 1, indicate

that the ex ante changes in the long—term rates are indeed quite small.

The mean absolute change is only 2.07 basis pints for Government of
Canada bonds, and 2.60 basis points for corporate bonds.7 The maximum

changes were 7.21 and 9.67 basis points, respectively. A full eighty—
eight percent of the cx ante changes for Canada bonds were smaller than

4 basis points in absolute value. The corresponding figure for corporate
bonds was 80%. By contrast, the actual changes in these long—term rates
were typically quite large. Of particular interest is the striking difference in

the size of the variances of the cx ante changes and the variances

of the actual changes. The ratio of the former to the latter equalled
0.62% for Canada bonds and 1.26% for corporate bonds. Since anticipated
and unanticipated changes in long—term rates must be uncorrelated if

the market is efficient, these figures imply that 99.38%and98.74% of the
variances of the observed changes in Canada and corporate bonds, respectively,
must be due — under the joint hypothesis of market efficiency and time—
invariant term premiums —

to

the receipt of new information. Equivalently,

under this joint hypothesis, regressions of the current change in the
long rate on any set of variables known at the beginning of the period

11

are not likely to explain more than one percent or so of the variance of

the dependent variable. A higher R2 or explained variance would suggest
the presence of spurious correlation, and suggest that the observed relationship is not likely to prove useful in an out—of—sample or forecasting context.

To sum up, the ex ante changes in the long—term rates are so close
to zero that the no—change prediction of the martingale model is a very
close approximation to the optimal forecast under the joint hypothesis.

This benchmark is employed in the subsequent analysis of the recorded

forecasts of long—term interest rates in Canada.8 Note also that the small
size of these cx ante changes suggests that the relatively large changes
in long—term interest rates implicit in many recorded forecasts imply substantial variation in the cx ante return on long— relative to short—term

securities. This point receives attention in the subsequent discussion
of the recorded forecasts.

4.

AN ANALYSIS OF RECORDED INTEREST RATE FORECASTS IN CANADA
The Conference Board in Canada has made quarterly macroeconomic fore-

casts since late 1974, and histories of these forecasts for long—term corporate bonds (McLeod, Young, Weir (MYW) 10 industrials) and 90—day finance

paper are available. Data Resources Incorporated (DRI) of Canada has published macroeconomic forecasts since 1974, and historical data are avail-

able on five separate interest rate series: 90—day Treasury bills, 90—day
finance company paper, long—term Government of Canada bonds, long—term corporate bonds (MYW 10 industrials) and long—term provincial bonds (MYW 10

provincials). For a large part of the sample period, DRI forecasts are
available monthly. To provide comparability with the other recorded forecasts,

12

only four forecasts per year —

corresponding

to the calendar quarters —

were employed in the forecasting experiments. Since December of 1974,
McLeod, Young, Weir and Company Limited has conducted quarterly surveys
of interest rate forecasts, receiving responses from 35 to 40 individuals

from the financial community. The survey respondents are asked to provide one and two quarter ahead forecasts of nine Canadian and three U.S.

interest rates. Since (1) the concern in this paper is with Canadian data
and (2) several of the series (such as the prime lending rate of the chartered banks) are not determined in auction markets, only three series

proved appropriate for this study: 90—day finance company paper, long—
term corporate bonds (MYW 10 industrials) and long—term provincial bonds
(MYW 10 provincials).

In comparing the recorded forecasts to the predictions of the mar—
tingale model, care must be made to ensure that the martingale forecasts
(i.e. the current value of the relevant interest rate) do not have access
to information not available at the time the recorded forecasts were made.
Since the published data on the several interest rates series are available

only on a monthly basis, the martingale forecasts were set equal to the
interest rate at the end of the latest month which unambiguously preceded

the month in which the recorded forecasts were made. In so doing, this
procedure confers an informational advantage to the recorded forecasts.

This advantage typically consisted of about two weeks, but in some cases
approached a full month.

The results of the forecast comparisons,9 summarized in Table 2,
indicate that the recorded forecasts of long—term rates in general failed

13

to outperform the no—change prediction of the martingale model, while this

was not the case for the recorded forecasts of short—term rates. In view
of the theoretical discussion, this result is not surprising. Only the
two—quarter ahead forecasts by DRI of the long—term Canada rate proved
superior to the martingale forecasts.

Even this modest success merits

qualification, however, in view of (1) the informational advantage accorded
the recorded forecasts and (2) the inferior performance of the one—quarter

ahead forecasts relative to those of the martingale model. This latter
result suggests that the improvement of the two—quarter ahead forecasts may
be somewhat of a statistical artifact and not likely to obtain over a
longer sample period.

Both the DRI and MYW survey forecasts of the short—term rates did

prove significantly superior to the martingale model. Further, the forecasts
of the short—term rate by the Conference Board were about as accurate as
the martingale model, while their forecasts of the long—term rate were

distinctly inferior. These results, in general, enhance the credibility of
the null results with respect to the forecasts of the long—term rates.

In general, there always remains —

especially

with survey data —

the poss-

ibility that the reported figures do not accurately reflect the expecta-

tions that actually drive market behavior. In this regard, it is interesting to
note that Friedman (forthcoming) provides evidence that the Goldsmith—Nagan
interest

to

rate forecasts fail to pass a now standard battery of tests designed

measure their "rationalityt'. As

raise

noted by Pesando (19751,), such failures

the interpretive question of whether the recorded forecasts do indeed

reflect those of active economic agents, in which case the latter fail to

14

form "rational" expectations, or whether such recorded forecasts must

not be those of the market on the maintained hypothesis that the market
efficiently

processes

dard battery of tests —

information. Lynch (1979) performs this stan-

the

unbiasedness of the forecasts, the orthogon—

ality of forecast errors to costlessly available information, and efficiency and consistency in the use of autoregressive information — on the
MYW survey data and, on the whole, the results are favourable to the hypothesis that the expectations are rationally formed.

Finally, the magnitude of the changes in the long—term interest

rates implicit in many of the recorded forecasts merits comment. The
maximum (absolute) change forecast for the corporate bond rate, based on
the two—period compared to the one—period prediction (so as to eliminate
the

uncertainty regarding the date —

when

and hence the value of this rate —

the forecasts were made), equalled 22 basis points in the MYW survey

data, 30 basis points for the DRI forecasts and 70 basis points (!) for the
Conference Board forecasts. The mean absolute changes were 11.2, 12.7 and

13.8 basis points, respectively. In view of the magnitude of the ax ante
changes

summarized in Table 1, these

substantial

recorded forecasts clearly imply

variation in the ax ante return on long— relative to short—

term securities. For the extreme forecast of the Conference Board, for
example,

the implied ex ante return on long—term bonds is 32.60%. During

this same quarter, the Conference Board was predicting a 6.86%

return on

90—day finance company paper. On a:prima fade basis, this result appears
to be unreasonable and serves to highlight the conceptual importance of
translating predicted changes in long—term rates into comparable statements

15

about their ex ante holding—period return. Although corresponding
calculations for the DRI and MYW survey forecasts are less dramatic,

they also imply a very sharp divergence between the ex ante returns

on short— and long—term securities.10 Both forecasters and those who
monitor forecasts would be well advised to focus on ex ante returns
in assessing the likely path of long—term interest rates during their
forecast horizons.

5. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

The failure of the recorded forecasts of long—term interest rates
to outperform the no—change prediction of the martingale, and the reversal
of this result for short—term rates, is not surprising on theoretical

grounds. In fact, however, this point does not appear to be well understood by many financial market participants. These results, for example,
mirror those found in two studies of the accuracy of recorded forecasts

in the United States. The authors of these studies, however, apparently
failed to fully understand the nature of their findings. Prell (1973),
analyzing Goldsmith—Nagan survey data for the period 1969:3 —

1972:4,

found that the recorded forecasts of short—term rates (Federal funds,

90—day Eurodollars and 90—day Treasury bills) outperformed the no—change
prediction, while those of the long—term rates (Aaa utility bonds) did

not. A similar, although less precise, analysis by Fraser (1977) of pooled
forecasts of the National Association of Business Economists, Wharton
Econometric Forecasting Associates and Chase Econometrics, Inc. for the

period 1974—1976 suggests comparable results. In both studies, the authors

16

refer with some surprise to the inability of forecasters to outperform
the

"naiv&' no—change extrapolation for long—term rates, and apparently

fail to

anticipate that their results are not surprising in light of the

evidence in support of market efficiency.

To conclude, economic agents ought to regard published forecasts
of short—term movements in long—term interest rates with a healthy degree
of skepticism, although the same does not necessarily apply to future move-

ments in short—term rates. (The very small ex ante changes in long—term
rates isolated for the quarterly data examined in this paper do not, of
course, necessarily imply trivial future movements in the short—term rate.
In the absence of yield data on noncoupon bonds with sequential maturity

dates, however, such implied movements are not easily extracted.) Those
seeking to forecast movements in long—term rates over longer horizons
ought to explore further the use of the ex ante changes in the long—term
rate implicit in the term structure itself as a means of refining the

no—change prediction of the martingale model. In this regard, the large
forecast changes in long—term rates in the recorded data analyzed in this

paper — which imply substantial ex ante variation in the returns to long—
term relative to short—term bonds —

merit

note. These results highlight,

in the absence of convincing evidence regarding the existence of time—
varying term premiums, the fact that economic agents ought to observe

two rules: (1) predicted changes in long—term rates must be "small",
at least over short forecast intervals, if they are to be creditable; and
(2) predicted changes in long—term rates ought to be recast into statements
regarding ex ante returns on long—term bonds, in part to facilitate comparison with the ex ante returns (i.e. the interest rate) on short—term
securities.

17

Footnotes

=

If stock prices follow a random walk (i.e. P —

where

is an independent and identically distributed disturbance term with mean

zero), then equilibrium returns are zero. If stock prices follow a random

walk with a particular form of drift (i.e. P —

—1

=

+ kPi), then

equilibrium returns are constant (and equal to k). The statement in the
text is meant to draw attention to the fact that forecasts of the future
level of common stocks which translate into large (in absolute value)

ex ante returns on a diversified portfolio are appropriately discounted

by the market. The same skepticism does not seem to apply to forecasts of
changes in long—term interest rates, perhaps because the latter are not
so easily translated into statements about ex ante returns and/or the case
for market efficiency is viewed as less persuasive for bonds than for
common stocks.
2

The standard errors of the regressions, in basis points, for the Treasury bill and

finance

compànypaper rates were: ARMA

(1,1),

74.92 and

92.90; AR (2), 75.98 and 93.65; AR (1), 78.32 and 94.08. In the AR (1)
regression, the null hypothesis that the coefficient of the lagged rate

is equal to one could not be rejected. The standard errors for the martin—
gale or ARIMA (0,1,0) models, which constrain this coefficient to equal
unity, are clearly larger than those noted for the AR (1) specification.

See, for example, Roll (1971) and McCallum (1975).

18

4

Equation (8) is derived as follows. For a consol,

dP =

—dR
Since

R

the ex ante changes in the long—term rate implied by (6) are so small, this

*

expression produces ex ante changes (dRc, =

Rco,t_l =

_Xt

*

R,_1)

which are almost identical to the exact changes implied by (7). Consider

the standard valuation formula for an n—period coupon bond. Let c be
the coupon payment and F be the face value of the bond. After summation,
the standard valuation formula reduces to:
(F —

R

(Fl)

(l+R)'

Differentiating (Fl) and dividing the resulting expression by price yields:
C

dP
p

n(t)

nF
____
(1+Rfl )n+1

=

+

+

___

(l+Rn )n+1

(1+Rn )n

dR

n
(F2)

(F_t)
n
R

(l+R )fl

If the bond is selling at par, so that

equals Rn

then this expression

reduces to:

dP
P

Hence, for a given

*(i_ (l+R)r

-dR
=

1

(F3)

Rn

(

= x)

,

the

larger change in the interest rate on

an n—period bond is related to the change in the interest rate on a consol

by (8). Note, of course, that dRn + dR, as n +

19

The corporate bond series is the McLeod, Young, Weir 10 Industrials, com-

piled by McLeod, Young, Weir and Company Limited. The other series are
compiled by the Bank of Canada. The corporate bond rates are those prevailing on the last business day in the quarter. All of the other rates
are those prevailing on the last Wednesday in the quarter.
6

Calculating the ex ante change in the long—term rate as if the long—term
rate were a consol provides a useful check on the results reported in the

text. If these changes are not trivial, then the larger (in absolute
value) changes for the finite maturity bonds clearly cannot be trivial either.

The mean absolute values of the ex ante changes so calculated are 1.42
and 1.92 basis points for the government and corporate bonds, respectively.

For corporate bonds, the term to maturity figure of 17 years is clouded.

by the existence of call options and sinking funds. Fortunately, the
results of the simulation exercises are not sensitive to moderate changes

in the assumed term to maturity of the bond indexes. For an assumed term
to maturity, of 10 years, the mean absolute value of the ex ante changes

is 3.57 basis points rather than the 2.60 basis points reported in the

text. For an assumed term to maturity of 20 years, the corresponding figure
is 2.44 basis points.

Similarly, variations in the assumed value of the time—invariant
term premium do not produce major changes in the mean absolute values of

these ex ante changes. If, contrary to most empirical studies, the term
premium is set equal to zero (i.e. the pure expectations hypothesis is
assumed), then these values rise to 3.50 and 4.02 basis points for Canada

and corporate bonds, respectively. These higher values reflect the tendency

20

of long—term to exceed short—term rates, which thus requires — on average —

ox ante increases in long—term rates to produce the capital losses necessary
to equilibrate ex ante returns.
8

An obvious question is whether the use of the ex ante change to refine

the martingale prediction (i.e.

=

Rn,t_l

A
+ AR
rather than

will

= R
improve its forecasting accuracy and thus provide a
)
n,t—l
n,t
more useful benchmark. In fact, root—mean—squared errors of the refined
R

martingale as defined above were slightly smaller than that of the martin—
gale model for the period 1957:2 —

1979:1.

These errors equalled 34.87

and 29.75 basis points for government and corporate bonds, respectively.

compared to those of 35.15 and 30.81 basis points for the unadjusted

martingale model. These results, in general, invited the estimation of
the following regression:
= a + B(ARA ) +
AR
n,t
n,t

t

(F4)

Under the joint hypothesis of market efficiency and a time—invariant
term premium, a = 0

and B = 1

while the residuals are devoid of serial

correlation. The appropriate test statistic for the null hypothesis
(a =

0,

B =

1),

distributed F(2,86), equalled 0.83 and 2.97 for govern-

ment and corporate bonds, respectively. The 5 per cent significance level
for this test statistic is 3.12 and thus the null hypothesis could not

be rejected for either of the two data sets. The Durbin—Watson statistics,
as required by the joint hypothesis, provided no evidence of serial correla-

tion. Finally, as anticipated in the text, the explanatory power of these

equations is quite low. R2 equalled .022 in the corporate bond regression,
and only .005 in the government regression.

21

The forecasts differ in their release dates, and pertain to both quarterly

average (Data Resources and the Conference Board) and end—of—the—

quarter (MYW surveys) interest rates. As a result, the accuracy of the
forecasts cannot be compared across forecasting agents.
10

The maximum change predicted by DRI implied an ex ante return on long—

term bonds of 17.71

return

per

cent at a time when DRI forecast a 9.49

per

cent

on finance company paper. For the MYW survey, the corresponding

figures are 17.23 per cent and 9.29 per cent.

22

REFERENCES

Fraser,

D.R.

the Accuracy and Usefulness of Interest Rate Forecasts".

Business Economics XII: No. 4 (September 1977): 38—44.
Friedman, Benjamin M. "Financial Flow Variables and the Short—Run Determination of Long—Term Interest Rates". Journal of Political Economy

85, No. 4 (August 1977): 661—89.
_____________________

"Substitution

and Expectations Effects on Long—term

Borrowing Behavior and Long—term Rates". Journal of Money, Credit and

Banking 11: No. 2 (May 1979): 131—150.
_____________________

"Survey Evidence on the Rationality of Interest Rate

Expectations". Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Lucas, Robert E. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique", in Karl Brunner
and Allan H. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labour Markets,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1

(Amsterdam, North—Holland, 1976): 19—46.
Lynch, Kevin. "A Test of the Rationality of Interest Rate Expectations

Using Survey Data". Mimeograph, April 1979.
Masson, Paul R. "Structural Models of the Demand for Bonds and the Term
Structure of Interest Rates". Economica 45 (November 1978): 363—377.
McCallum, John S. "The Expected Holding Period Return, Uncertainty and the
Term Structure of Interest Rates". Journal of Finance 30 (May 1975):
30 7—2 3.

McCulloch, J. Huston. "An Estimate of the Liquidity Premium". Journal of

Political Economy 83: No. 1 (February 1975): 95—119.

23

Mishkin,

Frederic, S. "Efficient—Markets Theory: Implications for Monetary

Policy". Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3, 1978: 707—52.
Modigliani, Franco and

Shiller,

Robert. "Inflation, Rational Expectations

and the Term Structure of Interest Rates". Economica 40, No. 157
(February 1973): 12—43.

Modigliani, Franco and Sutch, Richard. "Debt Management and the Term
Structure of Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis of Recent
Experience". Journal of Political Economy 75, No. 4, Pt. 2

(August 1967): 569—89.

Pesando, James E. "On the Efficiency of the Bond Market: Some Canadian
Evidence".

Journal of Political Economy 86, No. 6 (December 1978):

1057—1076.
_________________•

"The Impact of the Conversion Loan on the Term Struc-

ture of Interest Rates in Canada: Some Additional Evidence".

Canadian Journal of Economics 8: No. 2 (May 1975): 281—88. (a)
________________•

"A Note on the Rationality of the Livingston Price

Expectations". Journal of Political Econy 83: No. 4 (August 1975):
849—58. (b)

________________

"On the Random Walk Characteristics of Short— and Long—

term Interest Rates in an Efficient Market". Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, forthcoming, 1979.

Prell, N.J. "How Well Do the Experts Forecast Interest Rates?" Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Monthly Review, September—October 1973,
pp. 3—13.

Roll, Richard. "Investment Diversification dn Bond Maturity". Journal of

Finance 26: No. 1 (March 1971): 51—66.

24

Sargent, Thomas J. "A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United

States". Journal of Political Econoy 84, No. 2 (April 1976):
207—237.

Working, Holbrook. "Note on the Correlation of First Differences of Averages

in a Random Chain". Econometrica 28: No. 4 (October 1960): 916—18.

TABLE 1A

ACTUAL AND ANTICIPATED QUARTERLY CHANGES IN LONG-TERN INTEREST RATES
IN

Mean absolute change
Maximum absolute change
Mean change
Standard deviation

CANADA, 1957:1 — 1979:1
Government Bonds
Actual
Anticipated

Corporate Bonds
Actual
Anticipated

26.38
127.00
6.73
34.50

23.08
119.00
5.90
30.23

2.07
7.21
—0.03
2.71

2.60
9.67
0.05
3.39

TABLE lB

CUMULATIVE FREQUENCY DISTRIBUTION OF ABSOLUTE VALUES OF ANTICIPATED CHANGES
IN LONG TERN INTEREST RATES

Absolute Change

Government Bonds
No.
Percent

Less than

2

51

4

79

6
8

10

"
"

"

"

Corporate Bonds

Percent

57
88

42
71

47
80

84

94

82

92

89

100

86

89

J2Q

.2.

97
i&Q.

89

100

89

In both tables all numbers are in basis points.
the calculation of the anticipated changes.

See text for discussion of

1978:4

27.77

NcLeod, Young, Weir
10 provincial bonds

94.03
36.37
38.96

90—day Finance paper
McLeod, Young, Weir
10 industrial bonds
McLeod, Young, Weir
10 provincial bonds

40.12

33.80

McLeod, Young, Weir
10 industrial bonds

McLeod, Young, Weir
10 industrial bonds

25.79

Long—term Canada bonds

71.16

61.66

90—day Finance paper

90—day Finance paper

48.47

37.19

33.83

108.40

28.44

69.68

20.48

19.62

24.36

63.86

74.50

One Period
Recorded
Martingale

90—day Treasury bills

Series

55.89

54.55

137.51

76.22

120.72

36.40

42.56

36.57

108.40

79.89

41.79

51.83

154.50

45.56

129.40

37.22

36.54

44.87

119.42

127.80

Two Period
Recorded
Martingale

Martingale forecasts equal the interest rate at the end of the month prior to the date at
which the recorded forecasts were made. Forecast dates for the recorded figures vary within
the quarter and are thus not strictly comparable across forecast sources.

1974:4 —

MCLEOD, YOUNG,
WEIR SURVEYS

Notes:

1978:4

1978:4
1974:3 — 1978:4

1975:1

—

1975:2 —

Sample

BOARD IN CANADA

THE CONFERENCE

DATA RESOURCES
OF CANADA

Source

ROOT MEAN SQUARE FORECASTING ERRORS

Recorded Forecasts of Short— and Long—Term Interest Rates Versus the Martingale Alternative

TABLE 2

