                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               WHAT IS LABOR SUPPLY AND DO
                    TAXES AFFECT IT?


                     Harvey S. Rosen



                  Working Paper No. 411




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                       November 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Support was provided by NSF Grant No.
SOC-7907847. I would like to thank C. Reimers, P.
Hendershott, J. Eaton and J. Pechman for useful
suggestions. This paper was prepared for presentation at
the meetings of the American Economics Association,
December, 1979.
                                                 NBER Working Paper 411
                                                          November 1979



             What is Labor Supply and Do Taxes Affect it?



                                 ABSTRACT




       There is a large econometric literature on the impact of income

taxes on hours of work and labor force participation rates.      It has long

been understood, however, that the concept "labor supply" is more general

than "hours of work."   Individual differences in skills, motivation and

health will influence the effective labor supply associated with any

given number of hours of work.    The purpose of this paper is to suggest

some ways by which it might be possible to learn something about the

effects of taxes on these other, and possibly very important, dimensions

of labor supply.




                                                 Harvey S. Rosen
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Princeton University
                                                 Princeton, NJ 08544

                                                  609/452-4000
         The issue of tax induced changes in labor supply behavior has been re-

ceiving increasing attention.        Economic theory alone can say little about the

impact of income taxation on labor supply because of the well known conflict

between income and substitutiQO        effects.   Therefore, an enormous amount of

effort has been devoted to empirical investigation of this problem, with a

focus on the impact of taxes on hours of work and labor force participation

rates.     In section I of this paper, we briefly discuss this literature and

its major conclusions.

         It has been long understood, however, that the concept "labor supply"

is more general than ''hours of work."       If one individual is healthier, better

educated, and more highly motivated than another, then presumably a given

number of hours of work will lead toa greater effective labor supply for the

former than for the latter.        Thus, studies of the effect of taxes on other

dimensions of labor supply are needed in order to assess the full impact of

taxes on work incentives.     The main purpose of this paper is to discuss some

of this research (Section III) and to explore its policy implications

(Section IV).


I.       Taxes and Hours of Work

         Econometric studies of taxation and hours of work have increased

steadily in sophistication.        In the pioneering econometric studies of the

determinants of hours of work, taxes were mostly ignored.         Gross rather

than net wages were included in the list of regressors.         (See, e.g., Cain,

or William Bowen and T. A. Finegan.)        A major advance was due to Robert Hall,
                                          2


who recognized that a progressive tax system fundamentally changes the shape

of the budget constraint in income-leisure space (it is kinked, rather than

a straight line), and therefore, standard econometric techniques must be

modified.   Subsequent work has dealt more explicitly with tax-induced non-

linearitiesi the reader is referred to Gary Burtless and Jerry Hausman who

discuss the problem in the context of the negative income tax.

      The more econometrically advanced studies have tended to confirm the

substantive results of their predecessors.     Although there are inevitably

considerable differences in parameter estimates due to differences in samples,

time periods, and statistical techniques, I think it would be fair to say

that two important "stylized facts" have been isolated:

1.    For prime age-males, the substitution effect of changes in the net wage

upon hours of work tends to be small in absolute value and often statistically

insignificant.   This result has emerged from both cross sectional studies

(see, e.g.,Cain and Watts, 1973, or Burtless and Hausman, 1978) and from

time series studies (see, e.g., Robert Lucas and Leonard Rapping. 1

2.    The hours of work and labor force participation decisions of married

women are quite sensitive to changes in the net wage.     Although estimates

differ widely, a number of investigators have found elasticities in excess

of 1.0 (see Glen Cain and Harold Watts, Harvey Rosen, or Reuven Gronau).
      One can imagine th·es e results leading to some complacency on the part

of individuals who conduct tax policy because of the implication that, except

for secondary workers, increased taxation will not have much of an impact on
                 ""
h ours 0 f workd ec~s~ons.2   The discussion in the next section suggests that

caution may, nevertheless, be -appropriate.
                                              3



,II.   Taxes and Other Dimensions 'of 'Labor Supply

        The literature's emphasis on hours of work is easy to understand

because it is an important variable and one that is relatively straight-

forward to measure.     Nevertheless, labor supply is a concept more general

than number of hours per week or per year.         In particular, at least three

important dimensions of labor supply, other than hours, may be influenced

by taxes:    (a) lifetime hours of work and timing of retirement,         (b) intensity

of work effort, and      (c) quality of work effort.

        The theoretical and empirical evidence on these important issues is

currently rather scanty.      In this section, we discuss and evaluate some

fragmentary evidence and suggest a 'few possibilities for future research.

A.      Time,'of'Retirement

                                3
        Although income taxes       may not influence the number of hours worked per

year, they: may affect the number of years worked,       i.e~,   the retirement decision.

As Boskin   (~977r   has noted, until fairly recently it was widely believed that

financial,variables had little to do with retirement decisions.           The pre-

vailing opinion, based upon survey'interViews, was that bad health was the

overriding reason for retirement.         In the past few years, however, a number

of econometric studies of the determinants of the retirement decision have

appeared <-see Michael Baskin, 1977; Richard Burkhauser, Alan Blinder,         et~   al. )

Almost uniformly, these studies suggest that the availability of pensions,

the' implicit: tax imposed on wages by the social security system, and other

financial'considerations have statistically significant and quantitatively

important, impacts:: on the probability' of retirement.
                                           4


         Most of these studies have focused on the interaction between pension

and social insurance systems, on the one hand, and the retirement decision,

on the other.       Nevertheless, in some cases the results can be used to shed

some light on the question of how the personal income tax influence retire-

ment decisions, ceteris paribus.       This is possible because the explanatory

variables generally include potential market earnings, which depend upon

the tax rate.

         For example, Burkhauser analyzes the probability of males

accepting social security retirement benefits at age 62 as a function of

marital status, education, potential market earnings, arid several other
     .
var~ab
         1 es 4   His estimates suggest substantial responsiveness of retire-

ment probability with respect to market earnings (p. 19).          Consider, for

example, an individual with adjusted gross income (in 1973) of $9700.
                                                                                            5
Assuming that he pays a payroll tax of 6.05% and an average income tax of           ~.O%,


his disposable income would be $8420.          According to Burkhauser's figures,

this $1460 change in net income would induce an increase in excess of 4 per-

centage points in the probability of retirement at age 62, a substantial

difference.

         This computation is meant to be only illustrative.       Personal income

taxes have not yet been integrated with sufficient care into models of the

retirement decision to allow more definitive conclusions.          However, in light of the

apparent sensitivity of retirement decisions to economic variables, this is a

subject worth further inquiry.

B.       Intensity of Work

         ftHours of .work " are usually measured as the amount of time elapsed at

the workplace.      However,   because in·tensity of effort varies from
                                           5

individual to individual, elapsed hours may be a poor proxy for the effective

mnnber of hours of work.     Clearly, intensity of effort is 4ifficult to

measure, particularly in jobs where salaries are not based on piece rates.

An   interesting attack on this measurement problem has recently been made by

Frank Stafford and Greg Duncan who analyze data from the Time Use Survey adminis-

tered     by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan.   These

data contain detailed time diaries in which individuals report on several

measures of on-the-joh time allocation: time spent in formal or scheduled work

breaY~;    time spent informally socializing or any other type of unscheduled

work breaks; and time spent in on-the-job training.

        with this information, Stafford and Duncan can compute an estimate of

effective number of hours, as well as hours of work as conventionally measured.

In an interesting experiment, they estimate two labor supply equations for

men, one using conventional hours as the dependent variable, and the second

with effective hours.     The right hand side variables include education and

age.    The coefficients on education and age in the second equation have larger

(positive) signs and relatively smaller standard errors than their counter-

parts in the first (p.    34~.   To the extend that education and age are proxy-

ing for the wage, these results suggest that improper measurement of effective

hours may be obscuring a positive wage response.

        Because Stafford and-Duncan do not explicitly include the after-tax

wage in their effective hours equation, nothing more specific can be said at

this time.    But the use of time diaries seems a fruitful way to continue work

on this problem.
                                          6


C.    HUman· Capital .Investments

      It has been argued that one of the key sources of wealth in the united

states <;lnd other developed countries is human capital, which augments the

productivity of workers and, thereby, increases the effective size of the

labor force.     Despite intensive analysis of human capital decisions,6   the

relation of taxes to human capital investment has received little attention.

      Theodore Schultz has argued that the united states tax system dis-

criminates against human capital investment:

      Our tax laws everywhere discriminate against human capital.

      Although the stock of such capital has become large and even

      though it is obvious that human capital, like other forms of

      reproducible capital, depreciates, becomes obsolete, and entails

      maintenance, our tax laws are all but blind on these matters

      [po 13].

      This view has been challenged by Boskin (1975), who points out that

Schultz's argument regarding the lack of deductibility for expenditures on

human capital investment is erroneous once it is recognized that the most

important costs of human capital are foregone earnings, rather than tuition

payments.   It has been estimated that foregone earnings amount to over half

the costs of human capital (Boskin, 1975, p. 5).

      Baskin points out that if all the costs of human capital investment are

foregone . earnings, then in a simple model a proportional wage tax has   ~   impact

Whatsoever on the decision to invest in human capital.     The logic of this

argument is straightforward.     The tax reduces the benefits and costs in the

same proportion, so if the net present value was positive prior to the tax,

it remains positive after the tax is imposed.
                                             7

         However, Jonathan Eaton and Harvey Rosen have shown that even under the

assumption that the only costs of human capital accumulation are foregone

earnings, the neutrality result does not necessarily follow.          There are two

reasons for this.     First, an important assumption in the simple model is that

t.~e   supply of hours of work is fixed regardless of the net wage.        Now, hours of

work can be thought of as the "utilization rate" of human capital:           the more

the individual works, the higher is the rate of utilization and, therefore,

the higher the return on the human capital investment.        With an endogenous

hours of work decision, then, a wage tax may change the benefits of the

investment without an offsetting movement in the costs, and neutrality no

longer holds.

        A second factor ignored in the simple model is the uncertainty of

returns to human capital.        \ihen an individual makes an educational investment,

he or she does not know for certain that it will increase earnings capacity,
                  7
or by how much.       It can be shown that. even when hours of work are independent

of the net wage, if the returns to human capital are stochastic, then pro-

portional wage taxation will not in general be neutral in the human capital

decision (Eaton and Rosen).        Rather, the impact of taxation is ambiguous

because of two conflicting effects:        (i) A proportional wage tax cuts the

riskiness of human capital because, in effect, the Treasury serves as the
                                                                  8
taxpayer's silent partner, sharing in both gains and losses.          To   the extent

that the individual is risk averse, this insurance effect tends to increase

h~an     capital accumulation.     (ii) On the other hand, the proportional tax

reduces the .individual's wealth.       To the extent that the desire to invest in

relatively risky assets decrease with wealth, then this effect will tend to

decrease investment in human capital.
                                            8


        Because the two effects work in opposite directions, in the absence of

specific assumptions on how risk aversion varies with wealth, it is impossible

to know a priori how a proportional wage tax will change human capital accumula-

tion.    Just as in the hours of work case, only empirical work can settle the

question.    However, measurement problems make econometric analysis here even

harder than in the hours of work case.          How does one measure the amount of

capital embodied in a human being?     What proportion of educational expenditures

are consumption and what proportion investment?          How can one estimate the

amount of earnings foregone in on-the-job and vocatiQnql training programs?

        In light of these formidable problems, it is no wonder that little

empirical work has been done.     However, a recent paper by      ~obert   Willis and

Sherwin Rosen permits us at least to speculate on the impact of taxes on an

j~portant   kind of human capital investment, college attendance.

        The Willis-Rosen (W-R) study measures the influence of various factors

on the probability that an individual attends college.          They investigate a

number of "background" variables, such as religion, achievement test scores,

and father's occupation.     In addition, they find that the probability is

significantly affected by the expected growth rates of earnings, with and

without college, and by the ratio of the initial earnings obtained by

college graduates to the earnings of those who did not attend.

        Some of their results are reported in Table 1.        The variable    gc   is

the expected growth rate of earnings if the individual goes to college,
                                                i   i
        is the rate without college, and    Yc/Ync      is the ratio of college to

non-college earnings in the initial period (the elasticities are evaluated

at a sample proportion of one-half).       These figures suggest that returns to

college exert a substantial impact upon the decision to attend.
                                        9




                                    TABLE 1




Elasticities of the Probability of College Attendance with Respect to:


                                                           i     i
                                                          Yc/Ync


                    2.91              -0.61                4.1

Source:   Based upon estimates in Willis-Rosen and included in a

personal communication from Robert willis.
                                               10

           An 'interesting exercise is to compute the percentage changes in

                    i     i
                   Yc/Ync       generated by the federal income tax, and use the

elasticities in Table 1 to find the implied change in the probability of

enrolling in college.           More specifically,     fo~   pre-tax values of the variables,

I use the means reported by W-R (p. 41) and post-tax magnitudes are cal-
                                                                             9
culated by applying federal tax tables to the pre-tax values.                    Due to

progressivity, the income tax lowers           g       by 10.1%,    gnc   by 12.2%, and
                                                   c
 i     i
Yc/Ync       by 4.6%.     Taking these results together with the elasticities in

Table 1 yields a decrease of 3.5 percentage points in the probability of

enrolling in college.           Because the elasticities of Table 1 are at the low

end (in absolute value) of those reported by W-R, this figure should be

regarded as a conservative one.

           As W-R emphasize, their results cannot be extrapolated to the population

as a whole because the sample used to generate the parameter estimates is

highly non-representative.           (It consists of a group of male World War II

veterans who applied for the army air corps.)                 However, the estima'tes

suggest that enough of an effect may be present to make further empirical

investigation of this problem worthwhile.


III.       Conclusions

           There is a rich and extensive literature on the impact of taxation

upon hours of work.           Doubtless, econometric work to refine current estimates

will continue.          But "labor supply" and "hours of work" are not the same, and

it is the former concept that should be of concern to those who are interested

in the long-run exonomic effects of taxation.                As noted above, this fact has

long been realized, but 'I think that an implicit view in                 much of the

public finance      lit~rature     is that it is simply too hard to find out anything

useful about the effect of taxes on other dimensions of labor supply.                     I
                                      11


have tried to show that there exists research which can be built upon to

learn about this subject, and even some hints that the tax effects are

important.

      At this point, all that can be said to the makers of tax policy is

that they should proceed with caution when it comes to taxing labor.       As

evidence accumulates that the income tax and social insurance systems

influence appreciably the stock of physical capital (e.g.,   Martin Feldstein),

there may be a temptation to increase relative tax rates on labor

because hours of work appear to be inelastic in supply.   "Because hours

of work are just the tip of an iceberg that is potentially very deep,

this may be a misguided policy.
                                        12


                                     REFERENCES


Gary Becker, Human Capital, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research

      1964.

Alan S. Blinder, et. al.,       "Market Wages Reservation Wages, and Retirement

      Decisions," Princeton University, mimeo, 1978.

Michael Boskin, "Notes on the Tax Treatment of Human Capital," National

      Bur~au   of Economic Research, mmeo, 1975.

Michael Boskin, "Social Security and Retirement Decision," Economic·Inquiry

      January, 1977,   _~'   1-25.

William G. Bowen and T. A. Finegan, The Economics of Labor Force Participation,

      Princeton; New Jersey, 1967.

Richard V. Burkhauser, "An Asset Maximization Approach to Early Social

      Security Acceptance," Institute for Research on Poverty, University of

      Wisconsin, 1977.

Gary Burtless and Jerry A. Hausman, "The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply:

      Evaluating the Gary Negative Income Tax Experiment," J. Polite Econ,

      December, 1978, 86, 1103-1130.

Glen G. Cain, Married Women in the Labor Force, Chicago, 1967.

Glen G. Cain and Harold Watts, Income Maintenfu'1ce and Labor· Supply, 1973.

Jonathan Eaton and Harvey S. Rosen, "Taxation, Human Capital, and Uncertainty I "

      Industrial Relations Section Paper No. 117, Princeton University, 1979.

Martin S. Feldstein, "T'ne Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation, It J. Polit.

     ~., ~pril,        1978,86, 529-552.

Reuven. Gronau, "Leisure, Home Production, and Work - The Theory of the

      Allocation of Time Revisted,"    J.   Polite Econ., December, 1977, 85,

      1099-1123.
                                      13


Robert E. Hall, "Wages, Income and Hours of Work in the U. S. Labor Force,"
                                  I




      in, Income Maintenance and Labor Supply,   ed. by G. Cain and H. Watts,

      Chicago, 1973.

Robert Lucas and Leonard Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment, and Inflation,"

      in Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory, ed. by.

      Edmund Phelps, New York, N. Y., 1970.

Harvey S. Rosen, "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage-Hours

      Determination," Econometrica, May, 1976, 44, 485-507.

Theodore W. Schultz, "Investment in Human Capital," Amer. Econ. Rev, March,

      1961, 51.

Frank Stafford and Greg Duncan, "The Use of Time and Technology by Households

      in the United States," University of Michigan, mimeo, 1977.

Joseph Stiglitz, "Tne Effects of Income, Wealth and Capital Gains Taxation on

      Risk Taking," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 1969, 83, 263-283.

Robert Willis. and Sherwin Rosen, "Education and Self-Selection," University

     of Chicago, mimeo, 1978.

Tax Foundation Inc., Facts and'Figures on Government'Finance, New York, 1977.
                                                                   '"
                                                      14

                                                  FOOTNOTES

             *




(
             lAn implication of this research is that in the short run, at least,

    it is unlikely that reductions in labor's tax burden will unleash an

    enormous amount of work effort.

             20f course, due to income effects, there can be a substantial excess

    burden of taxation, even if the uncompensated labor supply elasticity is

    small.

             3 In this paper I consider only taxes defined in the narrow sense, and

    not benefit reductions in transfer programs •

             4Burkhauser's data were from the 1973 Social Security Exact Match File.

             5 Th ~s
                  . f·~gure ~s
                            . f or a         . d person
                                         marr~e            w~
                                                              . th no d epend" en t s.   See Tax

    Foundation       Inc~   p. 105.

             6
                 See, for example, Schultz or Gary Becker.

             7It is unlikely that the individual can insure himself against such risks

    because the problems of moral hazard associated with insurance in general are

    especially pervasive in the case of human capital.                  In such a situation,

    the market is unlikely to provide insurance.

             8Sirnilar arguments have been used in discussion of the impact of taxation

    on nonhuman inves'bnent.          See, for example, Joseph Stiglitz.

             9For purposes"of computing tax liability, it is assumed that the individual

    is married, files jointly, and has two dependents.
