                 N BER WORKINU APi-R         I




            PREVENTIVE CARE • CARE FOR CHIi1)EPT
               AND NAT ION AL JIRALT R I NJ3URAIJC



                       Gilbert. R. Giez
                      Michael Grossu.in


                    Working Paper No. 1'(




            NAT1tO'IAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC R[GLARCI-I
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA O2l3
                         December lOT)




The research reported here .s part ;f the NBE[ s research
program in Health Economics. Any opinions expressed arc:
those of the authors and not those ot' the National 3ureau
of Economic Research. Research for this paper was sup-
ported by a grant t'rorn the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
to the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 417
                                                   December, 1979




                Preventive Care, Care for Children
                   and National Health Insurance



                             ABSTRACT


     The purpose of this paper is to examine issues related to the
coverage of preventive care under national health insurance. Four
specific kinds of medical care services are included under the
rubric of preventive care: prenatal care; pediatric care, dental
care, and preventive physicians' services for adults. We consider
whether preventive care should be covered under national health
insurance, and if so what is the nature of the optimal plan. Our
review of the literature on the effects of medical care on health
outcomes suggests that prenatal care and dental care are effective,
but pediatric care (except for immunizations) and preventive doctor
care for au1ts are not. Moreover, health outcomes in which care
is effective correspond to outcomes in which income—cifferences in
health are observed. These empirical results and the theory of
health as th source of consumption externalities indicate that the
optimal NHI plan should be characterized by benefits that fall as
income rises. In additon, the plan should be selective rather than
general with respect to the types of services covered.


Gilbert R. Ghez                         Michael Grossman
Walter Heller College of                Department of Economics
   Business Administration              City University of New York
Roosevelt University                       Graduate School
430 South Michigan Avenue               33 West 42d Street
Chicago, Illinois 60605                 New York, NY 10036
(312)341—3838                           (212) 790—4426
                                        National Bureau of Economic
                                           Research
                                        15-19 West 4th Street, 8th Fir.
                                        Washington Square
                                        New York, NY 10013
                                        (212) 59803321
                         PREVENTIVE CARE, CARE FOR CHILDREN,
                          AND NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE

                      Gilbert     R. Ghez and   Michael   Crossr,an*




        The numerous plans for national health insurance (NHI) introduced

 during the l970s have emphasized the extension of coverage to two types

 of services where private health insurance benefits are thought to be

 lacking or inadecuate: medical care services associated with cata—

 stroühjc illness and   medical   care services with a large preventive com-

ponent. Included in the latter category are prenatal care, pediatric

 care (care rendered by all physicians to children and adolescents), pre-

ventive check-ups, and dental care. Although some bills introduced in

Congress during the Nixon—Ford Administration focused solely on cata-

strophic illness, most of them, including those supported by the Admin-

istration, contained benefits for preventive care. For example, the

Miic-Schneebe1j.pack Bill, introduced in 1974 and                endorsed   by the
Nixon Administration, provided benefits subject to a deductible of $150
per person and a coinsurance rate of 25 percent for prenatal and mater-
nity care,   well—child care to age six,    dental care to age thirteen, and
vision and   eye examinations to age thirteen)! Preventive check—ups

for adults were excluded from the basic benefits, but the provisions of

the bill to stimulate enrollment in prepaid group health plans (health

maintenance organizations) would have resulted in an increase in the

percentage of the population insured for this service. Other bills,

most notably those associated with Senator Kennedy, were even more

liberal with respect to the coverage of preventive medical care. While

phase one of President   Carter's recent national health insurance plan
                                                                                   2




focuses on catastrophic illness, pregnant wonen and infants up to the
age of one would he guaranteed free care regardless of fanily 1nco:ne.2/
Presumably,    coverage would be extended to other types of preventive care
after    the initial phase—in period. Governor Brcwn has recently advo-

cated an all—out       emphasis on prevention.

        The purpose of this paper is to examine issues related to the

coverage of preventive care under national health insurance. In par-

ticular we    try to   answer two    basic   questions. Should   preventive ser-
vices be covered? If so, what is the nature of the optimal plan? As

part of the second question, we investigate whether coverage should be

universal or limited both         with   respect to which groups in the popula-

tion are insured and which preventive services are covered. In order

t dl with these two basic issues, several other issues must be ad-

dressed.    In Section I of the paper, in an effort to shed         light on the

extent   of "underinsurance," we discuss the extent of present third—
?caLy (private and      public)    coverage of preventive medical care   ser-

vices. In     Section II we review the literature on the effects of pre-

ventive medical care on health outcomes. Clearly this review is rele-

vant since one of the goals of coverage of preventive care under NHI is

to improve the health of the population. In Section III we review the

literature on the determinants of utilization of preventive medical

care services. Here our       focus      is on the effects of variables that are

under the purview of public policy (price, income, and health manpower)

and on variables whose effects government policy might try to offset

(socioeconomic and family characteristics). Implications for an opti

nal plan are treated in Section IV.
                                                                                              )




           fore turning to the rr.ain lsues                           be el—
                                                          in the panr, it will
 ful   to discu3s several         conceptual isueg. These rvolve around the
definitjon        of preventive care, the types of uedica]. services included

under      the rubric of preventive care, and the appL-opriaten'ss of in-

suring this care. We define preventive care activities as activieje

or   inputs that may improve health by reducing the probability of an

illness or an accident or that reduce the seriousness of an illness or

an injury     given      the occurrence of an unhealthy state. PreventIve care

is efficacious if there exists a course of action that can be taken

after detection of an adverse symptom that will reduce the need or ex-

tent   of   later treatment. Whether preventive care is efficacious or

not is a medical question. Preventive care is said to be effective if
*   unit   of preventive activity by an             individual   improves his later

health. Effective preventive care requires adequate symptomatic iden-

tification, efficaciousness and cornoliance with the prescribed course
-f action. Hence effectiveness is a stricter requirement than effi-
caciousness,
        Preventive activities are not limited to medical care. Indeed,
a   good deal of evidence suggests that preventive nonrnedical activities

have much larger impacts on             health   than medical care. We refer         here
to the importance in favorable health outcomes of behaviors or life

styles associated with           proper   diet, exercise and        recreation,   refrain-

ing from smoking cigarettes, avoiding alcohol abuse, and                    years of   for-

mal schooling completed.2'              By and   large,   we deal   with   preventive nedi—
cal care     in   this   paper, but the reader should not lose sight of the cx—

trernely important        role   of   non-nedical   factors in health outco:-s.±'
       e include four specific kinds of mcdi cal care services er the
ribric of preventive care. These are prenatal cares p iatric care
(preventive and curative physicians' services delivered to children

end adolescents); preventive physicians' services delivered to adults

under the aye of 65 including physical examinations, multiphasic

screening,   and   associated X—rays and laboratory   tests   and dental care

delivered    to children, adolescents, and adults under    the   age of 65.
To keep the paper manageable, we do not consider preventive care for

persons age 65 and over and therefore do not discuss issues related to

the Medicare program. We focus on the medical services just indicated

because they are all thought to have an important preventive comoonent.

This   is obvious in the case of preventive physicians' services for
dlts. In the case of children and adolescents, both preventive and
curative services delivered early in life can have important long-run
effects on health in adulthood. Moreover, the        appropriate   treatment of
pi.blems revealed by an annual check—up is an integral component of pre-
ventive care. The importance of prevention is underscored by making
pfriodic check—ups required in schools,     in the    armed forces, and
metimes at the place of work.
       The alleged importance of the early period of life in health out-

comes has led Newberger, Newberger, and    Richmond; Keniston and the
Carnegie   Council on Children;   and Marmor to propose that national health
insurance    should be limited at least initially to rather oomplete cover-
age of prenatal care, pediatric care, dental care for children,         end in

some instances catastrophic iiinessY Bills limiting national health

insurance    solely to mothers, infants, and children were       introduced in
                                                                                     S



Congress in 1976 by Senator Javits and Congressman Scheuer. The content

of our paper reflects the legislative and policy interest in preventive

care for children; the paper contains a selective, rather than a co—

prehensive, discussion      of   preventive care for adu1ts. To keep the

paper   manageable and because of the key role of the physician in the
medical care market, we do not deal with hospital care for children,
Also to keep the paper manageable, we do not treat        in any   detail   the

preventive    cnponent of adult remedial care delivered in the early
stages of illness, although we recognize that the benefits of preven.-
tion and intervention are perhaps greatest at this stage.
        At   first glance, it might seem somewhat anomalous to consider the

coverage of preventive care under       national health insurance,    After   all,
Lhe purpose    of   private insurance is to protect against uncertainty.
That   is, risk averse consuners have an incentive to purchase health in-

surance to finance medical outlays associated with illness and injury
(unfavorablehealth outcomes or states of the world). In this context
preventive care is a substitute for market insurance; it is a form of
self—insurance or self—protection to use      the   terminology introduced by
Ehr].ich and Becker,1' Put differently, there is a good deal of un-
certainty with respect to the scope and size of remedial medical care
outlays but no such uncertainty with respect to preventive medical care
outlays.
        If the sole purpose of national health insurance were to provide
protection against uncertainty and if the insurance scheme satisfied
several conditions mentioned later in the paper, there would be no
justification for covering preventive care. The key point to realize,
                                                                                   6




however, is that national health insurance has other goals in addition

to reduction of risk. If its goals include improvements in the health

of certain segments of the population or correcting suboptimal private

decisions due to externalities, NHI itself and coverage of preventive

care could be justified even if there were no uncertainty.' We dis-

cuss theoretical justifications for coverage of preventive care under

NHI and optimal   intervention strategies in more     detail in Section IV.


                                 I. Extent of Coverage

A.   Private Health Insurance     Coverage

      Panel   A of Table 1 shows the percentage of the civilian population
of the United States under age 65 with private insurance for three types
of medical services in 1970 and in 1976. The three services are (1) doc-
tor office and home visits, (2) X—rays and laboratory exams, and (3) den-
tal care. Panel B shows the percentage of private expenditures for each
service paid by health insurance. The percentage of expenditures covered
                                                                              S
is smaller than the percentage      of persons   covered because most health in-
surance policies contain deductibles, coinsurance rates, upper limits,
and restrictions on, for example, the type of doctor office visits cov-
ered. The most notable trend in the table is the rapid increase in the
percentage of the population with dental      insurance from 6.6 percent in

1970 to 24.0 percent in 1976.
      Preventive physicians' services delivered to children and adults
take the form of vaccinations and immuriiations, preventive check—ups,
detailed physical examinations, and rnultiphasic screening. Although
these services are associated with doctor office       visits, X—ravs, and

laboratory   tests,   the   coverage figures in Table 1 cannot be extrapolated
                                                                                          7




         —--------------------        Table 1

                        PRIVATE HEAJJTH INSURANCE COVERAGE




          Service   Covered                              1970                   1976


          Panel A. Percentage of Population Under 65Years of
                                                             A9e
                      with Private Health Insurance
                                      Te ofService
                                                           Coverag

Doctor Office and Home Visits                            48.0!"                 62.2?.'

X-ray and Laboratory     Examinations                    73.8/                  75.0?.'

Dentist's Services                                        6.6-!'                24.0?.'

            Panel B. Percentage of Private Extienditures Paid_
                      Private Health Insurance by Type of Service
Doctor Office and Home Visits for
 People under 65 Years of Age
Note: includes X-rays and laboratory
tests    associated with office visits                       Cl
                                                         22.1—                  28.6—
Dentist's Services                                        3.8"                  14.9'


a! Source: Marjorie Smith Mueller, "Private Health Insurance in 1970:

Population Coverage, Enrollment, and         Financial   Experience," Social

Security    Bulletin, vol. 35    (February   1972).

b/ Source:    Marjorie   Smith   Carroll, "Private Health Insurance       Plans in
1976,    An Evaluation," Social Security Bulletin, vol. 41 (Seotember
1978).

                                                         (continued on   next   page)
                                                                                         8




                           Footnotes to Table 1 (concluded)



Cl Source: Ronald Andersen, Joanna          Lion,    and Odin W. Anderson, Two

Decades of Health Services: Socia1yjrends                     in   Use and Expenditure

(Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Company, 1976).

d./ Computed as follows:


     So'    K76    percentages paid by insurance in 1970 and 1976, respectively.


     170, 176 =    percentages of population with private health insurance
                   coverage in 1970 and 1976, respectively.



     Assume
                   56
                     76
                             —
                             50
                              170
                                        ,
                                                                      *




     then          56 —       176
                               70
                                    x


C/   E—'rce:      Robert   M. Gibson and Charles    R.   Fisher, "National Health
Expenditures, Fiscal Year 1977," Social Security Bulletin, vol. 41
(July   1978).
                                                                                     9




 to these preventive services. This is because most health insurance plans

 do not cover preventive care.!" On the other
                                                       hand, prepa.id group prac-
 tice plans, comron1y termed health maintenance organizations (HNOs), do

 cover preventive physicians' services. In 1976 approximately 4 percent

 of persons with private doctor office visit insurance were members of

 prepaid group practice p1ans.!2' It should be noted that fraud by phy-.

 siciang and patients can      maice insurance   companies' exclusion from coy-

 erage of preventive services difficult to enforce. That is, in
                                                                           filling
 out  an insurance claim, a physician can report that he delivered cura-
 tive services when in fact he delivered preventive services. Although
 the extent of such fraud is      not   known, our own casual   empiricism sug-
gests it is not unimportant. Our own casual empiricism also suggests
tt dental      insurance, especially the newer plans, do cover preventive

check—ups    subject to deductibles, coinsurance, and specified        maximum
            11/
payments.—
         According to the health survey conducted by the National Opinion
Research Center and     the   Center for Health Administration Studies of the
University of Chicago (the NORC survey), 51 percent of children between
the ages of zero and five and 53 percent of children between the ages
of six and seventeen had doctor office visit insurance in l970)—f
This    insurance covered 13.6 percent of the private outlays on doctor
office visits on behalf of the younger children and         20.7   percent of the
private outlays on behalf of the older children.         There is evidence
that the NORC estimates of the percentage of children with doctor office

visit    insurance are too large,    Unpublished data from the National
Center   for Health   Statistics indicate that    approximately    one—third of
all children had such coverage in 1972)2.1
                                                                            10



        Tn 1970, 74 percent of all live births to woren not eligible for

Medicaid or other public funds were covered by private health thsur—

ance.' This ir.surance financed 49 percent of total private expendi-.
tures per live birth and 46 percent of obstetrical services delivered
by physicians. Obstetricians typically charge pregnant wcen a flat
fee for prenatal visits and the delivery of the child rather than a
fee   for each prenatal visit. Therefore, the figures just cited give a

good indication of the extent of coverage for all physicians' services

associated with births. Data on prenatal     insurance coverage are   not

available   for years after 1970, but Andersen, Lion, and Anderson report

that                                                           15/
       such insurance increased over time between 1963 and 1970.—
       To   summarize, preventive physicians' services for children and
iuitg   are not usually covered by private health insurance except in
the case of prepaid group practice plans. Between one—third and one—
half of all children have doctor office visit insurance, nxst of which
finances curative (remedial) medical care services. The percentages
of the population with prenatal and dental insurance have risen sub-
stantially over time."

B. Public Coverag
       The main public sources of coverage for the medical care services
considered in this paper are Medicaid, the matern.al and child health
program, and the neighborhood health center program.—17/ All of these
programs are aimed primarily at low—inccxoe families. Of the three
programs, Medicaid by far   is   the largest. In 1976, it accounted   for

approximately 95 percent of total public expenditures on the three
programs combined.
                                                                              11



         The Medicaid program was enacted in 1965 as Title XIX of the So—

 cia]. Security Act. It is a joint Federal—state program designed to

 finance   the medical care services of specified groups of needy persons.
Medicaid eligibility is linked to welfare eligibility. States that
elect to participate in the program (all states except Arizona have
elected to do so) must cover all families covered by the aid to fainil—
ies with dependent children (AFDC) program):!' States may also pro-
vide Medicaid coverage to the medically needy. These are persons
whose incomes net of medical expenses are 133 1/3 percent or less of

the AFDC eligibility income level in each state.      Twenty—eight states

provide coverage for the medically needy. In twenty—six states AFDC

is restricted to families without a father present in the home.

Twenty—four states extend AFDC and Medicaid     coverage to families with
unemployed fathers who do not receive unemployment compensation.
Seventeen    states cover all children under the age of twenty—one in
tami1ies with incomes below the AFDC eligibility level, regardless of
the employment status of the parents or the family composition.
        It is well known that AFDC income eligibility levels vary    con—

sierab1y among states. This factor, together with the factors        men-
tioned above, causes a considerable percentage of low—income persons
to be ineligible for Medicaid. In 1970 Davis and Schoen estimate that
45 percent of the poverty population of children under age twenty-one
and   39 percent of the poverty population of adults between the ages of
twenty—one                                                    20/
             and sixty—four did not receive Medicaid benefits.—

       In some states Medicaid recipients are   eligible   for benefits for
all four medical care services discussed in this paper: prenatal and
                                                                              12




obstetrical care, pediatric care, preventive physicians' services for

adults, and dental care. All states must cover physicians' services.

Coverage of dentists' services is optional, and in 1974 only 16 per—

cent of all white persons covered by Medicaid and 15 percent of all

nonwhite persons covered saw a dentist..Y Although Medicaid is

characterized by the absence of deductibles and coinsurance, states

can restrict the kind and amount of physicians' services covered in a

number of ways. In twenty states single women pregnant with their

first child are ineligible for prenatal and obstetrical care becaue

the AFDC programs of these states do not cover "unborn children."

Some states limit the number of physician office visits per person to

a specified number     per   month or per year. Some states exclude routine

physical examinations arid screening for adults.-t Moreover Medicaid

does not cover the indirect costs of obtaining medical care: outlays

on   transportation and                  time spent in traveling, wait-
                          the value of the

ing, and   obtaining   information about alternative sources of care.(
       In 1967 an early and periodic screening, diagnosis, and    treatment

(EPSDT) program was    created under Medicaid. By July 1, 1969, all states
were mandated to provide EPSDT services to children under the age of

twenty—one who were    eligible   under the state's Medicaid program. The

enactment of this program changed the nature of Medicaid frxn simply a
payment mechanism to finance services to an active deliverer of services
to poor children. States were required to seek out such children, ad-
vise them or their families of the availability of benefits, and ensure

that they receive them.
                                                                                    13



          The errtphasis of the EPSDT     program has been on screening. The
 screening examination must include a physical examination, provision

 of appropriate jmmunizatjon, vision and          hearing tests,   laboratory
 tests,    and a   dental examination for children three years of age and

 older. In fiscal      1977, 2.0   million children of an estimated Medicaid
population of 11.0 million children received screening services. This
 increased     the number of children with up—to—date assessments to 30
  •    25/
million.—

         The   failure of Medicaid to     cover all pregnant women and   children
in the poverty population and        the   failure of   the EPSDT program to
screen all children eligible for Medicaid has led the Carter Admninis—
tratiori to propose the Child Health Assurance Program (CHAP). A bill
      amend   Title XIX of the   Social   Security Act to create CHAP was intro-
duced in Congress in 1978 (HR 13611) and modified and reintroduced in
1979 (Hr 4053). To date, the        legislation    has not been enacted into
law.
        Under CHAP national income standards would be established for de—
termining the eligibility of pregnant women and children for Medicaid.
7cr pregnant women, the standard is $3,000, increased by $600 for each
additional, family member.'         For    children, the standard is $2,400 for
an individual (relevant for older children who do not live with their
parents), $3,000 for a family of two, and an additional $600 for each
additional family member. These uniform national standards would add
100,000   pregnant women to the Medicaid rolls and approximately 2 mil-

lion children. States would be required to finance prenatal care for

pregnant women     and routine   dental care for chi1dren.!/
                                                                                           14



Finally, funds are authorized to allow the EPSDT program's adzninistra—

tors to publicize the availability of these services. CHAP would in-

crease the cost of Medicaid by roughly $400 millionj this should be

conpared with total Federal and          state   expenditures on Medicaid      of    $14

billion in fiscal 1976.

         With   the    exception of the EPSDT program, Medicaid is a mechanism

for financing the medical care services of poor people rather than                   a

mechanism    for delivering these services. On the other hand the mater-
nal and child health program (MCH) and the neighborhood health center
program (NHC) focus both on delivery and on financing of services to
poor people. The MCII program was created by Title V              of    the Social
Security Act      of   1935. In 1963 Title V was to include special
                                                      amended

irnt for maternity and infant care CM and I) projects designed to
provide    adequate prenatal care. In 1965 Title V was further amended
to   include children and youth (C and Y) projects.             These   supply coin-

     &lsive medical       care services in poverty areas.

         In 1965 the program     to   create and   fund neighborhood health centers
was started by the Office of Economic Opportunity as part of the War on

Poverty,     By 1973 overall control of      the centers had been shifted to the

Bureau   of Community Health Services of the U.S. Department of Health,
Education,      and   Welfare. These centers provide ambulatory care services
to all age groups in the population. In 1974            36 percent      of registrants
in   NHCs were   children below the     age of   fifteen, 45  regis-
                                                                percent of

trants were between the ages of fifteen and forty—four, 13 percent of
registrants were between the ages of forty—five and sixty—four, and
6 percent were sixty—five or older (compared to 14              percent of the
                                                                               IS




 elderly in the poverty population).f Hence children and adults not

 eligible for Medicare are the main recipients of services delivered by

 NHCg.

         In both the MCH and NHC programs, funds are allocated directly to

 suppliers:  state and local health departments; special clinics and
centers for the medical care of pregnant women, infants, children, and
youths; and neighborhood health centers. Note that suppliers are not
physicians or dentists in private practice. Taken together, the MCH
and NHC programs cover prenatal care, pediatric care, preventive
physicians' services for adults, and dental care. But these programs
are very small relative to Medicaid: in fiscal 1976 Medicaid outlays
were nineteen times as large as outlays on the MCH and NHC programs..2.'
         To swrimarize, a network of public programs exists to finance pre-
natal care, pediatric care, preventive physicians' services for adults,
and dental care for the poverty population and to deliver these ser—
'.'ices to this population. This network has been criticized because it
fails to cover a significant proportion of the poverty population and
because it emphasizes financing rather than delivery. Nevertheless its
exictence should be kept in mind, particularly since we argue in Section
IV   that a convincing case can be made for limiting preventive care under
national health insurance to low and moderate—income families.

              II. Effects of Preventive Medical Care on Health Outcomes
         In   this section we discuss the effects of preventive medical care

on health outcomes. We do not argue that in those instances where care

is made effective it necessarily provides greater benefits than in cases
where care is less effective. Mter all benefits depend not only on the

health outcome, however measured, but also on the value of a unit of

improved health in the form of reduction in income loss or relief from

pain    and suffering. By concentrating on health outcomes rather than on
measures    of   full benefit from care, we bypass the difficult issues of

monetary valuation. Our aim is to distinguish those forms of care that

are effective from those that are not. Our review of the literature on

this subject is selective rather than comprehensive. Studies are cited

to illustrate our main points.                                -




A.    Prenatal Care

        There is a growing consensus that prenatal care is effective in

terms   of infant health outcomes,        although   Its   relative   importance re-
mains an open issue. Lewit reports       prenatal care, measured by
                                            that

the number of prenatal visits to physicians, is an important determi-
nant   of birth weight   and   neonatal   mortality in the 1970 New       York City

birth   and death cohort.' He also reports that birth weight has                  a

strong   negative   effect on postneonatal mortality, so that prenatal

care   has an indirect impact on postneonatal mortality. Based on
interstate regression analyses of neonatal mortality rates for states
of the United States for the years 1952, 1956, 1960, 1964, and 1968,
Williams finds that the mortality rate is            inversely related to the
number of   board certified obstetrician-gynecologists per birth.Y
        In addition to the evidence on the effects of prenatal care in
general,   there is suggestive evidence in support of             the effectiveness

of   selective public intervention strategies. With various socio-
economic variables held constant, Williams shows that the                infant
                                                                                   17



 mortality rate is negatively related to expenditures per birthunder

 iraternal   and infant care CM and I) projects in a       subsample of states
 of   the U.S. in 1966 arid 1967.2!1 Davis arid Schoen       suritnarjze studies

 that point to dramatic declines in infant mortality rates over time
 in the late 1960s and early 1970s in areas serviced by M and I
projects.2.-f These declines exceeded those experienced by similar
residents of the same city or county who were riot serviced by the M
and I project in their area. Davis and Schoen also point out that
the infant mortality rate of blacks in Lee County, Mississippi, was
cut in half between 1970 and 1974. This large decline followed the
opening of a neighborhood health center in the county in 1970.

Currently, the black infant mortality rate in Lee           County is below
the   state average, ... a remarkable achievement considering that the

county has the lowest educational level of any county          in   the state
and one of the highest poverty ratesM—
                                    34/

        Since birth weight rises with prenatal care, the benefits of

appropriate care are       not   limited to infant   mortality outcomes. Birth
weight has strong positive        effects   on intellectual development in

samples of school-age children./ Moreover, Shakotko, Edwards, and
Grossman     find   that health in adolescence is positively associated

with intellectual development in childhood in a longitudinal sample.2.Y

Since they control for health in childhood, the finding implies causal-

ity from IQ to health. It means         that   birth weight has favorable im-

pacts on health throughout the life cycle.

        Recent trends in infant mortality in the United States provide

suggestive, although not definitive, evidence of the importance of
                                                                                    18



prenatal care. From 1964 to 1974, the infant mortality rate declined by

3.9 percent per year. This was an extremely rapid rate compared to the

comoarahie      figure   of 0.6 percent per year from 1955 to l964.21 The

latter period witnessed the introduction of Medicaid, maternal and in-

fant care projects, and the neighborhood health center program. Rogers

and   Blendon   associate the trend in infant     mortality   with these develop-

ments, although they are careful to emphasize that there is no evidence

of a cause—and—effect relationship.!' Fuchs is somewhat more cautious

because the period in question also witnessed the legalization of abor-

tions and the widespread adoption of oral contraceptive techniques..!'

Nevertheless, Fuchs does not deny the effectiveness of adequate medical

care during pregnancy and       delivery,   especially for high-risk pregnancies.


B.    Pediatric Care
         Even such an enthusiastic supporter of national health insurance
for children as Marmor realizes that pediatric care makes small con-
tributions at best to favorable child outcomeg.2( To be sure, immu-
nizations against rubella, measles, diptheria, tetanus, pertussis,

polio,   and the mumps are extremely efficacious. Sharp         declines
                                                                       the in

reported   number   of cases of each disease occurred in the years imme-
diately following the general availability of an immunization against

          But routine pediatric care has small      and   often statistically

insignificant effects on the health of children and adolescents in a

number of recent studies.

       Edwards and Grossman study the prevalence of obesity, abnormal

corrected distance vision, arid anemia (reflected by low hematocrit
                                                                             19



levels) arnong white adolescents who were members of Cycle 111 of the

U.S. Health Examination Survey.-Y Youths who saw a doctor for a

preventive check—up within the past year (approximately 60 percent of

the sample) have one—half percentage point snaller probabilities of

being obese or of having abnormal corrected distance vision than

other youths, and a one—fifth percentage point higher probability of

having anemia, None of these three differentials is statistically

significant.

        Kaplan, Lave, and   Leinhardt   measure medical care input by en-

rollment in a comprehensive health care clinic and      measure   health

output   by number of days absent from school in a sample of elementary
school children from low—income families in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.±'
W4fh race and sex of the child held constant, enrollment in the clinic
has a small    negative   effect on number of days absent from school. Un-

fortunately, the authors could not control for parents' education,

        has been shown to be an extremely important factor in child

health outcomes.±Y

        Hu measures medical care by the dollar value of Medicaid benefits

and   by the receipt of a regular check—up in a sample of first—grade
children   in a coal mining county in Pennsylvania, mainly from low-income

families.±./ Medicaid benefits have a positive and statistically sig-

nificant effect on hearing correctioi4W but have no effect on vision

correction. The receipt of a regular check—up has no impact on either

health measure.

       Kessner studies the prevalence of middle ear infection and hear-

ing loss, vision defects, and     anemia in a sample of black children
                                                                                   20



between the ages of six months and eleven years in Washington, D.C.Zt'

He focuses on the relationship between these three health problems and

the usual source of pediatric care (physicians in private solo practice,

prepaid group practice, hospital pediatric outpatient departnents, hos-

pital emergency rooms, and       public   clinics).   Kessner finds that source

of   care   has no effect on prevalence of the three health conditions

with socioeconomic status held constant. Using more sophisticated sta-

tistical techniques, Dutton and Silber have reexamined Kessner's basic

result.—' They report higher than average illness probabilities in

solo practice and lower than average probabilities in prepaid group

practice and in the hospital outpatient departments. These differences

are small, however, and are not always statistically significant.

Dutton also indicates that the frequency of a preventive health check-

up has no significant impact (at the 5 percent level) on the presence

of anemia     in   the Kessner sample.-2'         -          -
       Inman    estimates   child health production functions    in   which pre-

ventive pediatric visits and       curative pediatric   visits appear    as
separate inputs." His data sample is the one analyzed by Kessner,

and his health measures are absence of ear, nose, and throat infec-

tions and absence      of ear   infection. The two pediatric care inputs

tend to have positive effects on health, but their regression coeffi-

cients are small and rarely statistically significant.

       In a sense      it is not surprising that pediatric care has little
impact on children's health. Many of their health problems are either

self—limiting, such as morbidity from acute conditions, or irrevers-

ible, such as congenital abnormalities of the neurological system.
                                                                                  21



But the studies reviewed above indicate that this lack of potency ex-

tends to health problems that are capable of being affected by pedi-

atric care and by family decisions concerning diet and other forms           of
at—home health care, as modified by the advice of physicians,


C. Dental Care

      Although appropriate pediatric care has little impact on chil-

dren's physical health outcomes, appropriate dental care is extremely

important   in   their dental (oral) health outcomes, This is illustrated

strikingly by rnultivariate analyses of the number      of   decayed teeth
and the periodontal index (a negative correlate of good oral health)—
                                                                    51/

of white adolescents who were members of Cycle III of the U.S. Health
Examination Survey by Edwards and    Grossman,-'   They find that there

are  large significant impacts of the receipt of a preventive dental
visit in the past year on both the periodontal index and the decay in—
dex. In particular, adolescents who did not have a preventive dental
check—up within the past year (approximately 30 percent of the sample)
have periodontal indices and decay    scores that are   each about 30 per-
cent of a standard     deviation worse than adolescents who received a
check—up.
      Edwards and Grossman also provide strong results pertaining        to the
efficacy of a publicly provided form of preventive dental care-—water
fluoridation. Youths exposed to fluoridated water have significantly
better oral health than other youths at all conventional levels of
confidence.      The fluoridation differentials are smaller, however, than

the corresponding preventive dental care differentials in oral health.
                                                                                 22




For example, the fluoridation coefficient in the periodontal index equa-

tion is one—third as large as the preventive dental care coefficient.

In the decay equations, the ratio of the two coefficients equals two—

thirds. Nevertheless, given that the per—child cost of fluoridation
                                                                53/
is also substantially below the cost of a preventive dental visit,—

this still remains a cost—effective method of improving dental health.

Moreover, in 1975 approximately 50 percent of the population of the

U.S. resided in coimnunities that had water supplies with less than

optimal fluoride levels.'

          Research by Newhouse and   Friedlander   questions the effectiveness

of dental care in adult health outcomes.Y Using adults in Cycle i

of the U.S. Health Examination Survey, they report an insignificant

positive     effect of the number of dentists per capita in the county of
residence on the periodontal index. They do not explicitly recognize,
however, the common—sense proposition that an increase in a community's
dental     manpower will not improve oral health outcomes unless it en-

courages more utilization of dental services. In particular, Edwards

and   Grossman argue that the appropriate way to measure the impact of

dentists on dental health is to estimate two multiple regressions:

one that relates oral health to the receipt of preventive dental care

and   a   second that relates the receipt of preventive dental care to the

per capita number of dentists in the cominunity.-/ They show that the

impact    of dentists on the periodontal index estimated in this manner is
very different from the effect estimated by the Newbouse—Friedlander

procedure. Despite the findings by Newhouse and Friedlander, there is

a consensus that     the receipt of appropriate dental care in childhood
                                                                                     23




and in adulthood contributes to better oral health at all stages in the

life   cycle.—
               57/



D.    Preventive Physicians' Services for Adults
         There is little evidence that annual physical check—ups and mass
screening programs for adults lead to improvements in health. Spark
and Phelps suimmarize a number of studies that contain evidence that
screening and check—ups are economically        wasteful and   only   occasionally
detect     conditions that are aided by early treatnient.W These          authors

and others conclude that preventive physicians' services for adults can
raise medical care costs without significantly raising the level of
health.
         To be sure, there are selected health problems for which preven-

tive care may be efficacious. The best documented cases are for

glaucoma,    breast cancer, cervical cancer, hypertension, and syphillis.
For such major illnesses, however, as angina and stomach cancer, the
                                                      59/ Moreover,
efficaciousness of a secondary prevention is uncertain.—
even when diagnosis and treatment are possible, there are problems
associated with false positives, low prevalence rates, adverse side
effects of, for example, frequent mainographies to detect breast cancer,
and   poor follow-up compliance.
       The above conclusions are highlighted by      a longitudinal study of
Inembcr3   of the Kaiser—Permanente Health Plan by Cohen and his asso—
ciates.-W      In 1964   approximately 10,000 members of the plan between
the   ages of thirty—five and    fifty—four   were randomly assigned to two

groups   comparable   in   socioeconomic status. The study group was urged
                                                                               24



to come in for frequent periodic physical exams, while the control group

was not. By mid—1975, 41 percent of the control group had not received

a check—up, while only 16 percent of the study group had not received a

check—up. Yet between 1965 and 1975, the overall mortality experience

of the two groups was very similar. By 1975, 6.9 percent of the study

group and 7.1 percent of the control group had died, a difference which

is not statistically significant. The control group did, however, have

higher death rates from two illnesses that offer substantial potential

for postponement or prevention: colorectal cancer and hypertension

complications. But even these findings where efficacy of prevention

is established cannot be intertreted as evidence in favor of the ef-

fectiveness of selective, as opposed to mass, screening. The cost of

tting one case of colorectal cancer is extremely high. Only fifty—

five cases were detected by protoscopic exams administered to 47,207

patients in a Mayo Clinic study.Y The detection of one case of

itension is relatively cheap and a standard course of treatment

exists to reduce blood pressure to normal. Despite this, the hyper-

tension mortality differential in the Cohen sample is not statistically

significant.

        It   is universally recognized that lowering blood pressure in cases
of extreme hypertension reduces both mortality and other severe comphi—
catioris.t There is also some evidence that reducing blood pressure
in patients with moderately severe or with mild hypertension also re-
duces   mortality and morbidity. The recognition of the role of hyper—

tension in heart disease and stroke has contributed in part to the

rapid reduction in deaths from these causes since 1968.2.1 For these
 reasons, it is worth considering the cise of hypertension screening in

more detail.

      The Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Group examined a

group of 143 male hypertensive patients with diastolic blood pressures

between 115 and 126 mm Hg randomly assigned to active or placebo      treat—
met.' In the     placebo group there were twenty—seven cases of severe

complications, while there were only two in the treated group. Four

sudden deaths occurred in the control group and none in the treated

group. The Veterans Administration Study Group also studied 380 male

hyperterisives with diastolic blood   pressures   between 90 and 114 mm

Treatment was estimated to reduce morbidity from 55 percent to 18 per-

cent over a five year period: terminating morbid events occurred in

thirty—five patients in the control group and only nine patients in the

treated group. There was no reduction in myocardial infarction or

sudden death. This study was confined to a small group of men and had

very strict criteria. Hence it is difficult to generalize these re-

sults to the population at large.

      While hypertension is easy to detect and treatment is efficacious,

in the sense that there is a known course of treatment, screening for

hypertension seems to have limited value. Lauridsen and Gyntelberg

report on a study of male employees in public and private comoanies in

Copenhagen.' A sample of 5,249 males aged forty to fifty—nine was

initially examined in 1970-71. Of these, 196 had previously undetected

severe or moderately high hypertension. While some dropped out of the

the program, 150 of these men were examined in an outpatient clinic,

treated if judged necessary, and then referred to their own persor.al
                                                                                  26



 physician for further treatment. A five year follow—up was undertaken
 on the 150 men. At follow-up their mortality was twice as high and
 their prevalence of major cardiovascular complications (rior—fatal     myo—

 cardjaj. infarction   and stroke) was three times as high as the expected

 rate for Danish middle—aged men. This relatively poor prognosis may be

 the result of inadequate compliance: only 31 percent of these 150 men

were well controlled on    antihypertensive medication at the time of
follow-up.    Other studies have also shown the low efficiency of public

screening for hypertension.Z/ Finnerty arid     his   colleagues have re-

ported that by screening in supermarkets    they were able to reach 61     per-

cent of an adult urban, largely stable population, but that despite all

efforts only 30 percent of those identified as having high blood pres—

ur 're available for treatment.—  68/

        The failure of mass screening in a best possible case (high preva-

lence, easy detection, kncwn course of treatment) seriously questions

      crectiveness of preventive care for adults. Future research may

shed light on the effectiveness of preventive care in areas where cur-

rent evidence is insufficient or not conc1usive..2.' Until such time,

however, we believe that the burden of proof should fall on the advo—

cates of effectiveness.                         -



        Proponents of health maintenance organizations, which provide pre-

ventive care at no charge to their members, cite the lower rates of

hospitalization of HMO members compared to the general population as

evidence in favor of the effectiveness of these delivery systems     and
of   preventive care. On the other hand, Pauly argues convincingly that

these lower hospitalization rates   can arise from the differential
                                                                                  27




 reimbursement schemes in IfliOs compared to other delivery systerns.—2.'

 In particular, physicians in private practice are pnid on a fee-for—

 service basis, while reimbursement in an HMO        setting   takes the form

 of capitation payments. Since an I-iMO's cost is increased when a

patient is hospitalized while its revenue is not altered, it has an

 incentive not to hospitalize patients if possible, In light of this

 factor and the results of the Cohen study, it is unlikely that the

 lower hospitalization rates of I-2•1O enrollees implies that their

health is better than that of other groups in the population.

      To summarize, in this section we have argued that prenatal care

and dental care are effective but pediatric care (other than irmnu—
nizations) and preventive physicians' services for adults are not.
Many government health policies are       directed   at blacks and   other low—
income children and     adults.    Therefore, it is useful to point out that
in general there is a correspondence between health measures for which
care is effective and     health   measures for which race and income differ-.
ences are           Black babies weigh less at birth than white babies
            observed.

and are more likely to die within the first year of life. Similar con-
clusions emerge when babies from low—income families are          compared   to
those from high—income families.!2t Data from the Center for Disease
Control reveal higher prevalence rates of measles and rubella among
black children than among white children and       children who reside
                                                     among

in poverty areas than among children who do not.7!" Edwards arid
Grossman   show that the oral health of children is better if they are
from high—income families or if they are white..:?( Newhouse and
Friedlander reach similar conclusions with respect to the oral health
                                                                             28



of adults.L/ Edwards and Grossman report that the physical health of

children is not related to race or parents' income, with perents'

schooling and other factors held constant.Z!" Mortality and morbidity

rates of white adults are sitive> related to income in a number of

studies, although black adults have higher mortality rates than whites..Z!

      The above suggests that there are income arid race-related differ-

ences in health to offset in some cases but not in others.-' These

differences could be offset by lowering the price of preventive care

for the poor via national health insurance, but they could also be of f—

set by income transfers and other policies. We consider the choices

among alternative policy options in more detail in the next two sections.


                 III. Determinants of Utilization of Preventive
                                Medical Care Services

      In this section we discuss the determinants of utilization of pre-

ventive medical care services. The coverage of preventive care under

national   health insurance would presumably result in a lower price of
care. Yet the effects of other variables on utilization as well as
'price are also discussed in this section to identify variables whose

ects    government policy might try to offset (race, income, and other
socioeconomic and family characteristics). Another reason for consider-

ing other variables is to compare a program of price cuts under national
health insurance with programs to alter other variables in the purview
of public policy (income   and   health manpower). For these reasons and
because there are few rnultivariate studies of prenatal care and pre-

ventive doctor care for adults, the section is organized around the ef-

fects of sets of determinants rather than on the determinants of the
                                                                                   :9




 four kinds of care. The sets of determinants are as follows:           (1) ia-.

 core, race, and     Medicaid;    (2) money and time prices; and (3) socio-.

 economic and family characteristics represented by schooling and family

 size, Incone, race, and Medicaid are treated together because proverty

 is more prevalent among blacks than among whites and because Medicaid

is aimed at low—income groups.


A. Income, Race, and Medicaid

        During the period from 1963 through 1976, data on the utilization
of the medical care services considered in this paper contain two prin-
cipal messages with regard to race and income differences in utiliza-
tion. First, cross—sectional surveys in selected years reveal that
whites and high—income families made more use of almost all these ser-
vices. Second, trend data on utilization of the same service reveal
that income and race differences declined over time. To a large ex-
tent, these declines can be traced to Medicaid which reduces the net
or out—of—pocket price of medical care to zero from the point of view
of the consumer.21' In the case of pediatric care, one of the declines
has been substantial: income differences in the average number of phy—
          •
sician visits
 •
                                             78/ Nevertheless, income
              by children disappeared in 1975.—
arid race     differences in   most measures of utilization still are large.

        Taffel reports that in 1969 72.4 percent of all white mothers

but only 42.7 percent of all black mothers started prenatal care in

the first trimester of pregnancy.22! In 1975 the comparable figures

were   75.9   percent for whites and 55.8 percent for blacks. Hence the

difference     between the   probability that a white mother would   obtain
 care within the first trimester and the probability that a black mother

would do so fell by ten percentage points over a five—year period.              But

the 1975 differential of twenty percentage points is sizable. A similar

differential emerges when high—income mothers are compared to low-income

mothers. In 1972, 71.2 percent of pregnant women whose family income

was $15,000 or over saw a doctor within the first trimester of preg-

nancy. The corresponding figure for women whose family income was under

$5,000 was 47.2 percent.'

         In 1976, white children and children from nonpoverty areas were

more likely to have been immunized against measles, rubella, polio,

mumps, and DPT (diptheria, whooping cough, and tetanus) than black

children and children from poverty areas.' The percentage of all

i!ren between the ages of one arid four immunized against polio de-

clined from 88 percent in 1964 to 75 percent in 1975.82 This trend

and the variations in immunization rates by race and income have been

r°cporisible    in part for the EPSDT program under   Medicaid and for    the
proposed CHAP program.

         We have already indicated that the income difference in physician
"isits   by   children vanished by 1975. Based on a multiple regression
analysis   of physician visits in the 1969 U.S.   Health   Interview Survey,
Davis and Reynolds show that this result can    be    attributed almost
entirely   to Medicaid,2.' In   particular, children from families with
an income of under $5,000 who were eligible for welfare made approxi-

mately ore more visit in 1969 than children from families with an in-

come of under $5,000 who were not eligible for welfare. Note that a

substantial fraction of children from low—income families are not
                                                                                  31



elibible for Medjcaid..!" Therefore income differences in visits rc:iin

                                                                   85/
for these children compared to children £ronl high—income families..—

Moreover, visits rise with income in the 1975 data if the lowest income

category is not considered,' Note finally that black—white differ-

ences in visits have not been eliminated. Black children made         approxi-.
mately one fewer visit than     white   children in l975.8.?!

         Gross income or race differences in other dimensions of pediatric

care utilization have not been altered as much by Medicaid as the per

capita number of visits. In 1973, 18.7 percent of poor children below

the age of seventeen but only 11.9 percent of nonpoor children had not

seen a physician in the past two years.!Y The race difference is al-

most identical to the income difference: 19 percent of black children

cii1   12 percent of white children had not seen a doctor within the past

two years.!!.' With respect to routine physical exams, in 1973 8e9 per-

cent of white children under the age of seventeen, 14.8 percent of non-

white children, 20.3 percent of children from families with an income

under $3,000, and 44 percent of children from families with an income

of $15,000 or more received examns,9

        7imong children with at least one physician contact in a given year,

white children and nonpoverty children are more likely to see private—

practice physicians in their offices. Black children and poverty chil-

dren are more likely to see physicians in hospital outpatient depart—
                                                    91/ Among
ments and public clinics not associated with hospitals.—

children with positive visits to physicians in private practice in a

given year,   parents'   income is positively related to the number of

visits. Colle and Grossman estimate an income       elasticity of   visits of
                                                                            32




 .4 in l97O,/ a figure that is much larger than the income elasticity

of visits for adultg.2—" In addition, in a sample of users of physi-

cians in private practice, parents' income is positively related to

the probability that the usual source of care is a board   certified   or

nonboard certified pediatrician as opposed to a general practitioner.2-/

In addition, in such a sample black children and Medicaid recipients

are more likely to see general practitioners and the latter group makes

fewer visits than non-Medicaid recipients.2( The last two findings

indicate that families on the Medicaid rolls encounter substantial

barriers when they try to take their children to specialists or to

make a relatively large number of visits to physicians in private

practice. In particular, the findings reflect the reluctance of some

physicians in private practice to accept Medicaid recipients as their

patients because of uncertainties and rigidities associated with Medi-

caid reimbursement schedules, some of which fail to recognize physician

specialties

        Interactions and relationships among parents' income, race, and

Medicaid in pediatric care utilization are highlighted in a study by

Colle   and Grossman with                   health survey.2.!! They
                            the 1970 CHAS—NORC

perform a inultivariate analysis of the probability that a child between
the ages of one and five had a preventive physical examination, i.e. an
examination for reasons other than illness or beáause it was reciuired,

in   1970. For whites the observed probability is 34.6 percent and for

blacks it is 28.7 percent. This 6.0 percentage point gross difference

is reduced to 1.9 percentage points when a number of variables are held

constant, The latter differential is not statistically significant.
                                                                                  33




Put differently, differences in characteristics other than race between

black    and white families fully explain   the   preventive care differential.

Black children would have the same probability of receiving an exainina—

tion as whites if they had the same mean values of these characteris—

tics.

         In the multiple regression analysis, the probability of having an

exam rises with income and is higher for welfare recipients than for

non—welfare recipients, Of course, blacks have lower income than whites,

but they are more likely to be on welfare. Colle and Grossman show that

black children would have a 2.7 percentage point higher probability of

having    a preventive exam if   they had the same mean family income as

whites.    On the other hand, blacks would have a 2.4 percentage point
lower probability of having an exam if the proportion of blacks on wel-
fare equaled the proportion of whites. Put differently, the        welfare

program,                                       is an effective policy
           of which Medicaid is an integral part,

tool for eliminating income—related differences in the utilization of
preventive care. Blacks and whites would have the same observed prob-
abilities if   all their characteristics except for income and welfare

eligibility   were the saine.2'
      Dental care is an optional service under Medicaid. Therefore,
income and race differences in dental care utilization by children
and   adults have not declined over time by nearly as much as the cor-

responding differences in pediatric care utilization. Wilson and

White report substantial differences both for children and for adults

in 1973.22.1 For example, data for that year indicate that 58.3 per-

cent of poor children under the age of seventeen had not seen a
                                                                                 34




dentist in the past two years. The corresponding figure for nonpoor

children was 37.2 percent. The differential probability of use fell

between 1964 and 1973, but the difference in the mean         number of   den-

tal visits by the two groups of children remained constant. A

similar picture emerges when the utilization of poor and nonpoor

aduit-q   are examined except that there was a slight reduction in the
gap   between the mean number of visits by the two groups.
          In a multivariate context Edwards   and Grossman   find that family
income has a    positive and statistically significant effect on the
probability     that a white youth obtained a   preventive dental check-up
in the past     year in Cycle III of the U.S. Health Examination Survey.!9."

The ccnputed income elasticity of this probability equals .15. Manning

      iielps   estimate a somewhat higher income elasticity of .51 for

white children of all ages in the NORC survey.2/ They also report in-

come elasticities of .64 for white adult females and .73 for white adult

itiales. Manning and Phelps also compute income elasticities of demand

for dental visits by the three groups of whites. These equal .55 for

adult females, .61 for adult males, and .87 for children.

       with regard to the use of preventive physician services by adults,

the U.S. Health Interview Survey for 1975 shows a mild positive corre—

lation between number of physician visits per person for general check-

ups and family income up to $15,000 (rising from .37 to .39 visits) and

a strong positive correlation at higher levels of income (.49 visits
for incomes between $15,000 and $25,000 and .55 visits for incomes in
excess of $25,000).!2-( Preventive care as measured by general check-,

ups increases also relative to other forms of care: they constitute
                                                                                35




less than 5 percent of all visits when family income is less than $3,000

and approximately 10 percent when family inco;ne is at least $15,000.

       Gross ccnparisons over time reveal that the percentage of persons

with family incomes less than $5,000 who had a general check—up during

the year rose from 28 percent in 1971 to 37 percent in 1975, with little

change in the fraction of the population with general check—ups in in—
                             103/
come brackets above    $5,000,—     This remarkable increase in utiliza-

tion at the lower end of the income distribution occurred during the

time when Medicaid was expanded and may be tentatively interpreted as a

direct result of the fall in cost, especially since over the period

1971 to 1975 aggregate real income did    not   change much.

       The   1963 and 1970 NORC data reveal similar patterns..-2-' For
Lut.h years the percentage of the population having never had a physi-
cal examination is negatively related to income and lower in 1970 than
in   1963. Moreover, the interval of time between check—ups is shorter
the higher is family income, and the mean intervals by income class
seem to be more similar in 1970 than in 1963. The proportion of the
population having never had a physical exam is higher for nonwhites
than it is for whites, but the freauency of exams within a year is
about the same for both   races,

       The NORC   data distinguish between physical examinations elicited
by the occurrence of self—assessed sytnptoms     those that    are   required

for a job, school, insurance, armed forces, or similar circumstances;

and those that are preventive.?2/ Preventive exams are positively

related to income in both 1963 and 1970. This positive income effect

on prevention is consistent with the evidence from the U.S. T3ealth
 Interview Suvey reported above. y contrast, the fraction of e>:ams
 that are required is highest for the middle income groups, and the
 fraction of visits elicited by symptoms falls with family income.
 These patterns are consistent with the higher prevalence rates of
 disease     at the lower end of the income distributjon.!PY
          The fraction of physical exams   that   are preventive rose from 29

 percent in 1963 to 37 percent in 1970. The fraction of such exams

 was lower for nonwhites than for whites in 1963, although by 1970 the

 difference was eliminated.

          More detail on preventive care is available from the 1973 U.S.

 Health Interview Survey. It gives information on the          utilization of
 selected    preventive services by specific population groups. These

 servicc include electrocardiograms, chest X—rays, glaucoma tests,

 eye examinations, pap smears, and   breast examinations. In general,
 high—income persons were more likely to have received these services

                persons.!2!.1 These patterns are, however, not always
         ow—income

 clear—cut. While for chest X—rays, glaucoma tests, pap smears and
 breast examinations, the fraction of persons ever having had an exam
rlses monotonically with income, for electrocardiograms this fraction
 rises   only when family income exceeds $15,000.

         Moreover, intervals since last visits for these specific tests

 are   shorter uniformly by income group only     for   pap smears and breast
 exams. For electrocardiograms and chest X—rays, intervals are short-
 est at the low and the high end of the income distribution, and for

 glaucoma tests intervals shorten only when family income reaches

 $15, 000.
                                                                           31




        Whites are more likely to have had any one of these trsts than

 blacks, except for chest X—rays where the likelihoods are the same.

 For all tests, however, except glaucoma, the percentage having had a

 test in less than a year is higher for nonwhites than it is for whites.

        Our survey of the impacts of income and Medicaid on utilization

 reveals that pediatric care and preventive physicians' services for

adults are sensitive to these variables, although the effectiveness of

pediatric care and check—ups is questionable. One explanation of these

results is that people want to verify that they are healthy,-2!" and

the demand for this information is sensitive to income and price

 (Medicaid). A second explanation is that, although preventive care

may not be effective for the average individual, it may have impacts

on certain individuals. Such differential impact effects are probably

subject   to a considerable amount of uncertainty.

B;   Money and Time   Prices
        The coverage of preventive care under national health insurance
would lower the net or out—of—pocket price of care from the point of
view   of the conswner. Therefore, estimates of the price elasticity

of demand for care play a central role in predictions about the ef-

fects of NHI on the   utilization of these services. Price effects
were treated to some extent in our discussion of Medicaid in the pre-
vious subsection. In the present subsection our focus is on price
variations associated with private health insurance and other factors.
       It should be realized that, since the consumer's time is re-

quired to produce health and obtain medical care, the relevant price
                                                                                      8




 in the demand function for care contains a money price component and a

time price component. In the case of a visit to a physician or a den-

tist, the money price pertains to the direct payment to the provider

net of insurance payments. The time price pertains to the sum              of   the

time spent traveling to reach the provider and return home and waiting

to see him at the source of care multiplied by the opportunity cost of

time)22.' For pediatric card          or   dental care for children, since the

mother typically is responsible for the child, the opportunity cost of

time is     evaluated   by her actual or potential hourly wage rate in stud-

ies   by   Inman;   Colle and   Grossman, and Goldman and Grossman)---&' The

existence  of a time price component implies that the money price elas-
ticity of demand for care should fall tn absolute value as income
rises, This is because the value of time rises with income. There-
fore,   a 1 percent reduction n money price is associated with a
                                                     111/ The
smaller percentage reduction in total price for the rich.—

pussibility of differential price elasticities by income is relevant

if price cuts under national health insurance are directed at         low—
income families and if      coverage   of time costs   is excluded. Empirical

evidence with respect to income—related differences in price elastici-

ties and with respect to the effects          of both money price and time
price   are reviewed below.

        To our knowledge there are no studies of the effects of money or

time price on the receipt of prenatal care. Information on           the   effects
of   these variables on the receipt of preventive doctor care by adults
also is      limited. Luft reports that the greater use of preventive
           very

services by HNO enrollees is due to their better financial coverage
                                                                                     39



 rather than to incentives of liMOs to supply such servjces.-2-.'          In par-

 ticular,    he finds that differences in the use of preventive services

 disappear when I-ir.iO enrollees are   compared to non-enrollees with private

 health insurance that covers preventive care or with Nedicaid.

         Estimates of money price elasticities of demand for physician

visits by children in studies by Inman;       Colle    and Grossman; and Gold-

man and Grossman are presented in Table 2.i22./ The elasticities are

fairly similar; they range in absolute value from .06 to .11. None of
the   studies explicitly investigates whether there are income—related
differences in the price elasticity. Yet the results in the table
shed dome light on this issue because the mean         level   of family income
varies   among the samples analyzed. There is         no evidence that   the
price   elasticity falls in absolute value as income rises; if anything

the reverse is true.        The table also contains   the finding that in each

study the income elasticity exceeds the price elasticity by a substan—

tiãi. amount. This suggests that it might be more efficient to increase

physician visits by means of income transfers to low—income families

rather than by means of national health insurance.

        Another   aspect of the impact of money price on pediatric care
services               effect on the choice ofa specialist or a gen-
             involves its

eral practitioner as the usual source of care. Colle and Grossman
and   Goldman and Grossman find that parents who face lower
                                                            money prices
are   more   likely to select board   certified pediatricians, This can be
explained by the    presence of the time price component       in the total price

of care. Consider two families one of which has health insurance for

doctor visits with a 25 percent coinsurance rate.          If time prices do
                                                                               40




                                     Table 2
       ESTIMATES OF INCO1E AND PRICE ELASTICITIES OF PEDIATRIC VISITS




                                         -      Study
                          Colle and Grossman Goldrnan and Grossman    Inan!"
                                (1978)              (1978)            (1976)


Average income in
     sample                   $10,000                $6,500           $8,700
Estimate      of income
     elasticity                  0.38                    1.32           0.23
Estimate of price
     elasticity                 —0.11                   —0.06         —0.09

Sample and year
        V
                             NORC 1970          Bronx, New York      Kessner
                                               Residents 1965—66      1970


i'    inan fits separate functions for preventive and curative visits.
His estimates of income and price elasticities of each service are
very similar. We shcM simple averages in the table.
                                                                                 41



 not vary   by source of care, the health insurance policy will lcwer the
 total price of a visit to a pediatrician relative to a general practi-

 tioner   because pediatricians charge higher fees than general practi-
 tioners. Hence a national health insurance plan that either pays a
 fixed   percentage of the fee of a visit or reduces noney price to zero

 would increase the demand for specialists relative to general practi-.

 tioners. This might be desirable if visits to pediatricians contri-

buted to favorable child health outcones. As we pointed out in

Section II, however, there is no evidence ira       support   of this proposi-
tion.

         Both Inman and   Goldman and Grossman   report   that the number   of
visits falls as the time cost of a visit rises. The elasticities

        .15 in the Ininan   study!Y and   —.12 in the Goldman—Grossman

study. Colle and Grossman do not find evidence of a negative time

cost coefficient in their demand     curve   for visits. They do indicate,
ccvar, that the time cost of a visit has a negative and statis-

tically significant effect on the probability that a child obtained a

preventive physical examination within the past year. A one dollar

pr visit increase in the time cost of a visit lowers the
                                                                  probability
of obtaining preventive care by 1.2 percentage points. Colle and

Grossman also report that children are more likely to have seen a

physician within the past year and have more visits if the mode         of
transportation to the usual source of care is walking. This variable

serves   as a negative correlate of direct transportation costs. In
summary, all                                  transportation costs are
               three studies show that time and

significant rationing mechanisms in the pediatric care market.
                                                                                          2




  Consequently, even some       !edicaid    families may act as if the price of

  care is substantial.

         !ann1ng and Phelps provide price elasticities of derand             for   den—
  tal   care for white children, white adult males, and white adult fe—

 ma1es.2—1       Price elasticities of the probability of a dental check—

 up in the past year are        -..59   for children, —.03 for adult males, and

 —.56 for adult females. Price elasticities of the number              of   dental

 visits are —1.40 for children, —.65 for adult males, and —.78 for

 adult females. Manning and Phelps allow             for   an interaction between

 income and price in their demand functions and obtain the result that

 price elasticities increase in absolute value rather than decrease as
              116/
 income rises.— They also show that the demand for dental visits
 wniild be   dramatically altered if       dental   care were covered under na-
 tional health insurance. "Demand appears roughly to double for adults
 and triple for children, when they pay nothing for dental care, rather
  -n the full price.
         Holtmann   and Olsen   study the effects of waiting time and travel
 time on   the   number of dental visits per family who resided in New York
                                         118/ Waiting time has a
 and Pennsylvania in the period 1971—1972.------
                                                                 nega-
 tive effect on the number of visits, but travel time has a positive ef-

 fect. Their results should be interpreted with caution because
                                                                              they
 aggregate visits by children and adults in the same family. On the

other hand, Manning and Phelps report significant differences between

the coefficients of demand functions for care by adults and demand

functions for care by children.!2f Additional evidence on the role

-of time costs in the demand       for   dental care is contained in a study by
                                                                              43



 Edwards and Grossman.'20 They find that the probability that a youth had

 a preventive dental check—up within the past year is smaller if his

 mother works full—time in the labor market. Presumably, such mothers

place a bigger value on their time than mothers who do not work.

        Time prices are difficult to estimate. It is not surprising that

 their effects are so variable across studies. Another way of looking

at time prices is to-estimate their effect indirectly, namely through

the effects of health manpower availability on utilization.

        Recently—enacted Federal legislation has attempted to increase the

availability   of physicians and dentists   in medically underserved areas

to expand the use of preventive care in such areas. The Emergency
Health Personnel Act of 1970 (PL 91—623) created the National Health
Service Corps., whose members are assigned to health manpower shortage
areas. The Health Professions Assistance Act of 1976 (PL 94—484) en-
courages new graduates of medical and dental schools to locate in urban
ghettos and rural regions by forgiving their medical education loan
obligations. Further, the Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1974
iPL 93—222) gives priority for developmental funding of HNSs in inedi-
cally   deprived areas.

        In general research on the determninantsof preventive care utiliza-

tion   shows that the receipt of care is sensitive to the availability of
medical care inputs. Using data from the 1973 U.S.         Interview
                                                       Health

Survey, Kleininan and Wilson show that the proportion of births to moth-
ers who began prenatal care in the first trimester of pregnancy was
lower in areas designated by the Secretary of Health, Education, and
Welfare as medically underserved areas (MUAs) than in other areas.!2/
                                                                               44




They also indicate that persons below the age of seventeen were more

likely not to have had a routine physical examination during the past

two years in MUAs. Finally, based on the indicators of preventive

physicians' services for adults mentioned previously (chest X—rays,

pap smears etcetera), adults in MtJAs were less likely to receive pre-

ventive care.

         In   multivariate analyses, Colle and Grossman, Manning and Phelps,

and Edwards and Grossman find that health manpower has large and sta-

tistically significant effects on the family's propensity to obtain

preventive dental and doctor care for its children.!-" For example,

an increase of one dentist per thousand population in the county of

residence     increases the probability that youths visited the dentist
fc   preventive    care              17 percentage points both in
                          by approximately

Cycle III of the Health Examination Survey and in the NORC survey.!?!"
It should be noted that these results are unlikely to reflect demand
iipulation by physicians or dentists. The concept of demand         Inanipu—

lation refers to       the ability of health personnel to shift the demand
curve    for their services, with all direct and indirect costs of these

ervices held constant. In        his extensive treatment of this phenomenon,
Pauly    shows that the demand manipulation effect should be larger in a

sample   of conswners with positive utilization than in a    sample of all

consumers. Moreover, his model gives no basis for expecting a demand

manipulation effect in an equation that explains the probability of a
        124/
check—up.—         V




        Based on the above considerations, it is appropriate to interpret

the role of physicians or dentists in the preventive care demand
                                                                                 45



     function as a reflection of information, entry, travel, waiting, and

     direct costs in the parents' decision to obtain care for their off—

     spring. In the study by Edwards and Grossman, all factors are at

    work because they have no measure of the money price of dental care

    or pediatric care and only a crude proxy for time price. Manning and

    Phelps control for money price but not for time price. Colle and

    Grossman control for both prices so that their findings indicate the

    importance of information, inconvenience, and other kinds of entry

    costs.

          As a prelude to our analysis of optimal health insurance in

    Section IV, it is useful to review Edwards and Grossman's estimates

    of the impacts   of three government programs to improve the oral
    health of youths.!.' First, they consider a $1,000 income—transfer
    to low—income families. This transfer would lower the periodontal
    index of youths from these families by .01 points and would lower
    their decay index by .02 points. (Such a program would also have
    other beneficial effects on children and their families.) These es—
    'tiicis take account of the direct favorable impact of income on oral
•
    neaiTh with   preventive dental care held constant, and   also take
                                                              they

    account of the indirect favorable impact of- income. In particular,
    an increase in income increases preventive dental care which increases
    oral health.—
                126/


          Next Edwards and Grossman consider a program   to   reduce or elimi-
    nate regional differences in the number of dentists per thousand popu—
    lation. Dentists are more numerous in urban areas than in rural areas.
    -To take two sites   in the Health Examination Survey, there were 1.1
     dentists per thousand population in San Francisco, California, while

     there were .2 dentists per thousand population in San Benito, Texas

     in 1968. Suppose that this difference were eliminated by raising the

    numer of dentists in San    Benito   by one per thousand population. Then

    the periodontal index of youths in San Benito would fall by .04 points,

    and   their   decay index would fall by .05 points. Here the mechanism is

    an indirect effect alone; the number of dentists per capita is posi-

    tively related to the receipt of a preventive dental exam, and the

    latter improves oral health. Finally, they consider an 80 percent

    reduction in the price of a dental check—up due to the enactment of a

    national health insurance plan for dental care with a 20 percent co-

    insurance rate. Based on research by Manning and Phelps on the imoact

    •f•ice on the propensity to obtain preventive dental care for chil-.

    dren and youths, Edwards and Grossman estimate that such a policy

    would raise the probability of obtaining care by 16 percentage
-
    poinis,3.a!( This would improve both     the   periodontal and   the   decay
    scores by .04 points.
           Edwards and Grossman view
                                their con,utatjong as illustrative
rther than definitive. To choose among the three programs, infor-
    mation on the cost of each program and on the number   youths af-
                                                              of

    fected clearly is required. Moreover, Edwards and Grossman indicate
    that definitive computations of impact effects should ta)e account
    of the supply elasticity of dental care and the exact nature of the
    relationship between dental manpower arid the indirect costs (costs
 other than money price) of obtaining dental care, We would add one

    further point. A health manpower program differs much more in form
                                                                                 47



than in substance from a program to cover preventive care     under   national

health insurance. 1fter all, both programs seek to reduce the total

price of preventive care. NHI cuts the money price component of care,

while manpower programs cut both the money price and the indirect price

components. If indirect costs are an important determinant of utiliza-.

tion, as our review indicates, NHI will be much more successful if

policy   makers recognize these costs and try to deal with them than if
they ignore them. Put differently, health manper programs and pro-
grains to develop delivery systems that lower indirect costs should not
be ignored when NHI policies are being formulated.

C.     Schooling   and Family Size
        With race, income, and price held constant, parents' schooling and

family size are extremely important determinants of the receipt of pre-.
ventive care. After controlling for husband's education (a proxy for
income) Lewit finds that more educated women are more likely to see a
physician within the first trimester of pregnancy and to make a greater
                                                   128/ Similarly,
number of prenatal visits than less educated women.—
pregnant women with few living children receive more prenatal care
than those with many living children. Colle and Grossman report that
mother's schooling is a positive correlate of the probabilities that

a child had a physician contact and a physical examination within the

past   year.!2f The number     of children in the family is a negative

correlate of these two probabilities. Edwards and     Grossman indicate
similar effects of mother's schooling and family size on the probability

that a youth received a preventive dental examination with the past
                                                                                   48



               More educated adults have higher probabilities of receiving

preventive care services such as chest X—rays and        pap smears)--'
         The importance of mother's schooling and      family size   in preven-

tive care utilization are underscored by Colle and Grossman's analysis

of differences between black and white children in the probability of

an   ambulatory contact and the probability of a preventive physical
                                132/They show
examination within the past year.—                      that   the welfare pro—
grain,   including   Medicaid, almost completely eliminates inmome—related
differences in these two      indexes   of pediatric care between black and
white    children. Black—white differences in these measures persist

primarily because black mothers have less education than white moth-

ers and   because black mothers have more children than white mothers.

Cna n speculate        that income—related differences in these      measures

and others persist over time for similar reasons. In particular,
high—income mothers have more education and fewer children than low
  iue mothers, Although researchers have not examined the latter
issue explicitly, Edwards and Grossman show that income-related dif—
•f-ncs in several measures of the health of white children are due
;.arily to differences in mother's. schooling and         to   a lesser extent
          133/                                     -
family size.—
         The   implications of these findings are at the same time both
disheartening and heartening. They are disheartening because they
imply that policies to reduce differences in utilization via NHI and

policies to reduce differences in health via       income   transfers and NHI
may not succeed. This is because the key differences are in            schooling

and family     size. These are extremely costly to reduce and will not be
                                                                              49




altered, at least in the short run, by NHI arid income transfers.!'

At the same time, the findings are heartening because black—white

differences in schooling have narrowed over time, particularly since

1970. In 1960, the difference between the median school years com-

pleted by white females and the median school years completed by

black females stood at 2.6 years. This difference declined to 2.0

years in 1970 and to 1.0 years in l977..2t' Recall that the infant

mortality rate, which historically has been higher for blacks than

for whites, declined rapidly from 1964 to 1974. Is there a hint in

these trends that a future policy of laissez faire may be the best

one?


             IV. Implications for Optimal National Health Insurance

         In this concluding section we consider the implications of our

analysis with respect to whether preventive care should be covered

under NHI and with respect to the nature of the optimal plan. To be

sure, we have already considered some of the implications of our dis—

cussions   of the effects and   determinants of preventive care in

Sections II and III.    Our purpose here is to pull together these

empirical   implications and   others   after first considering theoretical
justifications for governnent subsidization of preventive care. Note
that our intention is neither to design an optimal plan nor to estimate

the costs of alternative plans. Rather our intention is to underscore

relevant factors that should be kept in mind when decisions are made

with respect to preventive care under NHI. Put differently, we do

not have all the answers, but we want to      raise some   relevant cjues-

tions.
                                                                                 50




      The main justification for government interference with the pre-.

ventive medical care decisions of its citizens is the existence of ex-

ternalities. Two     basic   types of health—related externalities have been

identified. Production externalities refer to situations in which the

health of some individuals depends on the health or preventive medical

care utilization of others. Consumption         externalities   refer to situ-

ations in which the utility, rather than the health, of some individ—

uals depends on the health or preventive medical care consumption of

others.!.' In either situation it is easy to show that free rider

problems will lead at least some individuals to choose levels of

health or preventive medical care that are less than optimal from

society's point of view. When       there   is a one—to—one correspondence

rween health and      preventive   medical care, it   makes little   differ-
ence whether the externality is specified in terms of health or in
terms of care. This is likely to be true for immunizations against
irectjous   diseases. But in the more       common case there   is a multi—

variate health production function, where medical care can substitute
    other   inputs. Here it makes a difference whether a consumption
exrnality     specified in terms of health or in terms of the input
              is

of preventive medical care. It also makes a difference whether a
production externality is specified in terms of preventive medical
care or in terms of all preventive activities including preventive
nonmedical activities such as careful driving. We        discuss some im-

plications of this distinction below.
      The other justification for government attempts to modify the

preventive care    decisions   of its citizens that we wish to consider
                                                                               51




 is the existence of moral hazard. We      refer   to situations in which an

 individual pays a fixed premium for the purchase of a health insurance

 policy that covers renedial (curative) medical care services asso-

 ciated with illness or accidents. That is, the premium       does   not re-

 flect the individual's probability of becoming ill, a probability

 that is negatively related to preventive care. Pauly shows that moral

 hazard results inoverinsurance of remedial care and       too little   pre-
 ventive care.2.' Put       differently, it results in a substitution to—

 ward remedial care and away from preventive           138/
                                                   care.—   Clearly, there
is a close correspondence between a theoretical argument to cover pre-
ventive care under NHI to combat moral hazard and a practical argument
 to cover preventive care in order to contain the cost of
       Armed with the above justifications for government intervention
in the preventive care market and with our detailed treatment of the
t?xtent of third—party coverage of care and the effects and determi—
      of care, we offer the following theoretical and empirical impli-
cations with respect to preventive care and NHI.
          (1) When production and consumption externalities are specified
Jn    tcrms   of preventive medical care, the optimal way to deal with
these externalities is to subsidize the full (money and indirect) price
of care. This provides a justification for the coverage of preventive
care     under NHI to lower the money price. But as demonstrated by Pauly,

the optimal price cut should not be the same for everyone. In par-

ticular, since     the private demand for preventive care rises with income,
the   optimal price reduction should fall with income.     Beyond some in—
co-ne,   no price reduction is required. Moreover, the optimal insurance
                                                                                     52



plan does not and          should   not eliminate income—related differences in

 utilization. Instead, it should reduce such differences.

         (2) We     note   that the size of the optimal price dut depends on

the price elasticity of demand           for   care at each income level. For

example, if more refined estimates suggest that the price elasticity

of demand for care is greater the lower is the level of income, a

relatively small price cut would achieve substantial effects. It

follows that the optimal price cut need not be monotonically related

to income, if price elasticities of demand            for   care fall sufficiently

rapidly as income increases.!!2( This points to the need to obtain

precise estimates of response to price changes in order to formulate

an actual      price structure that is any way       near optimal.



             indirect costs of travel, waiting, entry, and information
        (3) The

are important determinants of utilization. From an administrative
point of view, these costs probably would be difficult to measure and
allocate under NHI. For this reason health manpower programs and
'ams          to   develop delivery systems that lower indirect costs should

     be ignored when NHI policies are being formulated.

        (4)    When production and consumption       externalities are specified
in   terms of health and the health production function has a multi-
variate form, the optimal policy involves reductions in the prices of
all inputs that contribute to favorable health outcomes, Since prac-
tical difficulties might preclude this approach, an income transfer
program,      possibly accompanied by reductions in the prices of easily-

identified inputs, especially inputs whose shares in health costs are
                                                                                   53




 large, might represent a second—best solution.!' This is why income

 transfers should not be ignored when NHI is being considered. Both

 can be viewed as alternative, although not necessarily competing,

means     to accomplish the same goal. Regardless of the nature of the
optimal program,      if the   private demand for health rises with income,!it
the    optimal transfer or price reductions should fall with income.

Income—related differences in health or differences due to factors cor-

related with inome such as race or schooling are reduced but not elirn—
 •
                        143/
mated by the opttmal plan.—

          (5) The application of a common coinsurance     rate   (possibly zero)

to preventive medical care arid curative medical care under         NI-lI might
or    might not reduce moral hazard. The price of the former relative
to tb Ltter is unaffected by NHI only if the time price components
and    the gross   money prices of each are the same or if the ratio of
time     price to total price is the same   for each type of care. This is
              because the money price of curative care in the event of
serious illness undoubtedly exceeds the money price of preventive care,
          the time price of the former is smaller than that of the latter.
         i.f the relative price ratio is not affected, undesirable substitu—

     away from other goods including preventive nonrnedical care and
tioris


toward curative care might occur.!!±"
          (6) Prenatal care arid dental care are effective, but pediatric
care     (except for immunizations) and   preventive   doctor care for adults
are   riot.   Moreover, health outcnes in which care is effective cor-

respond to outcomes in which income—differences in health are          observed.
These empirical results and the theory of health as a consumption          item
                                                                                 54




suggest that the optimal NHI    plan should     be characterized by benefits

that fall as income rises. In addition, the plan should be selective

rather than general with respect to the types        of   services covered.

For instance, instead of providing complete coverage for preventive

physicians' services to persons of all ages under NHI, the government

should direct its attention at prenatal care and physicians' services
                                 145/
during the first year of life.— Similarly, the effectiveness of

dental care throughout the life cycle suggests that the payoffs to

the coverage of dental care from the age it is first received until

age eighteen or beyond are substantial.2!" It should be kept in

mind, however, that a cost—effective alternative to preventive dental

care   exists in the form of water fluoridation, and that half of the
population of the U.S. resides in communities with less than optimal
fluoride levels. So perhaps the optimal policy might be to attach
significant coinsurance rates to dental care under NHI and simul-
taneously to encourage communities to adjust the fluoride content of
their water supply systems.
        (7) We do not know the income levels at which benefits       for pre—

natal arid dental   services should end. We do know that there       is little

theoretical justification for the provision of benefits to persons

from   all   income levels. Moreover, trends in the private health in-

surance   market indicate that benefits might cease at a fairly moder-
ate income level. We refer to the       rapid   increases in the percentages
of the population with obstetrical care and dental care insurance in
the recent past. The reductions in net price associated with these
increases in coverage imply that    the private demand of many families

for effective services may be substantial.—
                                         147/
          (8) Any discussion of preventive N}41 cannot ignore that a network

of public programs already exists to finance and deliver preventive

services to the poverty population. This network, which consists of

Medicaid, the maternal and     child   health program, and     the    neighborhood

health center program, constitutes a preventive NHI system for many

poor persons. Despite valid criticisms, this system has made at least

some improvements in the health of the poor. We can            see   no reason to

scrap it. Rather what is called for is a more uniform set of eliqibil—

ity standards and some modifications in       the   ways in   which   services are
delivered    and providers are reimbursed. In particular, less fragmenta-
tion of the health care delivery system would be desirable. Indeed it
has been shown that this fragmentation is a major source of delay and
nonnnrnnliance to treatment of recognized illness as well as for follow—
                      148/
ups to early detection.—
         (9) We will not discuss Medicaid reform in any detail because
  -.t Lc is the subject of another paper in this volume. We will
comment, however, on two aspects of the proposed reforms. First, our
lack of enthusiasm for coverage of preventive physicians' services de—
lzcrecI to persons beyond the age of one under NHI does not imply that
we think that existing Medicaid coverage of         these services should be
cutback.    Instead, we are   not   enthusiastic about future expansions       in
this    area. Second, some persons view the declining trend in the per-

centage of children immunized       against polio with alarm. They use this
trend   as evidence in favor of the CHAP    expansion of the EPSDT program
under Medicaid. Yet the trend may simply reflect a reduction in the

benefits   associated with immunization in    a period during which the
                                                                                        56




incidence of polio has been practically eliminated. Similar comments

apply to arguments      marshalled      in support of CHAP based on income—

related differences in rates of immunization against other infectious

diseases. In the present—day U.S., externalities associated with

these diseases are of little importance. To the extent that higher—

income parents "demand" a lower probability that their children con-

tact these diseases, income—related differences should persist in

equilibrium. This is not to say that the present differentials are

the optimal ones dictated by a merit-externality model. But we would
like to suggest that, in a climate of "tight" Federal and state bud-
gets, the prenatal care initiatives in CHAP should be given a much
higher   priority than the other parts of the program.
         (10)   Even in cases in which preventive care is        effective, the
provision of more care to blacks or low—income persons will not and
should not eliminate differences in health. Moreover, income trans—
fers will not eliminate these differences because health varies among
individuals with income and         preventive   care held constant. In par-
ticular, the studies that we have reviewed point to mother's schooling
as a key "preventive nonmedical determinant" of infant health and oral
health outcomes. Race and income—related differences in mother's
schooling are extremely costly to offset. Further, mother's schooling
and preventive     care may be complements. It is known that more educa-
ted mothers make     more   use   of   prenatal care and   dental care;   and   it is

plausible   that the impact of care on certain health outcomes rises as

schooling rises.!2." Another example of complertientarity may be corn—

pliance with the treatment prescribed as a result of a screening
                                                                                   57




 examination. For instance, in the case of hypertension, more educated

 consumers may be more likely to modify their diets        and   take the appro-
 priate medication. Lest the reader be disheartened he should recall

 thedramatic decline in the difference between black female and white
 female schooling levels since 1970. This decline may narrow race and
 income—related    differences in health in the future and curtail the
 amount of preventive medical care that the government should finance
 on the grounds of consumption externalities.
          (11) Finally it is worth repeating that our arguments in favor
 of   national health insurance rest on     externalities. Yet there is a
 market for private contributions for medical care, through         several
 nonprofitinstitutions. It is an open question to what extent pro-
duction and consumption externalities are already internalized
through private giving and voluntary transfers.
        Otir answers to   the three   questions posed by this conference are
-as follows:

        Preventive NHI: What Now? Medicaid reform with an emphasis on
        prenatal care, mandatory dental coverage for Medicaid children

        Preventive
       - crate—income
                     NHI: What Later? A preventive NHI program for mod—
                      families with an emphasis on prenatal care and
        dental care, mandatory dental coverage for Medicaid adults
        Preventive   NHI: What Never?  Comolete coverage of all preven-
        tive
        ______-;----_-_-----------------
               medical care services for all groups in the population


These answers appear to be at variance with
                                                  the widespread support for
comprehensive and     universal   N}fI expressed in the media and   in public
opinion   polls. Are we    simply "bucking" an inevitable trend? We think

not. Although most people say they favor NHI, a recent survey by the
                                                                                C
                                                                                ..1




Health Insurance Institute shows that this percentage falls dramatically

when it is pointed out that the enactment of NHI     is   likely to be accon—
                       150/
panied by higher taxes.—      Thus,   when people are asked to put their

money where their mouths are,"   there   is much less enthusiasm for con—

prehensive Ni-il.
                                                                                     59




                                       FOOTNOTES



*
 We    are   grateful   for the comments received from Edward F.X. Hughes, M.D.,

at the AEI conference on national health insurance. Grossman's research

for this paper was supported by a grant from the Robert Wood           Johnson
Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper has

not undergone the review accorded official NBER publications; in par-

ticular, it has not yet been sulzrdtted for approval by the Board of

Directors.


1/ Saul Waldinan, National Health Insurance Prooosals: Provisions of

Bills Introduced in the 93rd Congress as of February 1974, U.S.

Department     of Health, Education and Welfare,     Social Security Adminis-

tration,     Office of Research and Statistics, 1974.

2/ U.S. Congress, Senate, Congressional Record, September 25,1979k
      New York Times, "Comparison of Health Proposals," June 14, 1979.

3/ See for example L. Breslow and B. Klein, "Health and Race in
California," American Journal of Public Health,         vol. 61   (April 1971);
Victor R. Fuchs, "Some Economic         Aspects of Mortality in Developed

Countries,"     in The   Economics   of Health and Medical   Care, edited by
Mark   Perlmaj (London: MacMillan, 1974); Victor R. Fuchs, Who Shall
Live? Health, Economics and Social Choice          (New York: Basic Books, Inc.,

1974);   Michael Grossman, "The Correlation Between       Health and   Schooling,"
in   Household Production and     Consumption, edited by Nestor E. Terleckyj
(New York: Columbia       University   Press for the National Bureau of
                                                                                 60




Economic Research, 1975); Lawrence Mariheiin, "Health, Health Practices,

and Socioeconomic Status: The Role of Education," Ph.D. dissertation,

University of California at Berkeley, 1975; Linda N. Edwards and

Michael Grossman, "Adolescent Health, Family Background, and Preven-

tive Medical Care," in volume III of the Annual Series of Research

inHuman Capital and Devet, edited by Ismail Sirageldin and

David Salkever (Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press, forthcoming); and

Linda    N. Edwards and Michael Grossman, "Children's Health and the
Family," in volume II of the Annual         Series   of Research in Health

Economics, edited by Richard M. Scheffler (Greenwich, Connecticut*

JAI Press, 1980).


4/ In Section IV of this paper, we consider the implications, for an

optimal health       insurance   plan, of the possible existence of comp].e—

mentarities       between preventive medical care and preventive nonmedical


5/ Eli   B. Newberger, Carolyn Moore Newberger and Julius B. Richmond,
"Ch1d Health in America: Toward a Rational Public Policy, Milbank
"rIal      Fund Quarterly, vol. 54 (Summer        1976); Kenneth Keniston
arid the Carnegie Council on       Children,   All Our. Children: The American
Family   tinder   Pressure (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovariovich, 1977);

Theodore R. Marmor, "Children and National Health Insurance," in

Developing a Better Health Care System for Children, volume III of

the report of the Harvard Child Health Project Task Force (Cambridge,

Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Company, 1977); and Theodore R. Marmor,

"Rethinking National Health Insurance," The Public_Interest (winter

1977).
                                                                                      61




6/ Our focus on children is due in part to Phelps's excellent recent

paper   on insurance of preventive care for        adults.   See Charles E.

Phelps, "Illness Prevention and Medical Insurance,"           Journal of   Human

Resources, vol.     13, Supplezent (1978).

7/Isaac Ehrlich and Gary S. Becker, "Mar3cet           Insurance,   Self—Insurance

and SelfProtection," Journal         of   Political Economy, vol. 80 (July/

August 1972).

8/ For a similar      discussion,   see Mark.V. Pauly, Medical Care at Public

Expense:   AStud'     in pp1ied Welfare Economics (New York: Praeger Pub-

lishers, 1971).

9/ The percentage of the population with X-ray and           laboratory   exaxnina-

LiOn   insurance exceeds    the percentage with doctor office      visits insur-
ance in   Table 1 because sometimes the       former   type of insurance is
limited to X—rays and      tests   performed in a hospital.

10/ Marjorie Smith     Carroll.     "Private Health Insurance Plans in 1976:

An Evaluation," Social Securiy Bulletin, vol. 41 (September             1978).

11/ For a detailed discussion of this point, see Phelps, "Illness

Prevention.


12/ Ronald Andersen, Toanna        Lion, and Odin W.   Anderson, Two   Decades   of

Health Services, Social Survey Trends in Use and Expenditure (Cambridge,

Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Company, 1976).

13/ Harvard   Child   Health Project, Toward     a rimar Medical Care System
Resoonsive to   Children's Needs, volume I of the report of the Harvard
                                                                                    62




 Child Health Project Task Force (Cambridge,
                                                   Mass.g Ballinger Publishing
 Coinoany, 1977). This estinate agrees with the one reported by Colle

 and Grossman based on their research with children between the ages of

 one and five in the NORC survey. See Ann D, Colle arid Michael
                                                                        Grossran,
 'Determinarits of Pediatric Care Utilization," Journal of Human Resources,

 vol. 13, Supplement (1978).

 14/ Andersen, Lion and Anderson, Two Decades.

 15/ Andersen, Lion and Anderson, Two Decades.


 16/ Prenatal care, pediatric care, preventive physicians' services for

 adults, and dental care all are eligible for the medical expense

 deduction under the Federal income tax. Due, however, to the sizable

deductible    that must   be satisfied (3 percent of adjusted gross income),
this    cannot be an    important source of "insurance" of preventive care
for most taxpayers.


17/ Otir   discussion is based on   Anne-Marie   Foltz, "Uncertainties of Fed-
eral Child    Health Policies: Impact in Two States," U.S. Department of

Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, National Center

for Health Services Research, 1978; Anne—Marie Foltz and Donna Brown,

"State Response to Federal Policy: Children, EPSDT, and the Medicaid

Muddle," Medical Care, vol. 13 (August 1975); Anne—Marie Foltz, "The

Developraent of Ambiguous Federal Policy: Early and Periodic Screening,

Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT)," Milbank Memorial Fund
                                                              Quarterly,
vol.    53 (Winter 1975); and Karen Davis and
                                              Cathy Schoen, Health and
the    War on Poverty   (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution,    1978).
                                                                                   63




 18/ Robert M. Gibson and Charles R. FIsher, "National Health Expendi-

 tures, Fiscal Year 1977," Social Secuzialletjn, vol. 41 (July 1978).

 19/ We do not discuss persons covered under Medicaid because they are

a9ed, blind, or disabled recipients of supplenental security incone

 (ssl).


20/ Davis and Schoen, War on Pover.

21/ Karen Davis and Roger Reynolds, "The Impact of Medicare and Medi-

caid on Access to Medical care,"       in   The Role of Health Insurance in

the Health Services Sector, edited by Richard Rosett (New York; Neale

Watson Academic Publications, l976) and Davis and Schoen, War on

Pover,

22/ Davis and Schoen, War on Poverty.

23/ For a detailed outline of the benefits provided in each state, see

Health    Care Financing Administration, Data on the Medicaid Program:
Eligibility, Services, Expenditures;        Fiscal   Years 1966—78 (Washington,
D.C. s The   Institute for Medicaid Management, 1978).

24/ The         of indirect costs on utilization are discussed in
          effects

Section III of this paper.
25/ These data are from an unpublished memorandum kindly supplied to us
by Malcolm Curtis, Human Resources Division, Congressional Budget Office.
For   a careful   review of EPSPT see Edward F.X.     Hughes and his associates,
An   Assessment   of the Validity   of the Results   of HCFA's Demonstration
and Evaluation    Program for the Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis
and                                      Center for Health Services
      Treatment Program: A Metaevaluatjon,

and Policy Research, Northwestern University,
                                                                                        €4



26/ Note that this standard would make women pregnant             with    their first

child eligible for MedIcaid in all states.


27/ Currently, EPSDT covers the cost of a dental           examination and treat-.
merit of problems uncovered by the examination. States have the option

of covering or not covering routine dental care for children that is

not associated with the EPSDT assessments

28/ Davis arid Schoen, War    on   Poverty.

29/ Gibson and    Fisher,   "National Health Expenditures."


30/   Eugene N. Lewit, "Experience with       Pregnancy,    for Pre-
                                                           the   Demand

natal Care, and the Production of Surviving Infants," Ph.D. disserta-
tion, City University of New York Graduate School, 1977.

31/   Ronald L.   Williams, "Outcome-Based Measurements of        Medical Care
Output: The Case of Maternal and Infant Health," Ph.D. dissertation,
University of California at Santa Barbara, 1974.

32/   Williams, "Outcx,xne—Based Measurements."

33/ Davis and Schoen, War on PoverZ.

34/ Davis and Schoen, War on       Povert1,   p. 176.
35/ For example, Linda N. Edwards and Michael Grossman, "The Relation-
ship between Children's Health and Intellectual Development," in
Health; What is it Worth?, edited by Selma Nushkin and David Dunlop
(Elmsford,   N.Y.: Pergamon Press, Inc., 1979).

36/ Robert A. Shakotko, Linda N. Edwards and Michael Grossman, "The

Dynamics of Health and Cognitive Development in Adolescence," paper
                                                                                  65




presented at the fifty—fourth annual conference of the Western Econonic

Association, Las Vegas, Nevada, June       l979
37/ Victor R. Fuchs, "The Great Infant Mortality Mystery, or What Caused

the Slurip?," mimeograph, 1978.


38/ David E. Rogers     and   Robert J. Blendon, "Feeling Fine," The New York

Times   (June   27, 1977).


22/ Fuchs, "Infant     Mortality   Mystery"; and Fuchs, Who Shall   Live? In
research in progress,     Jacobowitz and   Grossman are studying the effects
of Medicaid, H and I projects, the legalization of abortion, the use
of oral contraceptive techniques, and other factors on variations in
infant mortality rates among counties of the U.S. See Steven Jacobowitz
a Michael Grossman, "Determinants of Variations in Infant Mortality
Rates Among Counties of the United States," in progress.

40/ Marmor, "Children and National Health Insurance.

4].! National. Center for Health Statistics and the National Center for
Health Services Rasearch, Health: United States, 1978, U.S. Department
of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, 1978.

42/ Edwards and Grossman, "Adolescent Health.TM

43/ Robert S. Kaplan, Lester B. Lave, and Samuel Leinhardt, "The
Efficacy of a Comprehensive Health Care Project: An Empirical Analysis,"
American    Journal of Public Health,   vol. 62 (July 1972).
44/ For example, Edwards and Grossman,       "Adolescent Health"; Edwards and

Grossman, "Children's Health and the Family"; and Shakotko;         Edwards and

Grossman,    "Dynamics of Health."
                                                                              66



 45/ Teh—Wei Hu, "Effectiveness of Child Health and Welfare Programs:

A Simultaneous Equations Approach,"
                                            Soda—Economic_Planninence,
vol. 7 (1973).


      A problem arises in interpreting Hu's result for hearing correc-

tion because of the way in which he coded this variable: zero if the

child had normal    hearing,   one if the child had hearing defects cor-

rected, and     minus one   if the child had uncorrected defects. This

coding   scheme gives children with       a corrected defect rtore "health"

according   to this   index of health than children with no defect.

47/ David N, Kessner. Assessment of Medical-- Care        for   Children

(Washington, D.C.: Institute of Medicine, 1974).

  7 Diana B. Dutton and Ralph S. Silber, "Children's Health Outcomes

in Six Different Ambulatory Care Delivery Systems," mimeograph,

March   1979.

49/   Diana B. Dutton, "Hematocrit Levels and Race: An Argument Against
the   Adoption of Separate Standards in Screening for Anemia." Paper
presented at the American Public Health Association Meetings in Los
Angeles, October 18, 1978.

50/ Robert P. Inman, "The Family      Provision of Children's Health: An

Economic Analysis,"    in   The Role of   Health Insurance in the Health

Services   Sector, edited by    Richard   Rosett (New York: Neale Watson

Academic Publications, 1976).
                                                                                    67



 51/ Kelly and      Sanchez   describe the periodontal index as follows:

            Every tooth in the ruouth ... is scored according to
               presence or absence of manifest signs of peri-
             the
            odontal disease. When a portion of the free gingiva
            is inflamed, a score of 1 is recorded. When com-
            pletely circumscribed by inflammation, teeth are -
            scored 2. Teeth with frank periodontal pockets are
            scored 6 when their mnasticatory function is unimpaired
            and 8 when it is impaired. The arithmetic average of
            all scores is the individual's [periodontal index] ...
 See James E. Kelly and Marcus J. Sanchez, Periodontal Disease and

Oral Hygiene among Children, National Center for Health Statistics,

U.S.   Department of      Health, Education and Welfare,       Public Health
Service, 1972, pp. 1—2.

52/   Edwards and    Grossman, RAdolescent       Bealth.N

53/ MFluoridation, The Cancer Scare, Consumer               Reports,   vol. 43


/(July 1978).

      National Center for Health Statistics and
iiedIth Services Research, Health: United States.
                                                        the   National Center for


./    Joseph P. Newhouse and Lindy       3. Friedlander, The Re1ationshi
Between Medical Resources and         Measures   of Health, Some Additional


/
Evidence (Santa Monica, Calif., The
      See   Edwards and   Grossman,
                                           Rand    Corporation, May 1977).

                                      Ado1escent Health.TM Technically, the
Edwards—Grossman procedure is to estimate an oral health production
function, a preventive dental care demand function, and the solved
reduced form of the production and demand           model.    On the other
hand, Newhouse and Friedlander use the estimated reduced form of
such a model. The      latter does not incorporate the restriction that
0   the number of dentists should not appear in the production function.
    In fairness to Newhouse and    Friedlander,   they are forced to fit the

    reduced form directly because they lack data on dental care utilj-.

    zation.


    57/ National Center for Health Statistics and the National Center

    for   Health   Services Research, Health: United States.


    58/ Richard Spark, "The Case Against Regular Physicals," The New York

    Times (July 25, 1976); and Phelps, "Illness Prevention,"

    59/ For   example, Donald Louria et al., "Primary and Secondary Preven-
    tion   among Adults,    An Analysis with Coimnents on   Screening and Health
    Education,"    Preventive Medicine, vol. 5 (1976).


    60/ Morris F. Cohen, editor, Multiphasic Health Testing Services (New

    York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978); and Loring G. Dales, Gary D. Friedman,

    and Morris F. Cohen, "Evaluating Periodic Multiphaslc Health Checkupsi

    A Controlled Trial," Journal of Chronic Disease, vol. 32 (1979).

    61/ Spark, "Regular Physicals."

    62/ For example, M. Sokolow and D, Perloff, "Five-Year Survival of

    Consecutive    Patients with Malignant Hypertension Treated with Anti—
    hypertensive    Agents," American Journal of Cardiology, vol. 6
    (November 1960); E.R. Mohler and E.D. Freis, "Five-Year Survival of
    Patients with Malignant Hypertension Treated with Antihypertensive
    Agents," American Heart Journal, vol. 60 (September 1960); and S.Bjork
    et al., "The Effect of Active Drug Treatment in      Severe   Hypertensive
    Disease," Acta Med Scand, vol. 169    (June 1961).
                                                                                   19




63/ Surgeon General of the United States, Healthy People: The Seon

General's    Report on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention, U.S.

Department of Health, Education and     Welfare,      Public Health Service,

1979.


64/ Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Group on Antihypertensive

Agents, "Effects of Treatment on Morbidity in Hypertension, I. Results

in Patients with Diastolic Blood Pressures Averaging 115 Through 129 mm

Hg," JAMA, vol. 202 (December 11, 1967).

65/   Veterans Administration Cooperative Study Group on Antihypertensive
Agents, "Effects of Treatment on Morbidity on Hypertension, I. Results
in Patients   with Diastolic Blood Pressure Averaging 90 Through 114 mm
Hg," 3AMA,   vol. 213 (August 17, 1970).
66/ Lone Lauridsen   and   Finn Gyntelberg, "A Clinical Follow-Up Five Years
After Screening for Hypertension in Copenhagen, Males Aged 40—59,
Ltnational Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 8 (March 1979).
67/   For example, Milton Weinstein and     William   Stason, Hypertension - A

Policy   Perspective (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard       University   Press, 1976);

M.F. D'Souza, A.V. Swan, and D.J. Shannon, "A Long—Term Controlled

Trial   of Screening for Hypertension in Genera1. Practice,u Lancet (1976);
W.E. Miall and S.   Chinn,   "Screening for Hypertension: Some Epidemiological
Observations,"   British Medical Journal, vol. 3       (1974); and R. Stamler
et al.,, "Adherence and    Blood Pressure   Response to Hypertension Treatment,"

Lancet (1975).
                                                                                        70



/ F.A.       Finnerty, Jr.,L.W. Shaw and C.K. Himineishach,          "Hypertension
in the      Inner   City, Part 2: Detection and Follow-Up," Circulation,

vol. 47 (1973).

      See Mark      V. Pauly,   "Efficiency, Incentives and     Reimburserent   for

Health      Care," Inquiry vol. 7       (1970). For careful empirical      evalua-.
tions    of HMOs, see Harold S. Luft, "How Do Health Maintenance Organi-

zations Achieve Their 'Savings': Rhetoric and Evidence," New En9land

Journal     of   Medicine, vol. 298 (June 15, 1978); and Harold S. Luft,

"Why Do HMOs Seem to Provide More Health Maintenance Services?9

I4iThanic   Memorial Fund     puarterly,   vol. 56 (Spring 1978).

70/   For example, Brian MacMalion, Mary Grace Iovar and Jacob J. Feldman,

Infant Mortality Rates: Socioeconomic Factors, U.S. Department of
Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service and              Mental Health
Administration, 1972;         Fuchs,   "Mortality in Developed Countries; Fuchs,
•h11 Live9; Steven L. Gortmaker, "Poverty, Race, and Infant
Mortality in the United States," Institute for Research on Poverty
Discussion Paper No. 404—77, University of Wisconsin, 1977; Lewit,
"Experience with Pregnancy"; and Selma Taffel, Prenatal Care in the
United States, 1969—1975, U.S. Department of Health, Education and
Welfare, Public Health Service, 1978.
71/   Center for Disease Control, "United States Immunization Survey,
1976,"   U.s. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public

Health Service, 1977.


72/ Edwards and Grossman,          "Adolescent   Health"; and   Edwards and Grossman,
"Children's      Health and     the Family."
                                                                                      7].




"    73/ Newhouse and Friedlander, "Medical Resources and Measures of      Health."

     74/ Linda N. Edwards and Michael Grossman, "Income and Race Differences

     in Children's Health," National Bureau of Economic Research Working

     Paper No. 308, 1979; Edwards and Grossman, "Adolescent Health"; and

     Edwards and Grossman, "Children's Health and the Family."


     75/ For example, Richard D. Auster, Irving Leveson and Deborah Sarachek,

     "The' Production of Health: An Exploratory Study," Journal of Human

     Resources, vol. 4 (Fall 1969), Michael Grossman, The Demand for Health:

    A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation (New York: Columbia University

     for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972); Grossman, "Health

     and Schooling"; Fuchs, "Mortality in Developed Countries"; Fuchs, Who

    Shall Live". These studies control for reverse causality from poor

    health to low income in a variety of ways.


    76/ In general, conclusions reached with respect to the existence or

    '±jstence of income and         differences are valid whether or not
                                  race

    medical care is held constant. When care is efficacious, sensitive to
    income, and not held constant, the gross difference 'exceeds the net
     (medjcal care—constant) difference. This pertains to infant       health
    and   oral   health. In the case of prevalence of infectious diseases,
    net   differences have not been obtained.


    77/ For example, Davis and Reynolds, "Access to Medical Care"; Colle

    arid Grossman, "Pediatric Care"; and Davis      and Schoen, War on Povery.

    78/ National Center for Health Statistics, Physician Visits: Volume and

    Interval Since Last Visit, 1975,     U.S.   Department of Health, Education

    and Welfare, Public Health Service, 1979.
                                                                                     72




 79/ Taffel, Prenatal Care.

 80/ National Center for Health Statistics, Use of Selected Medical           Pro-
 cedures   Associated with Preventive Care, 1973, U.S. Department of Health,

Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, 1977.

       Center    for Disease   Control, "United States Immunization Survey,

l975,     U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health
Service,    1976.


82/ Center for Disease Control, "United States L:nmunization Survey,

1971, U.S. Department of Health Education and           Welfare,   Public Health

Service, 1971; and       Center for Disease Control, "Immunization Survey,
1975."

83/ Davis and       Reynolds, "Access   to Medical Care."

84/ As indicated in Section I, this figure          was 45 percent in 1970.

,Rc/1-n   1975   children from families   with an   income of under $5,000 made
exactly the same number of visits on average as children from families
with an ince of $15,000 or over. This means that children who              re-

ceived Medicaid benefits made more visits than their counterparts in
the $15,000 or over family income class.

86/ National Center for Health Statistics, Physician Visits.
87/ National Center for Health Statistics, Physician Visits.
88/ Pna1d W. Wilson and Elijah L. White, "Changes in Morbidity, Dis-
ability, and Utilization Differentials between the Poor and Nonpoor:
Data from the Health Interview        Survey:   1964 and 1973," Medical Care,
vol.    15 (August 1977).
                                                                                      73



89/ Wilson and White present data that reveal a downward trend in these

differentials between 1964 and 1973. See Wilson and White, "Changes in

Morbidity."

90/ National Center for Health Statistics, Preventive Care.

•j Colle and Grossman,          "Pediatric Care"j   and National Center for Health
Statistics and the National Center for Health Services Research, Health:
United    States.

92/ Colle and     Grossman,     "Pediatric Care."


93/ For example, Charles E. Phelps, "Effects of Insurance on Demand for

Medical   Care," in Equity in Health Services, edited          by Ronald Andersen,
Joanna    Kravits and   Odin W. Anderson    (Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Pub-

lishing Company,     1975).

94/   Colle and Grossman, "Pediatric      Care"; and   Fred   Goldman   and Michael
Grossman, "The Demand for Pediatric Care: An Hedonic Approach," Journal

of Political Economy, vol. 86 (April 1978).

;5/   colle   and Grossman, "Pediatric Care."

      T example, Davis and Schoen, War on Poverty; and Frank Sloan,

Janet Mitchell and      Jerry   Cromwell, "Physician Participation in      State
Medicaid Programs," Journal of Human        Resources,   vol. 13, Supplement
(1978).

97/ Col].e and   Grossman,    "Pediatric Care,"

98/ The sources of the observed difference in          the   probability of re-

ceipt of preventive care are discussed in Section III—D. Colle and
Grossrz'an perform a similar analysis of the probability that a child
                                                                              74




 had at least one physician contact in 1970. They reach a similar con—

 clusiori: the inconc—related difference in the probability of use

 between blacks and whites are entirely offset by the welfare program.

 99/   Wilson and White,   "Changes in Morbidity."

 100/   Edwards and Grossman, "1do1escent Health.

101/ Willard B. Manning Jr. and Charles E. Phelps, Dental Care De.and:
Point Estimates and    Implications    for National Health Insurance (Santa
Monica, Calif.: The Rand     Corporation,   1978).

102/ National     Center for Health Statistics, Physician Visits.

103/ National Center for Health Statistics, Physician Visits. These

figures    assume that persons will have only one general check—up within
a   year. Comparable figures cannot be obtained prior to 1971 because
general check—ups were recorded under a more narrow definition start—
inq in 1971.                                                         -


104/ Andersen, Lion and      Anderson,   Two Decades.

105/ The N01 questionnaire specifies "there was nothing particularly
w.,on and the examination wasn't required——it was just time for a
check-up   or physical examination." The NCHS definition of general

check-up is less inclusive than the NORC definition of physical ex-

amination because it   excludes   those check—ups occasioned by a specific
condition.    On the other hand   it   is nore inclusive than the NOFC
definition of preventive physical examination because it includes those
exams that are required.                       -
                                                                                   75


•
    106/ The above statement is not inconsistent with our proposition at

    the end of Section II that morbidity and mortality rates of white

    adults rise with income. The latter proposition refers to studies

    that control for schooling and also for reverse causality from poor

    health to low income..


           National Center for Health Statistics, Preventive Care.


    108/ For example, Phelps, "Illness Prevention."

    109/ If the trip to the source of care is made by a mode of transporta-.

    tion other than   walking,   the direct cost of the trip would be included

    in the total price of a visit.


    110/   Inman, "Family Provision of Children's Health"; Colic and Grossman,
    "Pediatric Care"; and Goldman and    Grossman, "Demand for   Pediatric Care.
    111/ For a rigorous derivation of the above proposition and      some   ex-
    ceptions to it, see Michael Grossman and Elizabeth H. Rand, "Consumer
    Incentives for Health Services in Chronic Illness," in Consumer
    tives for Health Care, edited by Selma J. Mushkin (New York: Prodist,
    1974).

    112/ Luft, "Health Maintenance Services."

    113/ Inman, "Family Provision of Children's Health"; Colic and Grossman,
    "Pediatric Care"; and Goldman and Grossman, "Demand for Pediatric Care."

    114/ This estimate pertains to the time cost elasticity of curative
    visits. Preventive visits are insensitive to time costs. For more
    details, see the note to Table 2.
                                                                                      76




 115/ Manning and      Phelps, Dental Cai-e Demand.

116/   The price elasticities reported in the text were computed by Manning

and Phelps   at sample means

117/   Manning and Phelps, Dental Care Demand, p. 23.

118/   A.G. }ioltman and E. Odgers Olsen Jr., "The Demand for Dantal Care:

A Study of Consumption and Household Production," Journal                of   Hunan

Resources, vol. 11 (Fall 1976).


119/ Manning    and   Phelps, Dental Care Demand.


120/ Edwards and Grossman, "Adolescent Health."

121/ Joel C. Kleinman and Ronald W. Wilson, "Are 'Medically Underserved

Areas' Medically Underserved?', Health Services Research, vol. 12

(Swmner 1977).


122/ Colle and Grossman, "Pediatric Care"; Manning and Phelps, Dental

ie Demand;       and Edwards and Grossman, "Adolescent Health."


123/ Manning and Phelps, Dental Care Demand; and Edwards and Grossman,

Aaólescent Health."

124/ Mark V. Pauly, Doctors and Their Workshops (Chicago, Ill.: Univer-

sity of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research,

forthcoming).

125/ Edwards and Grossman, "Adolescent Health."


126/ Technically, Edwards and Grossman estimate the impact of each pro-.

grain from the solved reduced form of an oral health production and are—

ventive care demand model.
                                                                                              77




$
    127/     Manning and Phelps, Denta]. Care Demand,


    /Lewit, "Experience with Pregnancy."

    129/ Col].e and Grossman, "Pediatric Care."


    130/ Edwards and Grossman, "Adolescent Health."

    131/ National Center for Health Statistics, Preventive Care.

    132/ Colle and     Grossman,    "Pediatric Care.


    133/ Edwards and Grossman, "Children's Health and               the   Family."

    134/ In the long run, NHI might result in a reduction in family size

    by making contraceptive information and            abortion   more readily avail-

    able, Also in the long run, income transfers could narrow schooling

    cii   fferr&ntialg by   making it easier   for low—income families to finance
    a college education for their children,
    135/ Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States,
    t9f (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978).
    136/ For an excellent treatment of health—related externalities with
    a focus on merit externalities, see Pauly, Medical Care at Public
    pense.
    137/ Mark V. Pauly,       "Overinsurance
                                          Public Provision of Insurance:
                                                and

    The Role of Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection," The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, vol. 88        (February   1974).

    138/    For a similar conclusion see Ehrlich and Becker, "Market Insur-
    ance."     Zeckhauser, Pauly, Phelps, and         others have   constructed      models
    in which    moral hazard is present even in the absence of preventive
                                                                                  78




 care. Here the concept refers to a substitution of remedial medical

care for other consumption goods in general due to insurance—related

reductions in the price of care. Since preventive and remedial care

are likely to be good substitutes, it sec.rns more natural to use the

concept developed in the text. See Richard Zeckhauser, "Medical

Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between Risk Spreading and

Appropriate Incentives," Journal of Economic_Theo, vol. 2 (March

l97O)j Pauly, Medical     Care   at Public Expense; arid Charles E. Phelps,

"Demand   for Reimbursement Insurance,"     in The Role of   Health Insurance
in the Health Services Sector, edited by Richard Rosett         (New York:

Neale   Watson Academic Publications, 1976).

139/   Another reason   for the government to modify the preventive care
&cisions of    its   citizens is that they may have imperfect information
about     effects of care. A special case of imperfectinformatjo,
        the

which is particularly relevant to children's health and closely re—
lated to externalities, arises because parents' health affects the

hith of their offspring. Parents may ignore or may           not be aware    of

these effects when they decide how much to invest in their health.

(For an interesting model along these lines, see Edward Lazear,

"Intergenerational Externalities," National Bureau of Economic Re-

search Working Paper No. 145, 1976). We do not deal with imperfect

information   because it will    almost always be more   desirable for the
government to deal with the problem directly than to subsidize the
price of care. In the case of parent—child externalities, since

these pertain to a small number of people in the same family, they
                                                                                            79




are likely to be small and to be internalized by the family in a number

of ways. Moreover, the issue of imperfect information most frequently

is raised not in the context of the effects of preventive care but in

the context of the quality of physicians (for example, Pauly, Medical

Care    at Public Expense).

        If 1M    denotes   the change in medical           expenditures of the jth income

group required to achieve optirtiality, and if income groups are listed

starting from lowest,then optirnality requirest


                           AM1 >             >              >    0
                                      AM2            AM3



Hence optimality requires:

                           S1AP1>S2Ap2>sAp>O

where-S1 stands for the effect on medical care of the th group result-

ing from a unit change in the price of care (with all Si negative),

and        is   the reduction in the price of medical care for the th group.

re the pattern of AP depends on the size and pattern of the                         S.
in particular     if
                                  >              >
                           1s11       js2f           1s31


It    follows that the optimal price cuts need not be inversely related to

income throughout the whole range of incomes,                   Quite conceivably the

optimal price cut could be greater for those with modest incomes than

for   the very poor.
                                                                                      80




     141/ It is well known that, unless total consumption of some persons

     (say the poor) enters the utility functions of others, price reductions

     of specific merit goods are preferable to income transfers.          Indeed,

    price reductions may be preferable even if the merit good in question

    is total present and future consumption of poor children rather than

    consumption of all poor persons. Poor parents would receive income

    transfers directed at their children and        might   spend them on their own

    consumption.       To avoid this, the rich might prefer to subsidize health

    and    schooling   investments of poor   children   which would raise their

    earnings prospects and hence their future consumption.

    142/ The properties of the private demand functions for health and the
    differences between this demand function and the demand function for
    medical      care are analyzed in detail by Grossman. See Grossman, The

    Demand for     Health.
•
           The   above statement pertains to gross schooling or race differ-
    ences in health. Net (inccjcue—constant) differences would be unaffected
    unlcosthe price reduction or income transfer depended on race or
    scoling as well as on income. Undoubtedly, the transactions costs
    of a program whose benefits depended on many characteristics of con-
    sumers would be prohibitive.


    144/ Phelps, wIliness Prevention.w

    145/ If future research provides     definitive evidence on the efficacy
    of screening for certain adult diseases, possibly in subsets of the

    population, coverage could be expanded to       include the administration
    of these tests to groups with high prevalence rates.
                                                                                          81


 146/ To the extent that smaller dollar weights are placed on irnorove-

 mc±nts in oral health relative to physical health, the above statent

 would have to be qualified. Nevertheless, if the impact of preventive

 doctor care on physical health is nih, coverage cannot be justified

 regardless of the size of the dollar weights.


 !!Z( Fuchs interprets these trends as a form of "pre—cornxnitxnent."               See

 Victor R. Fuchs, "Economics, Health, and Post—Industrial Society,"

 Milbank   Menoria1 Fund 9uarterly, vol. 57 (1979), Phelps develoos a
model that    explains them   in    tervs   of   situations in which consumers
and    insurance companies   share the gains of preventive care activities
by consumers.     Another factor is that employers' contributions to

fringe    benefits are   excluded   from employees' taxable income, There—
fore, the price of preventive care is reduced if it is financed
through a work—related health insurance plan. As income and hence
marginal tax rates rise oier time, the incentive to finance preven-
tive care in this manner increases. See Phelps, "Illness Prevention."
148/ See Howard Greenwald, Selwyn           Becker   and Michael   Nevitt, "Delay
and                in Cancer Detection — A Behavioral Perspective for
       Noncompliance

Health Planners," Milbank Memorial Fund Quartery,, vol. 56 (1978).

149/ Inxnan is the only researcher who has tested this proposition, His
results are               This is not surprising since they pertain to
              inconclusive,

pediatric care which is not efficacious. See Inman, "Family Provision
of Children's Health."

150/   Health Insurance Institute. Health and Health Insurance: The

lic's View '(Washington, D.C.: The Health Insurance Institute, 1979),
                                                                                    i2




                                   BIBLIOGR&hy



Andersen, Ronald;       Lion, Joanna;   and Anderson, Odin W. Two Decades of
  Health Services Social Survypds in Use and Ecpenditure.
  Cambridge, Hass.:        Ballinger Publishing Company, 1976.

Auster, Richard D.; Leveson, Irving; and Sarachek, Deborah. "The Pro—
  duction of Health: An Exploratory Study." Journal of Human Resources,
  4 (Fall 1969).

Bjork, S., et a].. "The Effect of Active Drug Treatment in Severe Hyper-
  tensive Disease." Acta Med Scand, 169 (June 1961).

Breslow, L., and Klein, B. "Health and         Race in   Californiae" American
  Journal of Public Health, 6]. (April 1971).

Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1978,
  Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1978,.

Carroll,Majorie Smith. "Private Health Insurance Plans in 1976: An
  Evaluation." Social Security Bulletin, 41 (September 1978).
Center for Disease Control. "United States Immunization Survey, 1971."
 U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health
  Service, DHEW (HSM) 72—8094, 1971.
             . "United States Immunization Survey, 1975." U.S. Department -
 -'-4th,   Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, DHEW (CDC)
 76—8221, 1976.

__________     "United States Immunization Survey, 1976." U.S. Department
  c'f   ea1th, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, DEEW (CDC)
  78—8221, 1977.
Colle, Ami D.,,     Grossman, Michael. "Determinants of Pediatric Care
                  and
  Utilization." In NBER Conference on the Economics of Physician and
  Patient Behavior, edited by Victor R. Fuchs and Joseph P. Newhouse.
  Journal of Human Resources, 13 (1978).
Cohen, Morris F.,  editor. Multiphasic Health Testing Services. New
  York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978.

Congressional Record — Senate, September 25, 1979.

Consumer Reports. "Fluoridation: The Cancer Scare." Vol. 43 (July          1978).
Dales, Loring G.; Friedman, Gary D.; and Cohen, Morris F. "Evaluating
  Periodic Multiphasic Health Checkups: A Controlled Trial." Journal
  of Chronic Disease, 32 (1979).
                                                                              83



 Davis, Karen. National Health Insurance: Benefits,_Costs and Conse—
   quences. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1975.

 Davis, Karen, and Reynolds, Roger. "The Impact of Medicare and Medicaid
   on Access to Medical Care." In The Role of Health Insurance in the
   Health Services Sector, edited by Richard Rosett, New York: Neale
   Watson Academic Publications, 1976.

Davis, Karen, and Schoen, Cathy. Health and the war on
  Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1978.
                                                           Pove.
D'Souza, M.P.; Swan, A.V.; and shannon, D.J. "A Long—Term Controlled
  Trial of Screening for Hypertension in General Practice,, Lancet
   (1976).                               -




Dutton, Diana B.   "Hematocrit Levels and Races   An Argument Against   the
  Adoption of Separate Standards in Screening for Anemia." Paper
  presented at the American Public Health Association Meetings in
  Los Angeles, October 18, 1978.
Dutton, Diana B., and Silber, Ralph S. "Children's Health Outcomes in
  Six Different Ambulatory Care Delivery Systems." Mimeograph,
  March 1979.
Edwards, Linda N., and Grossman, Michael. "Adolescent Health, Family
  Background, and Preventive Medical Care." In Volume III of the
  Annual Series of Research in Human Capital and Development, edited
  by Ismail Sirageldin arid David Salkever. Greenwich, Connecticut:
  JAX Press, forthcoming.

__________   "Children's Health and the Family." In Volume II of the
  Annual Series of Research in Health Economics, edited by Richard M.
  Scheffler. Greenwich, Connecticut: JAI Press, 1980.

__________   "Income and Race Differences in Children's Health."
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 308, 1979.

__________   "The Relationship between Children's Health and Intellec-.
  tual Development." In Health: What is it Worth?, edited by Selma
  Mushkin and David Dun1o     Tmsford,Newjrk.      Pergainon Press, Inc.,
  1979.

Ehrlich, Isaac, arid Becker, Gary S. "Market Insurance, Self—Insurance
  and Self-Protection. Journal of Political Economy, 80 (July/August
  1972).

Finnerly, F.A., Jr.; Shaw, L.W.; and Hinrnelsbach, C.K. "Hypertension
  in the Inner City, Part 2: Detection and
                                            Follow—up." Circulation,
  47 (1973),
                                                                             84




 Foltz, Anne—Marie, "The Development of Ambiguous Federal Policy: Early
   and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment (EPSDT)." Milbank
   Memorial Fund Quarterly, 53 (Winter 1975).

__________   "Uncertainties of Federal Child Health Policies: Impact in
  Two States." U.S. Department of Health, Education and
                                                         Welfare, Public
  Health Service, National Center for Health Services Research, DHEW (pHs)
   78—3190, 1978.

Foltz, Anne—Marie, and Brown, Donna. "State Response to Federal Policy:
  Children, EPSDT, and the Medicaid Muddle." Medical Care, 13 (August
  1975).

Fuchs, Victor Re "Economics, Health, and Post—Industrial Society."
  Mflbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 57 (1979).

___________  "The Great Infant Mortality Mystery, or What Caused the
  Slump?" Mimeograph, October 1978.

__________• "Some Economic Aspects of Mortality in Developed Countries."
  In The Economics of Health and Medical Care, edited by Mark Penman.
  London: MacMillan, 1974.

__________• Who Shall Live?: Health,   Economics and Social Choice. New
  York: Basic Books, Inc., 1974.

Gibson,   Robert M,, and Fisher, Charles R. "National Health Expendi-
  tures, Fiscal   Year 1977." Social Security Bulletin, 41 (July 1978).

 o1dmn Fred,   and Grossman, Michael. "The Demand for Pediatric Care:
  An Hedonic Approach," Journal of Political Economy, 86 (April 1978).

Gortmaker, Steven L. Poverty, Race, and Infant Mortality in the United
  States. Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper No,
  4C4—77, University of Wisconsin, (March 1977).

Greenwald, Howard; Becker, Selwyn; and Nevitt, Michael. "Delay and Non-
  compliance in Cancer Detection — A Behavioral Perspective for Health
  Planners," Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 56 (1978).

Grossman, Michael, "The Correlation Between Health and Schooling." In
  Household Production and Consumptjon, edited by Nestor E. Tenleckyj.
  New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
  Economic Research, 1975.

_________ • The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Eiirnirjcal Investj—
  9ation. New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau
  of Economic Research, 1972,
0
    Grossman, !ichel, and Rand, Elizabeth H. "Consumer Incentives for
      Health Services in Chronic Illness." In Consumer Incentives for
      Health Care, edited by Seiria J. Mushkin. Iew York: Prodist, 1974.

    Harvard Child Health Project. Toward a Primary Medical Care Systeru
       ponsive   to Children's Needs. Volume I of the report of the
      Harvard Child Health Project Task Force. Cambridge, Mass.:
      Ballinger Publishing Company, 1977.

    Health Care Financing Administration. Data on the Medicaid Program:
      Eligibility, Services, Expandjtureg: Fiscal Years 1966—78.
      Washington, D.C.: The Institute for Medicaid Management, 1978.

    Health Insurance Institute. Health and Health Insurance: The Public's
      View. Washington, D.C.: The Health Insurance          Institute,
                                                               1979.

    Holtmann, A.G., and Olsen, E. Odgers, Jr. "The Demand for Dental Care:
      A Study of Consumption and Household Production." Journal of Human
       Resources,    1]. (Fall 1976).

    Mu, Teh-Wei. "Effectiveness of Child Health and Welfare Programs: A
      Simultaneous Equations Approach," Socio—Econornjc Planning Sciences,
       7   (1973).
               Edward   P.X., et   al. An Assessment of the Validity of the
      sults of HCFA's Demonstration and Evaluation Program for the Ea
      and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment Program: A Meta—
      evaluation. Center for Health Services and Policy Research,
      Northwestern University (Working Draft, June 1979).         -
          Robert P. "The Family Provision of Children's Health: An Economic
    Irixnan,
      Analysis." In The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services
      Sector, edited by Richard Rosett. New York: Neale Watson Academic
      Publications, 1976.
    Jacobowitz, Steven, and Grossman, Michael. "Determinants of Varia-
      tions in Infant Mortality Rates Among Counties of the United
      States." In progress.
    Kaplan,    Robert S. Lave, Lester B.; and      Leinhardt, Saniuel. "The   Effi-
      cacy of a Comprehensive Health Care Project: An Emoirical Analysis."
      American Journal of Public Health, 62 (July 1972).

    Kelly, James L, and Sanchez, Marcus       J.
                                             Periodontal Disease and Oral
      Hygiene Among Children. National Center for Health Statistics,
      U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health
      Publication Series 11 — No. 117, 1972.

    Keniston, Kenneth, and the Carnegie Council on Children. All Our Chil-
      dren: The American Family Under Pressure. New York: Harcourt Brace
      Jovanovich, 1977.
                                                                              86




Kessner, David M. Assessment of Medical Care for Children. Contrasts
  in Health Status, Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Institute of Medicine,
  1974.

}Zleiri.rnan, Joel C., and Wilson, Ronald 1. "Are 'Medically Underserved
  Areas' Medically Underserved?" Health Services Research, 12
   (Suiier 1977),

Lauridsen, Lone, and Gyntelberg, Finn, "A Clinical Follow-Up Five Years
  After Screening for Hypertension in Copenhagen, Males Aged 40-59."
  International Journal of Epidemiology, 8 (March 1979).
Lazear, Edward. "Intergenerational Externalities." National Bureau of
  Economic Research Working Paper No. 145, 1976.
Lewit, Eugene M, "Experience with Pregnancy, the Demand for Prenatal
 Care, and the Production of Surviving Infants." Ph.D. dissertation,
 City University of New York Graduate School, 1977.
Louria, Donald et al. "Primary and Secondary Prevention among Adults:
  An Analysis with Comments on Screening and Health Education."
  Preventive Medicine, 5 (1976).

Tuft; Harold, "How Do Health Maintenance Organizations Achieve Their
  'Savings': Rhetoric and Evidence." New England Journal of Medicine,
  298 (June 15, 1978).
__________   "Why Do H!4)s Seem to Provide More Health Maintenance
  Services?" Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 56 (Spring             1978).
MacMahon, Brian; Kovar, Mary Grace; and Feldman,        Jacob J. Infant
  Mortality Rates: Socioeconomic Factors. U.S. Department of Health,
  Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service and Mental Health
  AdmiMstration, National Center for Health Statistics, Vital and
  Health Statistics, Series 22, No. 14 (March 1972).

Manheim, Lawrence. "Health, Health Practices, and Socioeconomic Status:
  The Role of Education." Ph.D. dissertation, University of California
  at Berkeley, 1975.

Manning, Jr., Willard G., and Phelps, Charles E. Dental Care Demand:
  Point Estimates and Implications for National Health Insurance.
  Santa Monica, California: The Rand Corporation, R—2157-HEW, March
  1978,

Marmor, Theodore R. "Children and National Health Insurance." In
  Develoig a Better Health Care System for Children, Volume III of
  the Harvard Child Health Project. Cambridge, Mass.: Balliriger Pub—
  lishing Company, 1977.
                   "Rethinking National Health Insurance." The Public Inter—
    est(inter 1977).                                -


 Miall, W.E., and Chinn, S. "Screening for Hypertension: Some
                                                               Epide—
   miological Observations." ritish Medical Journal, 3 (1974).

 Mohier, ER., and Freis, E.D. "Five—Year Survival of Patients with
   Malignant Hypertension Treated with Antihypertensjve Agents."
   Ajierican Heart Journal, 60 (Septehber 1960).
 Mueller, Marjorie Smith. "Private Health Insurance in 1970: Population
   Coverage, Enrollment, and Financial Experience." Social
   Bulletin, 35 (February 1972).                           Security
 National Center for Health Statistics. Physician Visits: Volume and
   Interval Since Last Visit, 1975. U.S. Department of Health,
   Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, Vital and Health
   Statistics, Series 10, No. 128 (April 1979).

 ___________      Use of Selected Medical Procedures Associated with
   ventivCare,       1973, U.S. Department of Health, Education, andPre—
   Welfare,    Public Health Service, Vital and   Health Statistics,
   Series   10,   No. 110 (March   1977).

National Center for Health Statistics and  the National
   Services Research, Health: United States, 1978. U.S. Center  for Health
                                                          Department of
   Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, DHEW (PHS)
   78-1232, 1978.
NYork       Times. "Comparison of Health Proposals,      June 14, 1979.
Newberger, Eli H.; Newberger, Carolyn Moore; and Richmond, Julius B.
  "child Health in America: Toward a Rational Public Policy," Milbank
  Memorial Fund Quarterly, 54 (Sumner 1976).

Newhouse, Joseph P., and Friedlander, Lindy J. The Relationship Between
  Medical Resources arid Measures of Health: Some Additional Evidence.
  Santa Monica, California: The Rand Corporation, R-2066-HEW, May1977.
Pauly, Mark V. Doctors and Their Workshops, Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research,
  forthcoming.
                "Efficiency, Incentives and Reimbursement   for Health Care."
  Inquiry,    7 (1970).
                          are
 iconomic.                                                   App1ied Welfare

__________   "Overinsurance and Public Provision of Insurance: The Role
  of Moral Hazard and Adverse Selection."
                                           The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 88 (February 1974),
*             Charles B.
                       "Demand for Reimbursement Insurance." In The Role
    Phelps,
      of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector, edited
                                                              by
      Richard Rosctt, New York: Neale Watson Academic Publications,
      1976.

                 "Effects of Insurance on Demand for Medical Care," In
      yinHealth        Services, edited by Ronald Andersen, Joanna Kravits
      and Odin W. Anderson. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing
      Company, 1975.

                •   "Illness Prevention and   Medical Insurance." In NBER
      Conference on the Economics oLciafl and          Patient Behavior,
      edited by Victor R. Fuchs and Joseph P. Newbouse. Journal of
      Human Resources, 13 (1978),

    Rogers, David E., and Blendon, Robert J. "Feeling Fine." The New York
      Times, June 27, 1977.

    Shakotko, Robert A.;      Edwards, Linda N.; and Grossman, Michael. "The
      Dynamics of Health and Cognitive Development in Adolescence."
      Paper presented at the fifty—fourth annual     conference   of the
      Western Economic Association, Las Vegas, Nevada,     June   1979.




'-
    Sloan,. Frank; Mitchell, Janet; and Cromwell, Jerry. "Physician Par-
      ticipation in State Medicaid Programs." In NEER Conference on the
      Economics of Physician and Patient Behavior, edited by Victor R.
      Fuchs and Joseph P. Newhouse. Journal of Human Resources, 13
      (1978).
                M., and Perloff, D. "Five—Year Survival of Consecutive
      Patients with Malignant Hypertension Treated with Aritihypertensive
      Agents." Merican Journal of Cardiology, 6 (November 1960).
    Spark, Richard.     "The   Case Against Regular Physicals." New York Times
      Magazine, July    25,   1976.
    Stamler, R., et al. "Adherence and Blood Pressure Response to Hyper-
      tension Treatment." Lancet (1975).
    Surgeon General of the United States. Healthy People: The Surgeon
     General's Report on Health Promotion and Disease Prevention.
      U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health
      Service, DHEW (PHS) Publication No. 79—55071, 1979.
    Taffel, Selma. Prenatal Care in the United States, 1969-1975. U.S.
     Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service,
      National Center for Health Statistics, Vital and Health Statistics,
      Series 21, No. 33 (September 1978).
Veterans A&ninistration Cooperative Study Crouo on Antihvpertensive
  Agents. "Effects of Treatment on Morbidity in Hypertension, I.
  Results in Patients with Diastolic Blood Pressures Averaging 115
  Through 129 run Hg," JAMA, 202 (December 11, 1967).

__________   "Effects of Treatment on Morbidity on Hypertension.I.
  Results in Patients with Diastolic Blood Pressure Averaging 90
  Through 114 mm Hg," JAMA, 213 (August 17, 1970).

Waidman, Saul, National Health Insurance Proposals: Provisions of Bills,
  Introduced in the 93rd Congress as of February 1974. U.S. Department
  of Health, Education, and Welfare, Social Security Administration,
  Office of Research and  Statistics,DHEW (ssA) 74-11920, 1974.

Weinstein, Milton, and Stason, William. perter.sion—A Poliy       Per-
  spective.   Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1976.

Williams, Ronald L. "Outcome — Based Measurements of Medical Care
  Output: The Case of Maternal and Infant Health." Ph.D. disser-
  tation, University of California at Santa Barbara, 1974.

Wilson, Ronald W., and White, Elijah L. "Changes in Morbidity, Dis—
  ability, and Utilization Differentials between the Poor and the
  Nonpoor: Data from the Health Interview Survey: 1964 and 1973."
  Medical Care, 15 (August 1977).

Zeckhauser, Richard, "Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff
 Between Risk Spreading and Appropriate Incentives.," Journal of
 Economic   Theory, 2 (March 1970).
