                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              STRICT LIABILITY VERSUS NEGLIGENCE
                      IN A r~KET SETTING


                     A. Mitchell Polinsky



                     Working Paper No.   4~0




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          January 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's researcq program
in Law and ~conomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of EConomic Rese~rch.
                                              NBER Working Paper #420
                                                       December, 1979




                  Strict Liability Versus Negligence
                         in a Market Setting


                              ABSTRACT


     Bo~h   strict liability and negJigence are efficient in the

short run when the number of firms causing harm is fixed.    Only

strict liability is efficient in the long run when the number of

firms is variable.    In general, the market price in the long run

under negligence is too low and too many firms enter the industry.

However, the optimal second-best negligence standard may result

in the same price and number of firms as under strict liability.




                                             A. Mitchell Polinsky
                                             Stanford Law School
                                                   -or-
                                             Department of Economics
                                             Stanford University
                                             Stanford, CA 94305
                                             (415) 497-0886
                 STRICT LIABILITY VERSUS NEGLIGENCE

                         IN A MARKET SETTING


                       A. Mitchell   pOlinsky~

     There are two competing rules of liability for controlling

activities like speeding or polluting which cause harm to others.

The rule of strict liability shifts the victitn's harm to the in-

jurer regardless of the injurer's behavior, while the rule of neg-

ligence shifts the burden to the injurer only if the injurer does

not take some specified amount of care.

     Most formal analyses of strict liability and negligence.have
                                                       l
been in a non-market context like automobileacc'idents. /     These

studies conclude (or imply) that 'both rules are efficient when the

administering authority has sufficieritinformation to set the neg-

ligence standard'properly (in each 'case a defense of , contributory

negligence may' b,e required).   According to these analyses, strict

liability is efficierit because it fUlly internalizes the harm and

negligence is efficient because the injurer can be induced to take

exactly the specified amount of care and this amount can be set

efficiently~   For reasons which will become apparent, it is im-

portant to note that these models have assumed a fixed number of

injurers--for example, a predetermined number :of drivers.

     Interestingly, most informal discussions of strict liability

and negligence have suggested that in a market setting negligence

may be inefficient even when the adminis,tering authority ,has per-

fect information.   The argument is stated clearly in a discussion

of environmental control by Richard Stewart and James Krier:

           Reflecting pollution costs in product price.s •   If
                                   -2-


       strict liability is not imposed for the residual

       damages caused by partially controlled polluting

       activity, these damages will not be reflected in

       the price of commodities produced by such activity.

       As a resu:l-t, commodities with whose production pol-

       lution is associated will be underpriced relative

       to commodities whose production causes no pollution,

       resulting. in resource misallocation.       [po    227]~/
       This paper formally analyzes strictliabili ty and neglige;nce

in a market setting. The discussion emphasizes the impact of the

rules on the market ,price and on the number of. firms in the indus-
          i

try.    For simplicity, the damage caused by each firm is assumed to

be determined only by that firm's "care"         (and not also by the firm's

output or the victim's behavior).ll

       The argument that both strict liability and neg-ligenceare

efficient is correct in the short run when the number of firmscaus-

ing harm is fixed.    The market price in the short run is the same

under strict liability and negligence despite the fact that under

the rule of negligence firms do not bear the cost of their harmful

activity.     The argument that only strict liability is efficient is

correct in the long run when the number of firms is variable.             When

the negligence standard corresponds to the efficient level of care,

the market price in the long run under negligence is too low and

too many firms enter the industry.       However, when the standard is

chosen optimally, taking' into account the ipef.ficiency of the neg-

ligence rule, the standard exceeds       t~e   efficient level of care,

tbe price rises, and the number of firms         ~alls.    The optimal second-

best standard may actually result in the same price and number of
                                               -3-

·firms under negligence as under strict liability.4/


                                      1.     The Model


       The analysis of strict liability and negligence is undertaken

in a very simple partial equilibrium model of a competitive industry

composed of n identical firms.                 Each firm's cost of producing q units

of output is C(q).        The average cost function is assumed to be U-

shaped.     Each firm's       cost of taking :.:. units of care is z (care is

defined so that one unit costs one dollar).                   Associated with each

firm's level of care is an external damage D(z).                    Damages decrease

with care.       Let P(s) be the industry's inverse demand function,

where s   = nq    is aggregate output.               Social welfare W equals the

benefits to consumers of output nq (assumed to be approxi-

mated by the area under the industry's inverse demand curve), less

the cost of producing nq, the external damages, and the cost of tak-

ing care:

                                  nq
(1)                       W   =   f        P(s)ds - nC(q) - nD(z) - nz.
                                  o
       In the short run, the number of firms is                 fixed.~   The social

optimum is defined by the q and z which maximize social welfare.                       From

(1) the first-order condition (all solutions· are assumed tobe unique in-

terior local optima) with respect to q may be written as


( 2)                              P (nq)      =   C' (q) •


This has the usual interpretation that price equals marginal cost.

The first-order condition with respect to z is:


( 3)                              -D' (z)      =   1.
                                             -4-

This states that the marginal benefits from an increase in care--re-

duced damages--equals the marginal cost of greater care.

        In the long run, the number of firms is variable.                The social

optimum is now defined by the q, z, and n which maximize social wel-

fare.     From (1) the first-order condition with respect to n can be

written as


( 4)                   P (nq)       =   [C (q)   + 8: z) + z] / q .

This has the usual interpretation that price equals average cost.

        The social welfare maximizing values of the variables will be

indicated by an asterisk.


                        II.         Short-Run Analysis


        Under strict liability, each firm's problem is to maximize rev-

enues     less production costs, external damages, and the cost of tak-

ing care:


(5)                  Max      Pq - C(q) - D(z) - z.
                     q,z

The first-order conditions with respect to q and z are, respec-

tively,

(6)                             P   =   C'(q),

( 7)                            -D' (z)      =   1,


which coincide with the social optimum.                   This is not surprising

since strict liability fully internalizes the externality.

        Under negligence, let       Z be     the standard of care.     Each firm's

problem is:
                                         -5-

(8)                    Max     Pq - C (q)      - D(z) -    z,
                       q,z
                                                      -
                                     I:<Z)
                                                    >
                                               if z = z,
where                  D(z)     =
                                               if z < z.


The first-order condition with respect to q is the same as (6).              It

is easily shown that when       z=     z*, the level of care chosen by each

firm is z (see footnote 8 below).              Thus, the social optimum can be

reached under negligence if the stc.ndard is chosen properly--equal

to the efficient level of care.


                        III.        Long-Run Analysis


        under strict liability, each firm chooses output and care to

maximize profits as indicated by (5), so that (6) and (7) are satis-

fied (implying at least that z = z*).              In addition, equilibrium is

characterized by zero profits:


(9)              P(nq)q -C(q) - D(z*) - z* =               o.

This is equivalent to the condition for the social optimum that

price equals average cost.          Thus, strict liability is efficient in

the long run.

        Under negligence, assume initially that the standard is set at

the efficient level of care.           Firms maximize profits by choosing

output and care according to (8), so that (6) is satisfied and

z= z*.     The zero profit condition under negligence is therefore:


(10)                           P(nq)q - C(q) - z* =             o.

T~is    condition, along with (6), implies that the output of each

firm under negligence is too low, that the market price is too low,
                                     -6-

and that too many firms enter the      industry.~/
     Since the negligence outcome is not efficient when the standard

equals the efficient level of care, the optimal second-best standard

is of some interest.     It can be    demonstrated that, optimally chosen,

Z > z*.21   The reason for this is not hard to understand.         Consider

a slight increase in the standard starting at        z = z*.   Since firms

will continue to meet the standard (they will over some range),

their costs will rise and, as a      cons€~uence,   so will the market

price.   This has the beneficial effect of raising the output of each

firm (which was too low when    z = z*)     and of reducing the number of

firms •. The inefficiency created by inducing firms to take care

just above the efficient level is negligible since the effect on

social welfare of a marginal change in firms' care is zero at the

optimal level of care.     Thus, it is desirable to increase the stan-

dard to some extent.

     There is a limit to how high the standard can be set and still

induce firms to meet the standard.         It is easy to show that the

highest feasible standard leads to the same price under negligence

as under strict liability; given this standard and the resulting

price, the output of each firm and the number of firms is efficient

under negligence.   Y   By reasoning similar to that used in the pre-

vious paragraph, it might seem, therefore, that the optimal second-

best standard should not be this high: the effect on social welfare

from lowering the level of care slightly (by lowering the standard)

would be beneficial while the effect on social welfare due to the

resulting marginal changes in firm output and the number of firms

would seem to be negligible.     Perhaps surprisingly, this argument

is not correct.     It can be demonstrated that the optimal second-
                                    -7-

best standard under negligence might in fact lead to the same price,

firm output, and number of firms as under strict       liability.~/
       The basis for this conclusion can be explained as follows.         It

is true that lowering the standard slightly from its highest feasi-

ble level improves social welfare through its effect on the level of

care and leaves social welfare unchanged by its effect on firm out-

put.    It is not true, however, that lowering the standard leaves

social welfare unchanged through     i~s   effect on the number of firms

even though the number of firms was previously efficient.        This is

because the optimal number of firms given an inefficiently high

level of care is less than the efficient number of firms.        Since

lowering the standard reduces firms' costs and consequently in-

creases the number of firms, this effect on social welfare is un-

desirable.     Therefore, whether the standard should be lowered de-

pends on the strength of this effect relative to the beneficial

effect on care.


                            IV.   Discussion


       (a)   The model used here can be interpreted in two ways.       The

most natural interpretation is that the damage from each firm's out-

put harms individuals who are not consumers of that output (e.g.,

a chemical industry pollutes a lake used for recreation).        The

other interpretation is that the damage falls on the consumers of

the firm's output but they underestimate it (e.g., food producers

sell products with misperceived carcinogenic effects).        Under the

second interpretation the model applies as it stands if the consum-

ers are totally ignorant of the harm.        However, it is easy to modi-

fy it to allow the demand curve for the output to shift, depending
                                       -8-

    on who bears the damage.     As long as consumers underestimate the

    damages, the basic results will apply.

         (b)   In a sense, the problem discussed here with the negligence

    rule in a market setting is that it is not possible to apply the

    rule to the industry as a whole.     Courts are allowed to determine

    only whether any particular f{rm is negligent with respect to the

    activities over which it has control.      This is not sufficient to

    correctly regulate the number of fj,:,ms in the long run since all

l   firms are acting the same way.     No firm can be held responsible for

    the number of firms in the industry.

         (c)   The same type of observation would apply in a non-market

    setting in which there is free entry into the injuring activity.

    For example, consider individuals who must decide whether to drive

    to a nearby city--and thereby risk hitting innocent pedestrians--or

    to not make the trip at all.     Under a negligence rule, too many in-

    dividuals will make the trip even if all who do so take the proper

    amount of care in driving.     The earlier formal analyses of strict

    liability and negligence in a non-market context which concluded

    that both rules were efficient assumed a fixed number of injurers.

         (d)   A version of the entry problem with the negligence rule

    also can arise in a market setting in the short run.      For example,

    suppose there are a certain number of firms operating in the short

    run in the absence of any regulation and that these firms have dif-

    ferent costs of production (but, for simplicity, the same damage

    functions and cost of taking care).      The rule of strict liability--

    which would still be efficient with this generalization--may drive

    some of the costlier firms out of business.     The rule of negligence,

    however, may induce some firms which would have gone out of busi-
                                   -9-

ness under strict liability to stay in business.        As in the long run,

t h 1S 'II
    ' W1resu lt '1n too 1 ow a pr1ce
                                 '   an d t   00              10/
                                                   many f'1rms.-

     (e)   The main   point   of this paper would not be affected if

each firm's total damage depends both on that firm's level of care

and its output.    .If the negligence standard is' then appropriately

defined both with respect to the firm's care level and its output,

the present analysis would apply essentially unchanged.         If, how-

ever, the negligence standard is still defined just in terms of

care (as is usual in practice), there would be an additional pro-

blem with the negligence rule besides the entry problem: it would
                                             .    11/
distort the firm's choice between care and output.-·

     (f)   Some of the conclusions of this paper may be affected if

the total damage depends both on the firm's actions and the victim's

behavior   (e.g., the care exercised in using a lawn mower).        If the

number of potential victims is fixed--so there is no "entry issue"

on the victim's side--then the present results would be essentially

unchanged (putting aside the separate issue discussed in the pre-

viouscomment).    An appropriate defense of contributory negligence--

in which the firm would be free of liability if the victim did not

take his efficient amount of care--should in principle be added to

both the strict liability and negligence rules.         In equilibrium the

victim would take the correct amount of care, so the strict lia-

bility and negligence rules would operate as described in this paper.

If, however, the number of victims is variable, then in general

neither liability rule (with a defense of contributory negligence)

would be expected to be efficient.       Negligence would lead to ex-

cessive entry on the injurer side, while strict liability would en-
                 ·' t ry on t h
courage toomuc h en              '"
                              e v1ct1m S1 d e .12/
                                                -
                                   -10-

                                Footnotes


     */ Law School and Economics Department, Stanford University;
and National Bureau of Economic Research.         Work on this paper was

supported by the National Science Foundation through a grant (SOC

78-20159)   to the law and economics program of the National Bureau

of Economic Research.    Any opinions expressed are those of the au-

thor and not those of the NBER.      Helpful comments were received

from participants in a number of seffiLnars.

     1/   See, for example, the paper by John Brown.       The only ex-

ceptions are discussed in footnote 4 below.         There are also a num-

ber of formal studies of products liability in a market context

which do not compare strict liability to negligence.

     ~See     also the discussions by Guido Calabresi (pp. 500-17),

Duncan Kennedy (pp. 54-61), and Richard Posner (pp. 137-42).

Michael Spence and Martin Weitzman (pp. 216-17) make a similar

point in the context of comparing taxes to standards.

     l/   See comments (e) and (f) in Section IV below fora dis-

cussion of how the results are affected if harm also depends on

output or the victim's behavior.
                            v
     i/   A recent paper by Cento Veljanovski (pp. 17-22) uses a

diagrammatic model to show that negligence is inefficient in the

long run, but he does not consider the second-best problem.         The

paper by Steven Shavell develops some closely related issues (see

comment (e) in Section IV below).         Barry Weingast et ale compare

strict liability and negligence when, in effect, only the consumer

of a product affects the harm.

     ~/   If the number of firms is effectively variable in the short

run due to exit, the results may be different (see comment (d) in
                                                            -11-

Section IV below) .

        ~/ Let qO and nO be the equilibrium values of q and n under

negligence.             Substituting P(nq)                   =   C' (q) into (9) and (10) gives ex-

pressions of the form C' (q)q                               C(q) - K     =   0, where   K    is some con-

stant.          It follows from C" > 0 (rising marginal costs are assumed)

that dq/dK > O.                  Thus, q    °       < q*.     Since P(nq)      = C' (q) and C"        > 0,

P (n Oqo)       <   P (*
                       n q *) •

        7../    Firms will just meet the staildard if and only if z is be-

tween zero and some                    z>   z* (see footnote 8 below).                      Given z in this

range, it follows from substituting (6) into (10)                                       (with z replacing

z*) that the equilibrium q minimizes (C(q) + z)/q.                                          Let q(z) be the

solution to this problem.                           Given q(z), the price is (C(q(z»                      + z)/
q(z).          Thus, nq(z)         =   P-l[(C(q(z»               + z)/q(z»).     Let n(z) be the

solution of this expression for n.                                   Substituting q(z) and n(z) into

(1) gives social welfare solely as a function of the standard,

W(q).       After some manipulation, it can be seen that sign{W'}                                         =
sign{-n'D - neD' + I)}.                               Since n' < 0 it follows from assum-

ing     that D(z) + z is U-shaped that W' (z)                                > 0 for z ~ z*

        ~       If z <      z,    where     z = D(z*)            + z*, firms will choose z because
Z < Z + D(z) for all z < z.
                                                -
                                                       If z      =   A
                                                                     z, firms are indifferent between

z and z*.            If z >       z,   firms will choose z*.                   Thus, the highest feasi-

ble standard is              z (or      arbitrarily close to it).                   Given z      =   z,    it

follows from the discussion in footnote 7 above that q(z)                                         =   q* and

that the price is (C(q*) + D(z*) + Z*)/q*i since q and P(nq) are

the same as under strict liability, n must also be the same.

        ~       It is sufficient to show that it is possible that W'(z)                                         > 0

for all z <            z.    Recall from footnote 7 above that sign {WI}                              =       sign

{ -n'D - neD' + I)}.                        Since D' (z), n(z), and n' (z) are continuous
      ·
f unctlons on 0 =
                < z = z, t h ey are b oun dd
                    <'"                    e .                                Thus, if D(Z) is suffi-
                                  -12-

ciently large, the result follows.

     10/ This point is illustrated diagrammatically in the context

of comparing taxes to subsidies in my paper.

     11/ See Shavell's paper.     Since he treats the industry as com-

posed of one competitively    behavin~   firm whose harm depends on care

and output, he does not raise the problem of controlling the number

of firms.

     12/ An analogous result is    show~   by Shavell when the damage

depends on the levels of care and activity of one injurer and one

victim.     The same point should apply when damages depend on care

and the number of injurers and victims.
                                      -13-



                                   References


J. P. Brown, "Toward an Economic Theory of Liability," J. Legal

     Studies, June 1973,      ~'   323-49.

G. Calabresi, "Some Thoughts on Risk Distribution and the Law of

     Torts," Yale Law   ~.,    Mar. 1961, J...Q., 499-553.

D. Kennedy, "A History of Law and Econorc.ics, or the Fetishism of

     Commodi ties," unpublished paper, Harvard Uni v., Sept. 1978.

A. M. Polinsky, "Notes on the Symmetry of Taxes and Subsidies in

     Pollution Control," Can.       ~.   Econ., Feb. 1979, 12, 75-83.

Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law, 2d ed., Boston 1977.

S. Shavell, "Strict Liability vs. Negligence," J. Legal Studies,

     forthcoming Jan. 1980.

A. M. Spence and M. L. Weitzman, "Regulatory Strategies for Pol-

     lution Control," in Ann F. Friedlaender, ed., Approaches to

     Controlling Air Pollution, Cambridge 1978.
Richard B. Stewart and James E. Krier, Environmental Law and            Poli~.'y:


     Readings, Materials and Notes, 2d ed., Indianapolis 1978.

C. G. Veljanovski, "'Economic' Myths about Common Law Realities--

     Economic Efficiency and the Law of Torts," work. paper no. 5,

    Centre for Socio-Legal Studies, Oxford, Mar. 1979.

B. R. Weingast, M. E. McBride and J. L. Conant, "Product Safety and

    Consumer Information: The Impact of Liability Assignment and

    Standards Regulation," work. paper no. 45, Center for the Study

    of Amer. Business, Washington Univ.          (St. Louis), June 1979.
