                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              AN EMPIRICAL MODEL OF LABOR SUPPLY
                    IN A LIFE CYCLE SETTING


                       Thomas E. McCurdy




                     Working Paper No. l21




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCh
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         January 1980




This research was supported by NSF grant SOCII—21136 and grant 10—
P—901b8/9—01 from the Social Security Administration. The research
reported here is part of the NBERts research program in Labor
Economics. Any- opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Feonomic Research. I have bene-
fited from discussion with James Heckman on the material in this
paper. I am also grateful for comments from Douglas Brown, William
Gould, Robert Michael, John Pencavel and Dan Sumner.
                                            NBER Working Paper #421
                                                     December, 1979




                An Empirical Model of Labor Supply
                      in a Life Cycle Setting



                             ABS TRACT


     This paper formulates and estimates a structural life cycle

model of labor supply. Using theoretical characterizations derived
from an economic model of life cycle behavior, a two-stage empirical

analysis yields estimates of intertemporal and uncompensated substi-
tution effects which provides the information needed to predict the

response of hours of work to life cycle wage growth and shifts in

the lifetime wage path. The empirical model developed here provides
a natural framework for interpreting estimates found in other work
on this topic. It also indicates how cross section specifications
of hours of work can be modified to estimate parameters relevant for

describing labor supply behavior in a lifetime setting.




                                           Thomas E. MaCurdy
                                           Stanford University
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Stanford, CA 94305

                                            (415) 497—3983
Introduction

        Over the past several years there has been considerable activity

in formulating life cycle models of labor supply. The crucial implication

of this work is that hours of work is a function of both current and future

wages, as well as such variables as wealth and the worker's future prospects.

Most of this work has gone unnoticed in the empirical literature. This

study synthesizes existing knowledge into an estimable model of labor

supply that incorporates life cycle factors, and relates it to empirical

models typically found in the literature. A full life cycle model of

hours of work is estimated using data on prime age males from the Michigan

Panel on Income Dynamics.

       Most empirical work on labor supply ignores life cycle theory,

assuming instead a one—period model. Typically, annual hours of work are

regressed on the current hourly wage rate and some measure of property

income. A worker, however, determines his current labor supply in a life

cycle setting. Unless credit markets are "perfectly imperfect" and there

is no human capital accumulation, the supply of labor is a function of

current and future discounted wage rates as well as wealth and constraints

in other periods. Accordingly, regressions of hours of work on current

hourly wage rates yield a wage coefficient that mixes the response of

labor supply to wage changes of three types: those arising from movements

along a given lifetime wage profile; those arising from shifts in the wage

profile; and those arising from changes in the profile slope. As a result,

the wage coefficient usually reported in empirical studies has no behavioral

interpretation, in the context of a life cycle framework.

        This study uses theoretical characterizations derived from an

economic model of lifetime consumption and hours of work to formulate an
                                   2



empirical model of labor supply. These theoretical characterizations

represent a natural extension of Friedman's (1957) permanent income theory

to a situation in which the relative price of consumption and leisure

varies over the life cycle. These characterizations separate those

factors determining a consumer's dynamic behavior from those factors

determining differences in consumption and labor supply across consumers.

This separation leads to a manageable empirical model that allows one to

disentangle and to estimate the separate responses of labor supply to wage

changes due to movements along a lifetime wage profile and also due to

parametric changes in this profile. In addition, one can estimate the

effects of wealth and demographic characteristics on lifetime hours of work.

        The empirical model also provides a natural framework for

interpreting labor supply estimates found in the literature. It suggests

how the typical cross sectional models of labor supply can be modified with

the introduction of control variables so that wage coefficients represent economicalli

meaningful parameters. It provides a new and simpler interpretation of

work due to Chez and Becker (1975). This model also provides a new

interpretation of empirical work due to Lucas and Rapping (1969).

        The organization of this paper is as follows. Section I outlines

an economic model of life cycle behavior. Section II develops and

discusses an empirical model of labor supply. Section III relates this

empirical model to other empirical specifications found in the literature.

Section IV contains the empirical analysis.
                                         3



                  I. A Life Cycle Model of Consumption
                            and Labor Supply


        The consumer is assumed to choose consumption and hours of leisure

at each age to maximize a lifetime preference function that is strongly

separable over time, subject to a wealth constraint. Let utility at age t

be given by the concave function U(C(t),L(t)) where C(t) is the amount of

market goods consumed and L(t) is the number of hours spent in nonmarket

activities at age t. Consumers are assumed to operate in an environment

of perfect certainty. The consumer starts life with assets A(O). At each

age t he faces a real wage rate equal to W(t) and this wage rate is assumed

to be exogenously given. The consumer can freely borrow and lend at a real

rate of interest equal to r, and his rate of time preference is p. A

lifetime is assumed to consist of T+1 periods with t being the total number

of hours in each period.

        Formally, the consumer's problem is to choose C(t) and L(t) at each

age to maximize the lifetime preference function


            T
                   1
(1)     G               t U(C(t),L(t))
            tro (l+p)


subject to the wealth constraint



                         1                         1
(2)     A(O) +               t N(t)W(t) =                C(t)
                 t= (1+r)                    t=o (1+r)


where G(') is a monotonically increasing function and N(t) E —L(t) is

hours of work at age t.'
                                        4




        Conditions for an optimum are satisfaction of the budget constraint

and



(3)     U1(C(t),L(t)) =                       t   =



(4)     u2(C(t),L(t)) >                w(t)   t =



where subscripts denote partial derivatives and A is defined by A

where A* is the LaGrange multiplier associated with the budget constraint

(i.e., A* is the marginal utility of wealth in period 0) and C' is the

derivative of C. According to condition (3), consumption is chosen so that

the marginal utility of consumption equals the marginal utility of wealth

after adjusting for a discount factor which depends on the rate of time

preference and the rate of interest. Condition (4) determines the

consumer's choice of leisure. If it is an equality, then a positive amount

of labor is supplied to the market. If it is a strict inequality, then all

time is devoted to nonmarket activities.

        Using the definition of labor supply (i.e., N(t) =   t —L(t))   and the

implicit function theorem, it is possible to jointly solve equations (3)

and (4) for consumption and labor supply as functions of the form



(5)     C(t) =
                   ::)A W(t)]

(6)    N(t) =             A,
                               W(t)]

The functions CC,) and N(,) depend only on the functional form of

U(',•). As a consequence of concavity of U and the assumption that leisure

is a normal good, they satisfy
                                    5



(7)
        C1<O       N1>O

These consumption and labor supply functions allow for corner solutions

for hours of work either at age t or at any other age t'. No matter what

the consumer's labor force participation pattern over his lifetime,

consumption and labor supply decisions at any age (including the decision

to set hours of work equal to zero) are completely determined by the

functions C(•,) and N(•,•) and the values of the variables [y))tx and



        The relationships given by (5) and (6) hereafter will be referred

to as the 'IX constant" consumption and labor supply functions. These

relationships represent the marginal utility of wealth constant demand

functions for consumption and leisure for a particular form of the lifetime

preference function given by (1); namely, the one obtained when G is the

identity transformation. For this particular choice of C, A is the marginal

utility of wealth in period 0. Given a choice of U(.,.), it is theoretically

possible to compute a unique value for A using data on an individual's

consumption, labor supply and wage rate at a point in time. This fact

receives much attention in the formulation of the empirical model which

is discussed in the next section.

        Substituting the A constant consumption and labor supply functions

into the budget constraint given by (2) yields the equation



(8)
       A(0) = J0 (l+r)tE{{l+rJ       A, W(t)] -
                                                  w(tm[I:P]   A, W(t)]j


This equation implicitly determines the optimal value of A.    A, then, can

be expressed as a function of initial assets, lifetime wages, interest
                                      6




rates, rates of time preference and "consumer tastes." Concavity of

preferences an& the assumption that leisure at all ages is a normal good

imply


         ax                  ax
        aA(o)
                < C   and
                            aw(t)
                                    < o   t   =   O,'",T. 5

        Inspection of the A constant functions reveals that consumption

and labor supply decisions at a point in time are related to variables

outside the decision period only through A. Thus, except for the value

of the current wage rate, A summarizes all information about lifetime

wages and property income a consumer requires to determine his optimal

current consumption and labor supply. At any age, any path of wages or

property income over a consumer's lifetime that keeps A and the current

wage constant implies the same optimal current consumption and labor

supply behavior.

        The A constant functions represent an extension of Friedman's

(1957) permanent income theory to a situation in which the relative price

of consumption and leisure varies over the life cycle. According to these

functions, current consumption and labor supply decisions depend on a

permanent component and the current wage rate. A is like permanent income

in the theory of the consumption function. At each point in time it is a

sufficient statistic for all historic and future information about lifetime

wages and property income that is relevant to the current choice of

consumption and labor supply. The usual concept of permanent income or

wealth does not qualify as a sufficient statistic for this retrospective

and prospective information. Given permanent income, a consumer also

requires information on future wages to determine his optimal current
                                       7




consumption and labor supply. Only if wages are constant over the life

cycle, or labor supply is exogenously determined, can A be written as a

simple function of permanent income or wealth.


                           II. An Eapirical Model


          This section formulates an empirical model of labor supply that

is based on the economic model described above. Specific functional forms

are    proposed for the A constant labor supply function and the relationship

between X and such variables as lifetime wages and initial assets.


An Empirical Specification for the A Constant Labor Supply Function

          The A constant consumption and labor supply functions fully

characterize a consumer's dynamic behavior in a world of perfect certainty46

According to these functions, there are two reasons why a consumer might

change his consumption or hours of work as he ages:     (1) the real wage

rate changes or (2) the rate of interest is not equal to the rate of time

preference.7 Estimating these relationships estimates all of the

parameters one requires to predict how a given individual's consumption

or labor supply changes over his lifetime.

           This study uses panel data to directly estimate the parameters of

a A constant labor supply function. To construct such a function requires

a specific form for the contemporaneous utility function.

          Assume that consumer i at age t has utility given by


                                  —                     t =
(10)       u(t) =   y2(t)(C(t))       ri(t)(N(t))
where 0 C       c I and w > 1 are time invariant parameters common across

workers and y(t), 1(t) > 0 are age specific modifiers of "tastes."
                                          8



y(t) and y1(t) depend on all of consumer i's characteristics which

plausibly affect his preferences at age t; these characteristics may

include such variables as the number of children present at age t,                 the
consumer's education and even age itself.

           Assuming an interior optimum,8 the implied X constant labor supply

function for consumer i at age t        in   natural logs is



(11)       ZnN.(t)
                        i[inx.—&nYJt) _znw+tin{::] +ZnW.(t)]

Assuming that "tastes" for work are randomly distributed over the population

                                                        the labor supply function
according to the equation £ny1(t) =
                                             ai_u1(t)
can be written as


(12)       nNjt) =     +   t b + ftnw.(t) + ujt)

                                              u—i int—j
               1                               1    fi+i;1                1
              u—i (fnA.-c.—Znw),                                                   o.i and
where F. =                             b =                     and 6 =         .
       '              1   1                        j+r)                  u—i
u..(t) are unobserved variables representing the unmeasured characteristics

of consumer 1; ujt) is art error term with zero mean.9

           The intercept term   F.   in this equation represents a time invariant

component that is unique to individual i. This study treats F. as a fixed

effect. Since F. contains mA, as one of its components, one cannot assume
               1             1

that F. is a tirandom factor" uncorrelated with exogenous variables of the

model. Inspection of equation (8) reveals that A depends on the values of

variables and constraints in all periods. By construction, F. is correlated

with any exogenous variables used to predict a consumer's wages or wealth.

Hence, treating F. as part of the error term would result in biased

parameter estimates of the labor supply function. Treating P. as a fixed

effect, on the other hand, avoids this bias.
                                   9




        Estimating the parameters of equation (12) only requires that

data actually observed within the sample period. Regressions of current

hours of work on individual specific intercepts and current wage rates

produces a full set of parameter estimates.'° Because F captures the

effect of mA,, its estimated value summarizes all of the retrospective

and prospective information relevant to consumer i's current choices.

As there is no need to forecast any life cycle variables that are outside

the sample period, the A constant functions afford a considerable

simplification of the empirical analysis.

        Use of the A constant functions allows one to estimate parameters

needed to characterize dynamic behavior without introducing any assumptions

regarding a consumer's behavior outside the sample period. To fully

appreciate this point, consider the problem of predicting the additional

hours of work a consumer will supply in response to observing a higher

wage rate than he observed at a younger age. To obtain an estimate of

this response using a traditional model of life cycle labor supply, one

must formally incorporate the worker's future plans in the model. For

example, if the worker anticipates an early retirement, future wages

corresponding to the retirement years do not influence current labor

supply. Thus, the researcher must not include these wages as explanatory

variables. Such considerations lead to difficult data requirements and

complicated estimation procedures. Using equation (12), on the other

hand, it is possible to empirically analyze this problem without knowing

anything about a worker's future plans; an individual constant term for

each worker accounts for a worker's future plans in a parametrically

simple way.
                                         10




An Empirical Specification for Individual Effects

           Estimation of the A constant labor supply function given by (12)

does not directly estimate all of the parameters required to characterize

life cycle labor supply. The level of a consumer's hours of work also

depends on the value of his individual component,         and we know that

Fi through A, is a function of the consumer's wealth and his lifetime

wage path. To explain any aspect of labor supply other than dynamic

behavior (e.g., how the hours of work of two individuals differ at a

point in time), one must confront the problem of predicting individual

effects.

           From the above theoretical analysis, we know that the value of F,

or more properly A, is uniquely determined by the implicit equation given

by (8). This equation does not admit an analytical solution for A given

the specific form of the utility function given by (9), even if it is known

that this function applies to all ages and the consumer works in each

period. A is a complicated function of initial assets, lifetime wages,

the interest rate, the rate of time preference, and parameters representing

unobserved "taste" variables.11 Using such a relationship as an empirical

specification is not feasible.

           This study assumes that equation (8) implies a solution for A in

which mA can be approximated as a linear function of measured character-

istics, the natural log of wages at each age, initial wealth, and an

unobserved random variable representing unmeasured characteristics. With

this assumption the implied equation for F. is


                         T
(13)       F, =   z. + t=0 'r(t)mnW(t)   + A(O)   U + a
                                                         11




where Z. is a vector of observed variables (e.g., family background

variables), a Is an error term, and ,                          y(t),   and U are parameters assumed

to be constant across consumers.'2 This structural relationship for F.

implicitly assumes that each consumer has a working life of T+1 years.

According to the theoretical restrictions given by (9), the y(t)'s and 6

should all be negative.

               Unfortunately, to formulate an estimable version of an equation

for Fii we require additional assumptions concerning the forms of the

lifetime wage and income paths. In contrast to the X constant labor

supply function, estimating the parameters of equation (13) requires data

which normally is not available. Most variables appearing in this equation

are not directly observed, including the dependent variable F., wages

outside the sample period, and initial wealth. While estimates of F. are

obtained as a by—product from estimating equation (12), we still require

a mechanism for predicting wages outside the sample period and initial

permanent income. We do this by introducing lifetime profiles for wages

and income.

               This study assumes that the lifetime wage path is


(14)           LnWi(t) =      Oi +       tir1.
                                                 +    t2r + V.(t)
where        u .,
              Oi
                     itii., and   it
                                    2i
                                       . are     linear functions of the form


(15)           ii.    = Mg.               j    = 0,    1, 2,


H. is a vector of exogenous determinants of wages which are constant over
    :1.




the        consumer's lifetime (e.g., education and background variables), g.,

j         = 0, 1, 2 are vectors of parameters, and Vjt) is an error term. This
                                              12




path assumes that wages follow a quadratic equation in age with an

intercept and slope coefficients that depend on age—invariant

characteristics of the consumer.

          To predict a consumer's initial wealth is complicated by the

fact that most data sets do not contain extensive measures of even the

consumer's current wealih. Some measure of the consumerrs property or

nonwage income during the sample period, however, is usually available.'3

Let Yjt) and Ai(t) denote the property income and assets of consumer

at age t. If Y.(t) is income flow generated by investing assets A.(t) at

a rate of interest equal to r, we have the relationship Y.(t) =             AJt)r.
Assume that the following quadratic equation in age approximates the

lifetime path for property income


(16)      YJt) =         + ta1. + t2c2. + v.(c)
                   a0.

where cx •, a ., and a .     are    linear functions of the form
        Di   ii       2i


(17)      a..   S.q.               =   0,   1, 2,


S. is a vector of measured age—invariant characteristics of consumer i
 1
(e.g.,    education and background variables), q, j          = 0,   1, 2 are parameter

vectors and 'ojt) is an error ten.14 The intercept a0 can be thought of

as a measure of consumer i's permanent income at age 0; that is, a0. =

A.(0)r.
          Combining the lifetime paths for wages and income with equation

(13) creates an equation for F. that can be estimated using data observed

within the sample period. Substituting the wage process given by (14)

and the relationship a0. =         rAJO)      into equation (13) yields
                                        13




(18)    F1 =   Z     + 'ff010 +        + Tt2i2 + ct01 + a.


or, substituting relations (15) and (17) yields


(19)           K.i + a1
        Fi


where

                T
(20)    j. =         &y(t)         =   0,    1, 2,    =   e/r,
               t=0

K1 is a vector including all age—invariant characteristics determining

either wages, income or A (i.e., all the elements of N., S, and 2), i
                                                       1  1       1
                                           T
is a vector of coefficients and a. =
                                 1    1
                                        +    ay(t)VJt) is a disturbance
                                                   1
                                          t=O
term which is randomly distributed across workers with zero mean.

Equation (18) is a structural.relationship between.F and the character-

istics of a consumer's wage and income profiles. The empirical analysis

of this study focuses on estimating the parameters of this equation, f,

             and .      As we shall see shortly, these parameters have a

sound economic interpretation. Equation (19) is essentially a reduced

form equation for (18). By estimating the parameters of this equation,

i, it is possible to predict how F varies across consumers using only

age—invariant characteristics of the consumer as explanatory variables.

        This section has developed an empirical model of lifetime labor

supply. The A constant hours of work function given by (12) and the

structural equation for P given by (18) provide a manageable empirical

model for analyzing labor supply behavior in a life cycle setting. This

model naturally suggests a two—stage estimation procedure. In the first

stage one estimates the parameters of the A constant hours of work

function. This first stage provides all the information a researcher
                                  14




requires to predict how the labor supply of a given consumer will differ

at two points in time. A second—stage regression of estimated "individual

effects" on the determinants of F, permits estimation of the coefficients

4),   and the V's. These coefficient estimates provide the additional

information one requires to predict how labor supply will differ across

consumers. Two—stage estimation of the X constant specifications exploits

the special characteristics of panel data to characterize life cycle

behavior with a minimal amount of computational burden.

        The empirical specifications for the X constant system developed

above can be extended to account for the presence of more than one form

of market consumption or type of leisure. They also are consistent with

a world in which the consumer is uncertain about his future lifetime path

of wages and property income. Elsewhere, I show that much of the formal

structure of the deterministic theory carries over with full force to the

uncertainty model (MaCurdy, 1978). The empirical specification for the X

constant labor supply function and the equation for F proposed above are

still applicable in the uncertainty case.


Interpretation of Parameters

        In investigating the effect of changes in wages on labor supply,

it is important to separate parametric change of the sort usually

contemplated in comparative static exercises from evolutionary change

due to movement along a life cycle wage path.'5 A parametric wage change

refers to shifts in a life cycle wage profile (e.g., a shift from path II

to path I in Figure 1), while an evolutionary wage change refers to

movements along a given profile (i.e., along any path in Figure 1).

Thus, parametric wage changes refer to differences in wages across
in W(t)
                  &— HI


              II

             ti           t

          Figure 1
                                  15




consumers while evolutionary wage changes refer to differences in wages

across time for the same consumer.16

        Consider the behavior of labor supply over the life cycle. As a

consumer ages, he adjusts his hours of work in response to the different

wage rates he observes at each point in his lifetime. These labor supply

adjustments represent responses to evolutionary wage changes; they reflect

the consumer's desire to supply more hours in those periods with highest

wages. There is no wealth effect associated with this kind of wage

variation since the wage profile is known to the consumer at the beginning

of his lifetime and changes in wages are due only to movement along this

given profile. It is apparent from the labor supply function given by

(12) that the value of the parameter (S determines the hours of work

response to evolutionary wage changes. Hereafter, I will refer to (S as

the intertemporal substitution elasticity. The theoretical prediction

for its sign is positive.'7 For the particular form of the utility

function given by (10), 6 is also the direct elasticity of substitution

for hours of work in any two periods.

       Now compare the labor supply profiles of two consumers who face

wage paths II and III respectively. As illustrated in Figure J the wage

profiles for consumers Ii and liT are the same except at age t' when

consumer III's wage rate is higher than consumer II's. Let ts denote the

absolute value of this difference in period t' wages. This wage

difference represents a parametric wage change because it involves a

shift in the lifetime path of wages. It causes the labor supply profiles

for consumers II and III to be different at all ages. Comparing these

labor supply profiles is the sort of problem usually considered in

comparative static exercises. In terms of the empirical model outlined
                                          16




above, this higher wage rate has two effects on consumer III's labor

supply. The first effect is on the value of F. According to equation

(13), consumer III will set a value for F which is lower than the value

of P for consumer II by an amount equal to y(t') . A.        This decline in P

implies that at all ages other than tT consumer hITs labor supply will

be less than consumer II's by a constant fraction. At age t' there is

a second effect of the wage difference. Neglecting the decline in F,

consumer III's labor supply at age t' will be higher by an amount equal

to 6 •   A.     Thus, the total impact on consumer III's hours of work at age

t' is (6+y(t')) A. Since 6 > 0 and y(t') c 0, there is no sign

prediction for 6+y(t'), so consumer III's hours of work at age t' may

be greater than or less than consumer II's.

              The parameters y(t') and 5+y(t'), then, determine the difference

in consumer Ilts and ccnsumer IiI's labor supply profiles which is due to

the discrepancy in their wage rates at age t'.         -y(t') and ô+x(t')

correspond to the usual concepts of cross— and own—uncompensated

substitution elasticities. These elasticities describe the response of

labor supply to parametric wage changes. They can be used to predict

differences in labor supply across consumers. These elasticities do not

directly provide information on the response of labor supply to

evolutionary wage changes; so, they cannot be used to predict differences

in a given consumer's labor supply over time. Since the intertemporal

substitution elasticity exceeds the own uncompensated substitution

elasticities (i.e., 6 >       6+y(t')),    one expects an evolutionary wage

change to induce a larger labor supply response than a comparable

parametric wage change. The wealth effect associated with a parametric

wage change accounts for the smaller labor supply response.
                                         17




      Comparing the labor supply profiles for consumers I and II also

involves a parametric wage change. As illustrated in Figure 1, consumer

II's wage profile exceeds consumer I's by a constant fraction over the

entire life cycle. The parametric wage change associated with moving

from consumer I's to consumer II's wage profile is analogous to

increasing the value of the intercept of the lifetime wage path,

This has two effects on labor supply in each period. First, a consumer

adjusts his value of F in response to the profile shift. According to
                                                     T
equation (19), F declines by an amount equal to   =    y(t) times the
                                                           t=o
increase in the value of it3.     This   decline in F implies a fall in hours

of work at each age. Second, there is a direct impact on each period's

labor supply. Holding the value of F constant, a consumer increases his

hours of work by an amount equal to 6 times the increase in 'it0.      The

implied total impact on each period's labor supply, therefore, is

   + 6 times the change in it0.    Because       is unambiguously negative,

there is no sign prediction for this total impact. Since           + 6 is less

than y(t')+6, however, the response of labor supply to a shift in 'it0

should be less in algebraic value than the response to a shift in the
wage profile only at age t'. The wealth effect associated with a shift

in 'ire is greater. The labor supply profile for consumer II, then, can

lie above or below consumer I's labor supply profile. It will lie above

consumer I's if *0+6 is positive.

        The empirical specification of life cycle supply given by

equations (12) and (18) provides a convenient framework for estimating

the response of labor supply to the different kinds of wage changes

described above. Estimation of the A constant labor supply equation
                                        is




produces an estimate of the intertemporal substitution elasticity (S.

This elasticity can be used to predict the response of labor supply to

evolutionary wage changes; and, so, it provides the information one

needs to describe a consumer's dynamic behavior. Estimating the equation

for F given by (18) produces estimates of the parameters '                     and

L   These estimates provide the additional information one requires to

predict the response of labor supply to parametric wage and wealth changes;

and, so, they can be used to explain labor supply differences across

consumers. Combining the estimates of              , and      with the estimate

of 6 allows one to predict how labor supply profiles adjust to changes in

the wage path coefficients qr0,         and iT2.   This   includes both shifts and
                                  u1,
slope changes of the wage profiles. The estimate of             provides the

information one needs to predict the response of labor supply profiles to

changes in a consumerts initial permanent income. Estimating the empirical

model proposed in this paper, then, fully characterizes a consumer's

lifetime labor supply behavior.


            III. Relating Different Models of Labor Supply


        This section relates the empirical model developed above to three

empirical specifications of labor supply coimnonly found in the literature.

The three specifications considered are: traditional models of lifetime

labor supply, the usual cross sectional specifications, and particular

models proposed by Ghez-Becker (1975) and Lucas-Rapping (1969).


Alternative Specifications of Lifetime Labor Supply

        To formulate an empirical model of hours of work over the life

cycle, one naturally uses some form of the labor supply function as a
                                                                            r
                                       19



guide for his empirical specifications. There are several alternative,

but theoretically equivalent, representations of labor supply behavior

in a life cycle setting. The model proposed in the previous section is

unfamiliar to many economists.19 The following analysis relates this

model to more traditional empirical specifications of lifetime labor

supply.

          There are primarily two theoretical characterizations of life

cycle labor supply behavior that underlie most empirical models in the

literature. The first characterization writes hours of work at any point

in time as a function of initial wealth and the lifetime wage path. The

empirical model outlined above is obviously consistent with such a

characterization. Substituting the expression for F given by (13) into

the A constant labor supply function given by (12) yields


                                                      T
          LnN.(t) =      + bt + (6+y(tflnL(t) +
                                                     it'
(21)                                                     y(i)ZnW(])
                                                     j#t

                      + OAJO) + vjt)


where vjt) is an error term.

          This equation shows how labor supply at any age depends on the

consumer's initial assets and the relative wage rates he faces at all

ages. This equation verifies results obtained in the previous section;

namely, that B measures the effect of a pure wealth change on labor

supply; tS+y(t), t =     1,'" ,T   are own compensated substitution elasticities;

and i(i) j    = 1,•,T    are cross uncompensated substitution elasticities.

          The second theoretical characterization of labor supply behavior,

and probably the most familiar to economists, is one that treats current
                                         20


hours of work as a function of current wealth and current and future

wages. To derive such a function, a consumer is viewed as resolving

his lifetime optimization problem at each age t. Using the model and

notation of Section I, it is easy to show that reoptimizing at each

age allows one to write labor supply as a function of the form

N(t) =   N(A(t),   W(t)) where ACt) is the Lagrange multiplier associated

with the wealth constraint at age t. Noting that A in Section I

corresponds to X(0), we see that A(t) =
                                                [f-Jo).     Whereas, A(O) is

a function of wages at ages 0 thru T and A(0)(E assets at age 0), X(t)

is a function of wages at ages t thru T and A(t)(E assets at age t);

thus, N(t) can be written as a function of A(t) and W(t), W(t-I-l),...,W(T).

      The empirical model of life cycle labor supply presented in the

previous section implies a specific functional form for this second

theoretical characterization of labor supply behavior. The empirical speci-

fication for the A        constant hours of work function given by (12) is

unchanged, except that A(t) replaces               A(0) as an argument; we

account for this in (12) by deleting the linear trend, bt, and replacing

Fja F.(0)) by F.(t) = —2-j(in Ajt) —            — in w). Our problem, then,

is to determine what the specification for F.(O) given by (13) implies

about an empirical specification for P.(t). The following observations

aid in determining this specification: (1) According to equation (13),

3inX(0) =
          (l—u)6 and              =(l—w)'y(t), t =   0,...,T.   (2) Wealth at

age t, A(t), is endogenously determined by the consumer, and it depends

both on initial wealth, A(0), and the entire lifetime path of wages.

Defining m(t)              we have 0 <   m(t)   c 1 which reflects the fact

that a consumer spends part of a dollar increase in A(0) at ages prior
                                                     21

to age t.       (3) Using the above relation for X(t), we see that

ainX(O)        flnx(t) aA(t)
BA(O)          3A(t)       BA(O)
                                           Differentiating Boys identity for N(k)

and rearranging terms yields
                                                3ZnA(t) =                         &LnA(t) Uk)
                                                &Lnw(k)     [inN(k)
                                                             3ZnX(U)    + lJ      DA(t)
                                                                                            (l+r)k_t
k =    t,.. .,T,   where E(k)              N(k)W(k) is earnings in period k.2° Combining

these three observations we conclude                                     (1—ui)
                                                                                   and ?)tnA(t) —
                                                                                                —
                                                            DA(t)         n(t             BZnW(k)
(1—w)y(k)
               (l+r)t
               m(t)
                           k =     t,.. .,T.      Therefore, Fi(t) has the form P1(t) =

               t T
       +                  y(j)Zn W.(j) + A1(t)                    + a(t). Substituting this
 I                                                        m (t)
                   :1=1

expression      for Fi(t) into the X constant hours of work function yields


(22)        Zn N,(t)
                1
                           z.
                               1
                                   +   16
                                       L
                                               + (i+r)tx(t)1Z W (t)
                                                 m(t)        3
                                                                    i
                                           T         t
                                                  l+r
                                                        (j)in W1(j) + A iCt)                + v(t)
                                                   m(t)                      m(t)


where v*(t) is an error term. This equation, then, shows the implied
       i
empirical relationship between current hours of work and current

wealth and current and future wages.

           There are two important points to observe about this empirical

specification. First, linearity in log wages and assets requires

additional assumptions. In general, m(t){                           A(o)J is a function of

both A(t) and 14(t),... ,W(T); thus, we must assume that n(t) is a
                                                        (l+r)t
constant which depends only on t if we are to treat 6 +
                                                                                      (t)

(l+r)t                     0
              k), and              as parameters.
 m(t)                     m(t)
           Second, we see that own and cross uncompensated substitution

and wealth coefficients appearing in specification (22) are different

than ones we have seen so far. Whereas 6 + y(t) and the y(j)'s are

own and cross uncompensated elasticities that hold initial wealth and
the entire path of wages constant, 5 + ltt y(t) and the               y(j)'s

are these elasticities when one holds wealth at age t and only wages

after age t—l constant. Since            >   1, we see that these latter
elasticities are algebraically smaller than the elasticities relative

to age 0. This reflects the fact that the total wealth effect arising

from a change in a wage rate at any age is spread over fewer periods;

so, there is a larger wealth effect in. each period. This factor also

accounts for the larger absolute value of the coefficient on assets

at time t,           than the coefficient on initial assets, e. Notice
             m(t)'
further, since aCt) declines as a function of t, that unconipensated

substitution and wealth coefficients fall monotonically as one advances

the lifetime optimization problem to a later age. For this reason, use

of specifications like (22) for an empirical analysis of life cycle

labor supply is not as attractive as using a specification like (21).

Cross Section Specifications

        Most cross sectional work on labor supply in the literature to

date ignores life cycle theory. Typically, annual hours of work are

regressed on the current hourly wage rate and some measure of property

income. The estimated wage and income coefficients from such a regression

are interpreted as measuring uncompensated substitution and income effects.

        Recognition of life cycle considerations suggests two questions:

(1) What behavioral parameters are being estimated in the typical cross

sectional modal of labor supply? (2) Is it possible to modify cross

sectional models so that they account for life cycle factors? The

following analysis answers these two questions.

        Consider cross sectional estimates of a labor supply equation of

the form
                                      23

                  =   +                           +          +
(23)     LnN(t)           82 LnW1(t) + 83Y(t)         84Q1

where nW1(t) and Y(t) are the predicted values of the consumer's current

wage rate and property income,       is a vector of exogenous variables that

control for demographic characteristics, the S's are parameters, and e.

is an error ten. Equation (23) assumes that a researcher estimates the

parameters of the labor supply function using simultaneous equation

techniques. Such techniques recognize that a consumer's wage rate and

property income are endogenous variables. There are three sources of

endogeneity for these variables: reporting error; the presence of

!ttransitoryPt components of wages and income;21 and mutual dependence due

to past investment decisions. Accounting for the endogeneity of tnW.(t)

and Yjt) has been shown to have a significant effect on cross sectional
            22
estimates

         Equation (23) provides a useful framework for restating the two

questions posed above. The typical cross sectional analysis assumes that

       0; it excludes all control variables Q1. Our first question amounts
84
to asking whether the parameters 8 and 83 have an economic interpretation

in such an analysis. The second question asks whether one can introduce

a set of control variables Q, so that 82 and            represent parameters

relevant to describing lifetime labor supply behavior.

         To answer these questions we need to develop cross section

specifications that are consistent with empirical models of lifetime

labor supply. Using equations (12), (18), and (19) and the lifetime wage

and income paths given by (14) and (16), it can be shown that the

following two specifications apply:


(24)      tnN(t) =        ÷ bt + ó znW1(t) + 1.


(25)      LnN1(t) =   + (6+0)thW,(t) +      Y.(t)      + 4t + 85t2   +
                                           24



where                +
                             + '2iY2' S4 = b—V0Tr11—ecs1., 55 =
and f1 and f are error terms. The derivation of equation (25) assumes

that the coefficients on age and age squared for the lifetime wage and

income paths (i.e.,                    and a2) are constant across consumers.

Referring to the definitions of the it's and the a's given by (15) and

(17), we see that the implied predicted values for wages and income are

inW.(t) =            + 'n1t + 'it2t2 and Yjt) =      + a1t + ct2t2 where the
              N1g0                              S.q0
vectors N. and Si contain such variables as education and family background

variables. Prediction equations such as these are commonly found in cross

sectional analysis.

             Let us start by answering our second question first. According to

equation (24), if a researcher excludes property income (i.e., sets

53 =   0),   and he chooses age and all the age—invariance characteristics

determining either the lifetime wage path or initial permanent income as

his control variables, then the coefficient on the current wage rate is

the interteinporal substitution elasticity (i.e., 2 6). Intuitively,

this set of control variables              accounts    for individual effects and

controls for differences in the value of F across consumers.

             If, on the other hand, a researcher chooses age and age—squared

as his control variables, we see from equation (25) that the wage

coefficient measures the response of labor supply to a parallel shift

in the wage profile (i.e., 2 =         6    + 6) and the income coefficient

measures the response of labor supply to changes in initial permanent

income (i.e., 53 =            Intuitively,      this set of control variables

adjusts for age effects and the only remaining difference in wages and

income across consumers is due to profile shifts. Notice that this

latter choice of control variables crucially depends on the assumption
                                  25




that the lifetime wage path coefficients on age and age—squared are not

functions of a consumerts characteristics. Violation of this assumption

implies that age—invariant characteristics as well as interactions between

these characteristics and t and t2 must also be included as control

variables in equation (25). Inclusion of such variables obviously leads

to identification problems.

        Using different sets of control variables, then, allows one to

estimate different behavioral parameters. If the rate of time preference

equals the rate of interest (i.e., b =   0),   then including education and

background variables in a cross sectional specification of labor supply

yields an estimate of the hours of work response to an evolutionary wage

change. If, instead, one includes polynomials in age, the estimated

wage coefficient measures the response of labor supply to a change in

the lifetime average wage rate.

        To answer our first question concerning the interpretation of

parameters in the usual cross sectional models of labor supply, consider

equation (25). This equation relates hours of work to measures of average

lifetime wages and income which is the interpretation that most analysts

would give to cross section models of labor supply. Typically, however,

these cross section specifications fail to include age and age-squared as

explanatory variables; they assume that the parameters       and     in

equation (25) are zero. Hence, the usual cross section analysis suffers

from a left—out variables problem. As a result, wage and income

coefficients are inconsistently estimated to the extent that the

predicted values of wages and income are correlated with age. The bias

of these estimates may be either positive or negative. The degree of

bias depends on the age distribution of the population. Changing this
                                 26




age distribution, in general, will change the estimated values of the

wage and income coefficients. This is certainly a disturbing feature

of typical cross sectional estimates.

        The standard cross sectional analysis of labor supply, then,

generally estimates wage and income coefficients that do not have an

economic interpretation. Because this analysis fails to include age

variables as controls, estimates confuse shifts of profiles with

movements along profiles for both wages and income. The resulting wage

and income coefficients are, in general, complicated functions of wage

effects, income effects and the distribution of consumer characteristics.

The situation even worsens if the slopes of the lifetime paths for wages

and income are allowed to depend on a consumer's characteristics. Not

only will estimates in this case confuse profile shifts from movements

along profiles, they will also confuse tilts in profiles from parallel

shifts. In the light of this argument, it is hard to see why anyone would

be interested in estimates produced by a typical cross sectional analysis,

especially if their ultimate interest is policy recommendations.


Other Life Cycle Models of Labor Supplyjn the Literature

        Two of the major published empirical investigations of life cycle

labor supply are by Becker in Ghez—Becker (1975) and Lucas-Rapping

(1969).23 Becker's objective is to estimate intertemporal substitution

effects. Lucas—Rapping attempt to estimate hours of work responses to

"permanent" and rtransitory wage changes. The following discussion

relates the work in these studies to the empirical model proposed in this

paper. It is argued that both Becker and Lucas—Rapping estimate parameters

of the X constant labor supply function, and neither of these authors

appears to recognize this possibility.
                                  27




        In his theoretical work Becker investigates the effect of life

cycle wage growth on the timing of labor supply. He analyzes only the

effects of evolutionary wage changes; there is no analysis of parametric

wage change.

        To test his theory, Becker uses data on wage rates and hours

worked by age from the 1960 U.S. Census to form synthetic cohorts. He

divides his cross sectional sample of workers into three education groups,

and then groups them by age. A synthetic profile is constructed by

computing means of the natural log of annual hours worked and hourly

wages for each age group. This synthetic cohort is assumed to represent

the life cycle of a typical individual.

        Becker then uses this synthetic cohort data to estimate the

parameters of what is effectively a A constant labor supply function.

Averaging observations over individuals in the same age group, equation

(12) bedomes


(26)    £nN(t) = F + bt + 5 ZnW(t) + u(t)       t =


where the bars denote means. This equation closely resembles the one

actually estimated by Becker using least squares. The crucial assumption

underlying this approach is that the value of P is the same for all age

groups. Averaging observations for each age group produces a consistent

estimate of the group intercept F. In contrast to using observations on

individuals, least—squares estimation of equation (30) produces consistent

parameter estimates using the averaged data if there are no cohort effects.

One eliminates endogeneity of wages by using group means as instruments.

The issue of treating F as a random variable does not arise since it is

assumed to be the same for all age groups.
                                  28



        To allow for smooth vintage effects, Becker treats F as a linear

function of age, average property income, and average family size.24 A

measure of the permanent wage rate is the obvious variable missing from

this relationship. If one cannot delete this variable, however, it is

impossible to identify the intertemporal substitution effect, S, using

the synthetic cohort approach. After controlling for age, income and

family size, this approach requires all vintage effects to be uncorrelated.

with wages. This seems to be a strong and implausible assumption which

suggests that cohort effects may contaminate estimates produced by the

synthetic cohort method.

        Becker's study represents the first attempt to estimate a pure

intertemporal substitution effect. Although he does not interpret his

empirical specification as a A constant labor supply function, he is

clearly using such a relationship to estimate the response of labor

supply to evolutionary wage changes.

        Lucas-Rapping formulate an empirical model of labor supply along

more traditional lines. They write log hours of work as a log linear

function of the current real wage rate, the anticipated future real wage

rate, and the level of wealth2 This specification is equivalent to the

one given by (27). They write this equation as


(27)    inN(t) = + S(Qn W(t) - Zn      \4%)
                                              +   ÷ y*)yn   W +   BA(t)   +         t   =   0,...

where y(t) is assumed to be a constant for all t, ZnW is the average

future wage rate defined by
                              T—t+lt £nW(j),
                                                    and y* =      (T—t+l)y.26   They

call LuW the permanent or normal real wage rate, and they refer to its

coefficient y* as the long-run wage elasticity. Indeed, given their

assumptions, y* is equivalent to the coefficient            in the empirical
                                   29




model described above, and   +   y determines the response of labor
supply to a permanent wage change. The coefficient on the current

wage rate1 6, is the iñtertemporal wage elasticity. Lucas-Rapping

call this the short-run wage elasticity.

        Lucas—Rapping estimate the parameters of their model using an

aggregate U.S. time series covering the years 1930—65. They convert most

of their variables to per—household terms. Assuming their data refers to

a representative individual, they estimate their model using two—stage

least squares, and they report a long—run wage elasticity equal to .03,

or essentially zero. Their estimate of the short—run elasticity is 1.4.27

Thus, they conclude that the deviation of the current wage rate from its

normal level is the major determinant of labor supply.

        There is a serious difficulty with Lucas'-Rapping's interpretation

of their results. How are they able to estimate labor supply responses to

parametric wage changes? ?resumably their aggregate time series data

depicts the life cycle of a representative individual. Their data, then,

effectively consists of observations on a single worker1s labor supply and

wages at various points in his lifetime. Using such data, all one can hope

to isolate is the effect of an evolutionary wage change on labor supply

since all wage changes arise from movements along a given lifetime wage path.

        The X constant labor supply function, like the one given by (12),

offers a more reasonable description of the empirical relation actually

estimated by Lucas—Rapping. It is this specification of the hours of work

function that determines responses to evolutionary wage changes. It

explicitly recognizes that the value of X fully summarizes the effects of

the permanent wage rate and wealth, and that X is naturally absorbed into

the constant term of the labor supply equation. Since the constant term
                                 30



summarizes all information on wealth and future wages relevant to the

current labor supply decision, measures of either the permanent wage rate

or wealth should not directly enter the labor supply equation. In the

light of this argument, it is not surprising that Lucas—Rapping find a

long—run wage elasticity near zero in value and no effect of wealth on

hours of work.

        In fairness to Lucas—Rapping, they assume an uncertain environment

in which it is theoretically possible to estimate the effects of parametric

wage and income changes on hours of work. In their model, a consumer is

uncertain about future wages and prices. As the consumer ages, he acquires

new information concerning his future prospects which causes him to adjust

his forecasts of wage and income profiles. Thus, the consumer experiences

and responds to shifts in his expected lifetime wage and income paths. To

actually estimate labor supply responses to such parametric changes,

however, one requires instruments for the unanticipated components of

wages and income. Such instruments are not easily found in any analysis.

It is hard to argue that Lucas-Rapping identify responses to unanticipated

changes in wages because they use a two—stage least—squares procedure to

estimate their relationships. They predict wages using primarily

predetermined variables. Given any sort of rational expectations scheme,

these variables will not be correlated with unanticipated components.

Even in this uncertainty environment, then, it is difficult to see how

Lucas—Rapping are able to estimate the impact of a permanent wage change

or change in wealth on hours of work.
                                  31



                        IV. Empirical Analysis


        This portion of the paper reports empirical estimates for the

structural model of lifetime labor supply developed in Section II. The

discussion begins with a description of the data. Next, estimates

obtained from a two—stage estimation of the full A constant hours of

work model are presented and discussed. The section concludes with a

discussion of cross sectional models of labor supply and the possibility

of using these models to estimate parameters relevant to describing hours

of work behavior in a life cycle setting.


Data

        The sample employed in this study is from the Michigan Panel Study

of Income Dynamics. It consists of observations on 561 prime—age, white,

married males for the years 1967—75. To be included in the sample, these

males had to be continuously married to the same spouse during the period

1968—76, and they had to be between the ages of 25 and 48 in 1967 (or 33—56

in 1975). Other sample selection criteria are presented in Appendix A.

        The labor supply variable used in. the empirical analysis is annual

hours of work. The wage variable is average hourly earnings deflated by

the Consumer Price Index. Table A—i in Appendix A contains summary

statistics for these variables. This table indicates a much wider

variability in hours of work and wages for males than many economists

would predict.


Estimation Procedures

        Estimation of the model of labor supply outlined in Section II is

carried out in two stages. In stage one, the A constant labor supply
                                  32




equation given by (12) is estimated using constrained two— and three—stage

least squares. In stage two, the structural equation for F given by (is)

is also estimated using simultaneous equation methods. This two—stage

procedure allows one to fit separately economic relationships describing

a worker's dynamic behavior (the first stage) and his lifetime average

labor supply (the second stage). It is efficient coxnputationally. Also,

to produce consistent parameter estimates, this two—stage procedure

requires fewer assumptions concerning the presence of correlation between

a consumer's measured and unmeasured characteristics determining his

individual effect.28


Estimates for the Intertemporal Substitution Elasticity

        Estimation of the A constant labor supply equation is simplified

by working with a first-differenced version of this equation. First

differencing produces a new equation that sets the percentage change in

hours of work equal to a constant term b, a times the percentage change

in wages, and a disturbance. Thus it relates a consumer's labor supply

changes to wage changes. The significant point is that differencing

eliminates individual fixed effects, and it avoids the introduction of

incidental parameters.

        The differenced labor supply and wage equations can be formed into

a simultaneous equations model. First differencing the labor supply

function given by (12) and the lifetime path for wages given by (14) yields


          1 —3     D&nN (t)         1
                                  X1.(t)
                                             0
                                                              c1(t)
                       i      =                           +
(28)                                                            1
          0   1    lflnWjt)            0
                                           X2.(t)    82       c2.(t)


or
                                                33




        ry.(t) =   X.(t)S +

where D denotes the difference operator (i.e., DZnNi(t) =                                            —
                                                                                            £nN(t)
2,nN(t—1)), X1(t) is a matrix of exogenous variables, $                                is   a vector of

parameters, and ei(t) is a disturbance vector. In the absence of any

year effects, X1jt) is simply an intercept term and $ =                                  b.    X21(t)
contains determinants of evolutionary wage changes; without year effects

it is !defined by X .(t)$ =     'rr        —   iT        + 2tir •,   where   ii         and ii .     are   the
                  2i    2             ii            2i         2i                 ii           2i
slope coefficients of the wage profile. In the following empirical

analysis, the elements of X1jt) include an intercept and year dummies

and X2.(t) contains year dummies, education, squared education, age, and

interactions between age and education and age and age—squared education.

        The simultaneous equation system estimated in this paper combines

all of the labor supply and wage equations for a single worker into one

model. This model is formed by stacking the yjt) and cjt) vectors and

the Xjt) matrix according to the t index. This new model contains all of
                              th
the observations for the i         worker. There are linear constraints across

equations in this complete structural equation system. To allow for the

most general contemporaneous and temporal correlation schemes, no

restrictions •are imposed on the covariance matrix for an individua1s

error vector. To account for correlation across workers, year duimnies

are included in the X. matrix.
                     i
        This paper also estimates a simultaneous equations model that

relates hours of work and earnings. Consider the set of structural

equations given by (28). Adding ÔDLnN.(t) to both sides of the labor

supply equation and solving this new equation for DthNjt), and adding

02.nN.(t) to the left—hand side of the wage equation and its expectation
                                     34




conditional on Xjt) to the right—hand side produces a new system of

structural equations that looks exactly like the one given by equation

(28) except that the log difference in earnings, DLnE(t), replaces

DnW.(t), 1+6 replaces 5, and there is a new parameter vector 8 and

disturbance vector.29 Using the coefficient on earnings in the labor

supply equation, 16       is    possible to construct an estimate of 6.

Thus, this new simultaneous equations model provides another econometric

framework for estimating 5.

        To estimate the param'eters of the two structural equation models

described above, this study employs constrained two— and three—stage

least squares. These simultaneous equation procedures take advantage of

the time series aspect of panel data to estimate the intertemporal

substitution elasticity 6 with a minimal amount of computational burden.

They avoid biases arising from pure reporting error in earnings and labor

supply, and they offer a flexible framework for testing and estimating

alternative functional forms.

        Table 1 presents estimates of the intertemporal substitution

elasticity. Two specifications of the labor supply equation are

considered. One includes only an intercept term in the equation and the

other includes dummy variables for each year. All of the implied estimates

of the intertemporal substitution elasticity are positive. According to

the estimates of the wage coefficients, 6 lies in the range .10 to .20.

The earnings coefficients indicate a range of .18 to .33 for 6. The

earnings coefficients indicate a higher estimate for 6 in all cases, but
                                                                 30
these differences are small relative to their standard errors.

        Estimating the labor supply equation with and without year dummies

provides a check as to whether the response of labor supply is sensitive
                                   35




to the source of wage variation. Two    sets   of variables are used to

predict the change in wages and earnings: age and education variables

and year dummies. Age and education variables capture in part variations

in the wage rate arising from investment in human capital. The addition

of year dummies reflects variations in wages due to cyclical or secular

factors. Excluding year dummies from the labor supply equation implies

the wage and earnings coefficients measure the response of labor supply

to any variation in the wage no matter what its source. Including year

dummies in the labor supply equation implies that the wage and earnings

coefficients measure the response of labor supply to variations in the

wage solely due to past investment activities. Comparing the results of

Table 1, we see there is little difference between the estimates of the

intertemporal substitution elasticity with and without the inclusion of

year dummies. Thus, there appears to be no evidence suggesting that the

labor supply response depends on the source of the wage change.

        To check on the robustness of the findings, the above structural

relations were estimated using averages of an individual's observations

over the sample period. Averaging the data amounts to a simple linear

transformation of the complete structural equation system described above.

Averaging the first differences of a variable is equivalent to taking the

difference of the variable for a period greater than one year; for example,

averaging over a sample period of eight years creates a new variable that

represents an eighth difference.

        Table 2 presents estimates of the intertemporal substitution

elasticity based on the averaged data. The estimates obtained for the

eight—year averages are .18 and .25. These results strongly support the

estimates based on the unaveraged data.
                                  35



        These empirical results and the ones that follow requite

qualification. Their interpretation relies on assumptions concerning

the absence of taxes and the existence of perfect capital markets.

Violation of these assumptions is certain in the sample used here.

Simple tax schemes can be admitted with no modifications to the above

results; if an individual's tax rate is approximately proportional over

the sample period, for example, then first differencing eliminates tax

effects.31 In general, however, the presence of taxes and imperfect

capital markets leads to complicated biases in the parameter estimates

reported here which are difficult even to sign.

        There is a further qualification of the above empirical results.

The previous discussion was careful to state that simultaneous equation

procedures avoid biases due to reporting error. There is, however, a

problem with measurement error in hours of work. Measured hours of work

includes both time spent working and time spent in on-the—job training.

Thus, to the extent there is investment in human capital, true hours of

work are measured with error. Given that measured hours of work are used

to construct average hourly earnings, it follows that wages are inflicted

with this measurement problem also. Unfortunately, this measurement error

is known to be correlated with variables that the above empirical analysis

treats as instruments, namely, age and education. Economic theory predicts

that investment time is related to both an individual's education and his

age. First differencing obviously does not eliminate this problem. The

result is inconsistent estimates of the wage and earnings coefficients.

Formally, the direction of this inconsistency is ambiguous. It depends

on whether the life cycle profile for the fraction of working time spent

in training is a concave or convex function of age and education.32
                                      37




Estimates   of Re!pqpses   to Parametric Wage Changes

        Estimating the structural equation for F given by (18) provides

the additional information we require to predict a consumer's labor supply

response to parametric wage changes. Estimating this equation is not as

difficult as it may first appear. It is true that all of the variables

appearing in this equation          fT0 1t•j 2i' and a01) are not directly
observable. But they are observable with error, and it is possible to use

standard two—stage least—squares procedures to estimate the structural

parameters of interest.

        Consider the coefficients of the lifetime path for wages given by

(14) and the following definitions


                                    — DZnW(t—1))
        (a) 2.(t)

(29)    (b) j11(t) = DZnW.(t) —     *2.(l—2t)
        (c) 0.(t) = ZnWJt) — f11t —

It can be shown that E(if.(t)) = ir.,,     j =   0, 1, 2. This is an important
result because the *1(t)'s are observable variables, and it is possible

to use the ji(t)'5 as dependent variables in a simultaneous equation

analysis to consistently estimate the 7T,'s. In the following empirical

analysis, the averages of the i01(t)'s, i1.(t)'s, and 2jt)Ts over the

sample period are used as the dependent variables.

        Similarly, given observations on consumer i's income over the

sample period, one can construct the variables &2.(t), &1jt), and

       using the definitions given by (29) with Yi(t) replacing £nW.(t).

The average of the &0.(t)'s over the sample period, then, can be used in

a simultaneous equations analysis to predict the intercept of the lifetime
                                                   38




income path, a01, which is a measure of consumer i's initial permanent

income.

          An analogous strategy can be used to construct a measurable

variable to serve as a proxy for F. Define F1(t)                    inN1(t) —   bt   — 6

£nW(t). The expectation of F1(t) is F,, but Pi(t) cannot be directly

observed since it depends on unknown parameters b and 6. We have

estimates of these parameters, however, from the first stage of the

empirical analysis. The first column of Table 1 indicates b                     — .01 and

6 =                A logical alternative to Fjt), then, is to form the variable

F.(t)      inN.(t) —      bt    —     QnW(t). Asymptotically, F(t) has an expectation

equal to            The following empirical analysis averages the F1(tYs over

the sample period and treats this average as a dependent variable that

measures F. with error.
               1

           Collecting       the above results, we have a complete simultaneous

equations model given by


                            + ii,              =   0,   1, 2
(30)       ji = M1g.

(31)       0i =             +
                     S1q0


(32)      i =t        +             +   lIj•i(] + '12i12 +     +


where                                   and . are averages of the variables
         rt,           2i'
                                     and   P.(t) over the sample period, the vectors of
11(t),     112,(t),     01(t),
exogenous variables Mi and Si and the coefficient vectors g0, g1, 2' and

      are defined by (15) and (17), and the ri.'s are disturbances. We have

one set of equations for each consumer i. The endogenous variables in

this model are F1, &, and the ñ.1ts; the exogenous variables are the

elements of N. and                  and the structural parameters of interest are
                                  39



V 2' and 6. N1 and S1 contain variables determining the coefficients

of the lifetime wage and income paths. In the following empirical

analysis they include the consumer's education, his education squared,

and three background variables: his mother's and father's education and

a bracketed variable indicating whether the normal income of the consumer's

parents was considered below average, average, or above average.

        To consistently estimate the parameters of the structural equation

for F given by (32) one can employ a standard two-stage least-squares

procedure. The standard errois reported by this procedure are valid if

the number of time series observations for each consumer is sufficiently

large. If one does not have a sufficiently large number of these time

series observations, however, the usual standard errors are invalid. The

problem lies in the fact that we use estimated values for b and 5 to form

the dependent variable P.. In cases where the number of time series
                        1
observations is small, one must adjust the usual standard errors to account

for the errors in estimating b and 6. The precise form of this adjustment

is given in Appendix B. Although this adjustment is not complicated, it

does require the use of matrix operations. Since the data set used here

has only nine observations per person, the standard errors reported in this

paper have been adjusted for estimation error. This adjustment was very

minor in every instance for which it was used.




        Table 3 presents two sets of estimates for the structural parameters

of the individual effects equation given by C32). The first row presents

unconstrained two—stage least—squares estimates. The second row presents

estimates with the restriction that 1(t) (i.e., the cross—substitution
                                   40



elasticity) is the same for all t. This restriction assumes a working

life of 40 years.34 The estimates of ,     , and      are all negative,

as theory predicts. Although one accepts the hypothesis that y(t) is

constant at conventional levels of significance, there are large

discrepancies between the constrained and the unconstrained estimates.

        Combining estimates of     and 6 allows one to form estimates of

cross— and own—uncompensated substitution elasticities. Dividing the

unconstrained estimates of    by the length of the working life produces

an estimate of the average cross uncompensated elasticity; assuming a

working life of 40 years implies an estimate for this elasticity equal

to —.0042. An increase in a future wage rate, then, essentially has no

effect on current hours of work. Adding an estimate for 6 to this cross

elasticity creates an estimate for the average own elasticity. Results

from the first stage of the empirical analysis suggest a value for 6

equal to about .2. This implies an estimate of .2 for the average own

elasticity.   Increasing a consumer's period t wage rate by 10%, then,

leads to a 2% increase in his hours of working in period t.

        Combining the estimates of %' ' and 2 with an estimate of 6

provides the information needed to predict a consumer's labor supply

response to shifts in his wage profile. In response to a uniform 100%

increase in wages at all ages (i.e., a parallel shift in the log wage

profile), the unconstrained estimates of Table 3 predict that a consumer

will adjust his hours of work by an amount equal to     + 6 =-. 1? + .20

.03% at all ages. There is, then, essentially no response in a consumerts

labor supply to parallel shifts in his log wage profile. If the slope of

a consumerts wage profile is altered by changing the coefficient on the

linear term (i.e., ¶1i) by an amount equal to ê, the unconstrained
                                   41



estimates predict that his hours of work at age t change by (V1 + t)L =

(—4.69 + .Zt)A percent. t, here, is measured in decades and takes a value

of 0 when the consumer is 18 years old. Hence, hours of work decline at

all ages in response to this sort of increase in the slope of the wage

profile with larger decreases occurring at earlier ages. The same is

true when the slope of the wage profile is altered by changing the

coefficient on the quadratic term (i.e., it2.).   Hours of work at age t

decline by an amount equal to (—18.45 + .2t2)A percent. The unconstrained

estimates, then, are consistent with the popular notion that the lifetime

labor supply curve of prime—age males is backward—bending or vertical.

        The initial permanent income coefficient U has the wrong sign,

but it is not statistically significant. The measure of property income

used in the empirical analysis is total family income minus the husband's

earnings. There are many problems with this measure of property income.

It includes wife's earnings, and it does not include any income derived

from consumer durables and the like which generally constitute the major

components of a consumer's nonwage income.35


Cross Sectional Estimates

        Theoretically, it is possible to estimate parameters relevant to

describing a consumer's lifetime labor supply behavior using cross

sectional models. The following analysis examines five such models and

compares their empirical results to estimates obtained from the two—stage

estimation procedure described above.

        The first two approaches considered use synthetic cohort data to

obtain an estimate of the intertemporal substitution elasticity. The

first specification estimated is the one given by (26); namely, average
                                 42




of log annual hours of work is regressed on age and average log wages.36

In this specification, the wage coefficient theoretically represents the

intertemporal substitution elasticity 5. The first row of Table 4

presents the least—squares estimates of this wage.coefficient. Results

are given for each year of the panel, and a final column presents a pooled

estimate obtained by full information estimation methods and imposing an

equality restriction across years. This first row- shows that the

coefficients on wages are negative for each year. Clearly, they do not

represent estimates of S as they should. Given the relatively small

number of observations per age cell in this sample, there is reason to

believe that these negative estimates of S are due to reporting errors in

hours of work and earnings.37

        The second use of synthetic cohort data employs an econometric

specification that relies on a more appropriate set of instruments to

estimate 5. It is possible to respecify the labor supply equation given

by (26) by adding the quantity 6 ZnN(t) to both sides of the equation and

dividing each side by 1+6. This creates a new equation with average log

hours of work as the dependent, age, and average log earnings as

explanatory variables. Using an estimate of the earnings coefficient,

    ,one can compute an estimate for 6. Beckdr (1975) suggests that it
1

is possible to reduce the effect of reporting error by specifying the

labor supply equation in terms of earnings rather than wages. His

reasoning is based on the assumption that reporting errors for earnings

and hours of work are uncorrelated. Given this assumption, a regression

of hours of work on earnings produces an earnings coefficient that is

biased toward zero. One can show that regressing hours of work on

average hourly earnings yields an estimate of the wage coefficient that
                                    43



is biased toward negative values rather than zero1 This result suggests

that better estimates of 6 can be obtained using earnings data rather

than wage data to estimate the parameters of the labor supply equation.

        The second row of Table 4 presents the implied estimates of 6

obtained by least—squares estitiation of the hours of work—earnings

specification using synthetic cohort data. Most of these estimates are

positive, as economic theory predicts. The results are consistent with

the above contention that there exists a less serious error in the

variables problem for earnings than for wages. These estimates of 6

are generally lower than those reported in Tables 1 and 2. The estimates

based on averaged earnings data, however, may possess a downward bias as

a consequence of reporting error in earnings and residual correlation due

to unobserved individual effects.

        The remaining three cross sectional models of labor supply are

estimated using data on individuals and simultaneous equation techniques.

These models include: the specification typically found in cross

sectional analysis and the equations given by (24) and (25). The

derivation of equation (25) requires slopes of lifetime wage and income

paths to depend only on a consumer's age; only parallel shifts in these

paths are admissible. The following analysis accounts for this

restriction by using reduced form equations for log wages and income

that include education, education squared, age, age squared, and

background variables as explanatory variables.38

        The third row of Table 4 presents estimates of the wage

coefficient based on an empirical specification of labor supply

typically found in cross sectional analysis; hours are regressed on

predicted wages and income. As discussed in the previous section,
                                 44



this wage coefficient confuses wage effects, income effects, and

properties of the population age distribution. It does not have a

clean economic interpretation. The estimates of this coefficient are

always positive and appear to increase over time as the population ages.

The estimates of the income coefficients are not presented; they were

all negative.39 Thus, according to conventional labor supply theory,

these estimates have the correct sign and show men's hours of work to

be positively related to the wages. Viewed in a life cycle context, it

is not clear what these coefficients tell us about labor supply behavior.

        The fourth row of Table 4 reports cross sectional estimates of

equation (24). Theoretically, the wage coefficient in this specification

represents the intertemporal substitution effect, 5. The estimates of

this coefficient for the years 1967—72 and 1974 range between .07 and .28

and are consistent with the estimates of   reported in Tables 1 and 2.

Estimates for the years 1973 and 1975 and the pooled estimate are less

satisfactory because they are negative. All of these estimates are

imprecisely estimated, reflecting the fact that only the age squared

variable identifies the wage coefficient.4°

       The last row of Table 4 presents cross sectional estimates of

equation (25). If wage and income profiles have slopes that are the same

across consumers of a given age, the wage coefficient in this specification

theoretically determines the response of labor supply to a 100% increase

in wages over the entire lifetime. The pooled estimate of .04 differs

only slightly from the .03 estimate obtained in stage two of the

estimation procedure discussed above. There is however, a fair amount

of variation in the estimates of this coefficient from one year to the

next; so much so that for two of the years (1974 and 1975) one would
                                 45



reject the hypothesis that the coefficients are zero using conventional

levels of significance.


Conclusion

        This study formulates a manageable empirical model of labor

supply that fully incorporates life cycle considerations. This model

naturally splits the empirical analysis into two stages. In stage one,

the analysis concentrates on describing a consumer's dynamic behavior.

The response of labor supply to evolutionary wage changes is estimated.

In stage two, the analysis focuses on explaining differences in labor

supply across consumers. This stage estimates the impact of changes in

wealth and parametric changes in wages on hours of work over the life

cycle. This two—stage analysis offers a very tractable estimation

procedure and minimal data requirements.

        A full set of estimates required to describe the lifetime labor

supply behavior of prime—age males is presented. The effect of a change

in the wage rate on hours of work is shown to depend on the source of the

wage change. Estimates of the intertemporal substitution elasticities

indicate that a 10% increase in the real wage rate which is due to life

cycle wage growth induces a 1% to 3% increase in hours worked. The

estimates of own period uncompensated substitution effects range between

.1 and .3, and cross uncompensated effects are approximately zero. Yet,

the evidence in this study is also consistent with the popular notion

that an increase in men's lifetime average wage rate leads to no change

or a decline in their hours of work.
                                   46



        This study argues that Ghez—Becker and Lucas—Rapping estimate

 the same structural labor supply parameter which determines the hours

 of work response to evolutionary wage changes. Civen their empirical

 specifications, neIther set of authors is able to estimate the effect

 of a parametric wage change on labor supply.


         This study shows how cross sectional specifications of hours

of work can be modified to estimate parameters relevant for describing

lifetime labor supply behavior; Including such demographic variables as

education and background variables in a cross sectional specification

yields an estimate of the intertemporal substitution elasticity which

determines the effect of wage growth on hours of work; for simple forms

of the lifetime wage path including polynomials in age, on the other

hand, yields an estimate of the response of hours of work to a change

in the lifetime average wage rate. Unfortunately, these modified cross

sectional models and the synthetic cohort models of GhezBecker met with

mixed success in the empirical analysis of this study.

        The important point for an analyst to extract from this study

is the following. Recognizing that individuals make their decisions in

a life cycle setting is crucial if onets objective is to estimate econ-

omically meaningful parameters. Creating an empirical model that accounts

for such a setting need not complicate the analysis, and it generally leads

to a more complete understanding of consumer behavior.
                                  47




                           APPENDIX A


     This appendix reports the exclusion criteria used to generate the

samples used in the empirical analysis. The primary sample is the

Panel Study of Income Dynamics for 1976.

     The following criteria were used in order to construct the sample

of nine years of data on 561 white males who were between the ages

25-48 in 1967 (or 33-56 in 1976) .     Households included in the sample

had to satisfy the following criteria: (I) A stable family composition

prevailed over the period in the sense that the husband and wife remained

together.   (2) A worker must be classified as employed or unemployed

 (i.e., permanently disabled and retired were deleted). (3) Wage and

labor supply data must be available for all years. A worker's years of

schooling must also be available.      (4) A worker must report less than

4680 hours worked per year. The absolute value of the difference in his

real average hourly earnings in adjacent years cannot exceed $16 or a

change of 200 percent. The absolute value of the difference in the

number of hours he works in adjacent years cannot exceed 2900 hours or a

change of 190 percent. The purpose of this last criterion is to minimize

difficulties arising from the presence of outliers. (Twenty-four workers

weredeletedby this outlier criterion.) (5) Households whose property

 income (defined as total family income minus husbands earnings deflated

by the consumer price index) was less than $5,000 in any year were deleted.

(Three observations were lost.)

               Table A.—l presents summary statistics for annual hours of

work and real average hourly earnings.
                                            48



                                        APPENDIX B


        This appendix develops the correct standard errors for the parameter

estimates of the individual effects equation given by (32                       ).

        Consider the following set of equations


(B-i)     u    = X.S   +    U
                                          i=     1,    2,...,N

(B-2) Y2 -          Z.5 =       +.

where         and are vectors of endogenous variab1es, Z is a matrix                       of

either    endogenous or exogenous variables, X and  are matrices of
exogenous variables, S and y are parameter vectors, and                          and C.   are

correlated error vectors which are independently distributed over the

index i. Suppose that one estimates                          by least squares using equation

(B-I), replaces S in equation (B-2) by its estimate, and estimates the

resulting equation by least squares. The standard errors for the

estimate of y reported by this least squares procedure are incorrect.

        Computing the correct standard errors is straightforward. Let

  =   (X'X)            X'U. =   S   +   (X'X)             I X!LJ. denote the estimate for S.
                                                                 -
            j=l                    j=l
Substituting B into equation (3-2) yields

(B-3) Y2 — ZS               W•y + C. + Z.(S           —
                                                           5).

        The least squares estimate for y is
                                                        49

                                                                         -

(3—4)         y   =y+       (W'W)               E W!(c. + Z.(B       -
                                                                         6))
                                              1=1 1    1   1


                  =     + (W'W)                         —    (I
                                                               N
                                                                   W1Zp(X'XY1 z
                                                                                      Ni
                                          'I.z
                                            1=1
                                                  W1c
                                                                                      x,u3j
                                N
                  =   y + E ((W'W)W1e1 -                     A(X'X)1 X!1J.)
                            jal                                       11
                                N
                  =Y+ S r.
                            i=l 1


where

                                      N
           A =        (WtW) S WZ.1
                                      i=l


         ii =         (W'WY' W?1 - A(X'X)1 xU1

In large samples, it can be shown that

                                N
(3-5)    -y    n N(y,       (    S
                                          1 1
                                i=l


where

          r. = (IV'W)'4 Wft. —                    A(x'X)      XtU.



(8-6)             =
                      '2i   -
                                 2i       -



         u.1      =
                       ii   - x.S.
                               1


A standard application of least squares reports standard errors

neglects the second component of

        The procedure used to estimate the parameters of equation (32)                        is

a simultaneous equation version of the estimation procedure described

above. The standard errors reported by two stage least squares are
incorrect. The correct standard errors have the same form as those

given by (8-5) except that all the endogenous variables included in

the matrices W, W1, X and                          are replaced by their predicted values

in all expressions but the definitions of                                    and U.
               -                     50


                                 References

DaVanzo, 3., Betray, B. and Greenberg, B. "Estimating Labor Supply

     Response: A Sensitivity Analysis." Rand Corporation, R—1372—OEO,

     December 1973.

Friedman, 14. A Theory of the Consumption Function.      National Bureau of


     Economic Research, 1957.

Ghez, G. •and Becker, 0. The Allocation of Time   and   Goods over the Life

      Cycle. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., 1975.

l-ieckman, J. J. "Three Essays on the Supply of Labor and the Demand for Goods."

      Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University, May, 1971.

                   "A Partial Survey of Recent Research on the Labor Supply

     of Women." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings

     (May 1978): 200—12.

             "A Life Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning and Consumption."

     Journal of Political Economy (August 1976): 53—545.

             "Life Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An Explanation

     of the Relationship between Income and Consumption over the Life

     Cycle." American Economic Review (March 1974).

Beckman, 3. 3. and MaCurdy, T. "A Life Cycle Model of Female Labor

     Supply." Forthcoming in Review of Economic Studies, 1979.

Houthakker, H. and Taylor, L. B. Consumer Demand in the United States,

     1929—1970, 2nd ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,

     1970.

Lucas, R. E. and Rapping, L. "Real Wages, Employment and Inflation."

     In E. Phelps (ed.), Microfoundations of Employment and Inflation

     Theory. New York: W. W. Norton, Co., 1970.

NaCurdy, T. "Two Essays on the Life Cycle." Ph.D. thesis, University

     of Chicago, 1978.
                              51


McFadden, EL "Production Functions with Constant Elasticities of

    Substitution." Review of Economic Studies 30 (1963): 73—83.

Morgan, J. et al. Five Thousand American Families——Patterns of Economic

    Progress, Vols. 1 and 2. Ann   Arbor,   Michigan, 1974.

Phlips, L. Applied Consumption Analysis. Amsterdam: North Holland

    Publishing Co., 1974.

Smith, J. "Family Labor Supply over the Life Cycle." Explorations in

    Research 4, no. 2 (1977): 205—76.

Theil, H. The Theory of Measurement and Consumer Demand. Amsterdam:

    North Holland Publishing Co., 1976.
                                        52


                                      Footnotes


     1. Adding a bequest function to the preference function does not

alter any of the following analysis. Similarly, one could introduce

time dependence in the period utility functions, u(.,), without any

significant consequences.

     2.    See Beckman (1974,1976) for proofs of these inequalities.

Beckman develops and uses functions equivalent to those given by

equations (5) and (6) in his analysis of the behavior of consumption

and labor supply over the life cycle.

     3. If it is optimal for the consumer to work at age t, then

condition (4) is an equality and the functions C(,') and N(,.)

represent the solutions of equations (3) and (4) for the variables

0(t) and N(t) =   t   —   L(t),   respectively. If, on the other hand, the

necessary condition given by (4) is inequality (i.e., U2(C(t),t)

                then the consumer chooses not to work. in this case,

          = 0 and the function C(,•) is the solution of the equation

D1(C(t),t) =                for   0(t). In either case, C(.,.) and N(,) only

contain the variables               A and W(t) as arguments and their functional

form depends only on the form of the period t utility function U(,').

For a further discussion on this issue see Beckman and }taCurdy (1979).

     4. Introducing age dependence into the utility function does not

change any of this analysis. If the utility function at age t is given

by tJ(c(t), L(t), X(t)), where 21(t) is a vector of time-varying

determinants of "consumer tastes," then a third argument 21(t) enters

the consumption and labor supply functions given by (5) and (6). These

functions satisfy the restrictions given by (7) and they also allow for

corner solutions.
                                        53


      5. See Heckman (1974,1976) for proof of these propositions.

      6. See MaCurdy (1978) for a discussion of the uncertainty case.

      7. Changes in a consumer's tastes can also be a reason for

adjustments in consumption and labor supply over the life cycle. As

discussed in footnote 4, if the period utility function is age dependent,

the A constant consumption and labor supply functions will also be age

dependent. It is still true, however, that the A constant functions fully

characterize a consumer's dynamic behavior.

      8. Since this study's empirical objective is to examine the labor

supply behavior of prime—age males, this assumption is not unreasonable.

      9. There are other forms of the utility function that imply

convenient empirical specifications for the A constant consumption and

leisure demand functions. Two such functions are


(a) U1(t)        K.(t)(c.(t)+p*Y(L.(t)+p)W             K.(t), , > 0
                                                    or w' + w < 1

                                                                      c 0

                         (Cjt)+p*)
                          1
                                   —1             (Ljt)+p) —1
(b)   tJ.(t) =   iC(t)                  + K.(t)                     K.(t), r!(t) > 0


where K(t), K.(t), p*, p, w*, and to are all parameters. Both of these

functions are concave. They include Cobb—Douglas, addilog, and Stone—

Ceary as special cases. The A constant functions for consumption and

leisure are log linear in A, wages, and the coefficients r(t) and ic..(t)

which represent specific modifiers of tastes.

      This study uses the utility function given by (10) to formulate an

empirical model because it implies a form for the labor supply function

which can be readily compared to labor supply equations found in existing

empirical work.
                                           54


     10.        II utility   at age t depends on measured characteristics of the

consumer that vary over the sample period, then current values of these

"taste shiftert' variables would also be included as regressors. A natural

way to introduce such "taste shifter" variables is to model the taste

coefficient y.(t) as a function of the form £ny.(t) =              +
                                                                       XJt)$—u1(t)
where Xi(t) is a vector of variables influencing tastes and B is a

parameter. For this case, X.(t)B enters as an additional linear ten in

the A constant labor supply equation given by (12).

     11. The equation determining A. is

                                                             1
                                                  t        oj*_1
           A.(0) =                                    A.
            1                                          1




                     - wi(t)

     12. The effects of the interest rate and time preference are assumed

to be absorbed into the intercept.

     13. These income measures seldom include such imputed income as that

generated by consumer durables which is a major source of property income

for most consumers.

     14. In contrast to W(t), Y(t) is determined endogenously in this

model. Equation (16) can be viewed as an approximation to the optimal

lifetime path for Y(t) expressed as a function of the exogenous variables

of the model.

     15. This distinction goes back to Ghez and Becker (1975).

     16. This statement is true only itt         an    environment of perfect

certainty. If there is uncertainty about the future, a consumer can
                                                    55


experience parametric wage changes as he acquires new information about

his lifetime wage path. For a discussion of this uncertainty case see

NaCurdy (1978).

          17. In the literature on consumer demand, 6 is often referred to

as the specific substitution effect. The specific substitution effect

determines the effect of a price change holding the marginal utility of

income constant (see Theil, 1976, Ch. 1).

          18. See McFadden (1963).

          19. Houthakker and Taylor (1970, Ch. 5) and Phlips (1974, pp. 190—93,

and 250—60) have estimated marginal utility of wealth constant demand

functions as an intermediate computational step toward estimating a system

of ordinary demand functions. In contrast to their work, I directly

estimate the A constant demand functions as a means of characterizing a

consumer's dynamic behavior. I treat A as a fixed effect which summarizes

the effect of historic and future information on current decisions. I

thank Orley Ashenfelter for the llouthakker and Taylor reference.

      20. The relation ZnX(O)                 =   flnA(t) A(t)
                                    3A(0)         A(t) A(0) follows immediately
from the equation Zn X(t)                   t Zn[?J + Zn A(0) and the assumption

that wages are exogenous. To verify the second relation, let V denote
                                                                                      T
the value function defined by V(W*(t),.. . ,W*(T),A(t))                          max{ )     U(C(j),
                                                                                     :1=1
                                                                             1
L(j))} subject to a wealth constraint where W*(j)                                     1.1(j) is the
                                                                          (l+r )

discounted      wage,      Roy's identity implies                    =   A(t)N(k)    where
                                                             ?1(k)
A(t) =
           -f)• Differentiating               this identity with respect to A(t) yields

           =   X(t)         +               N(t). Multiplying both sides of this
3WIk(k)
                  W*(k)
equation by                treating N(t) as a function of the form N(k) =
                  x(t)

                                =                 A(o),                                         =
                        w(k)J                             w(k)] [which implies
                                         56


            and regrouping terms     yields                       + iJ   It)
           which     is the desired result.
(l+r)

        21. The implicit interpretation of cross sectional estimates held by

most researchers relates to some sort of "lifetime average" relationship

between hours, wages, and income. to estimate such a relationship,

observations of &nW1(t) and Y1(t) must be purged of their transitory

components so that they measure their "lifetime average." Predicting

ZnW.(t) and Yi(t) is one way of accomplishing this task.

        22. See DaVanzo, Detray and      Greenberg   (1973).

        23. The comments that follow on the work of Becker also apply to

the work of Smith (1977).

        24. The family size variable or age may        enter   as a regressor for

another reason. If period—specific utilities are a function of family

size, then the A constant functions will also depend on family size

directly.

        25. They also allow for the price of market goods to vary over the

life cycle. In terms of the model presented in this paper, this translates

into a nonconstant real interest rate.

        26. The exogenous variables Z. and the index I have been suppressed.

0(t) is assumed to be constant.

         27. See Lucas and Rapping (1969, p. 745).

         28. An alternative estimation procedure would be to estimate either

the specification given by (23) or (24) by a restricted simultaneous

equations method. The two—stage estimation procedure described above has

two     advantages    over this more familiar one—stage estimation scheme. The

first is computational efficiency. The two—stage procedure significantly
                                    '57

diminishes   the number of variables and parameters one must deal with at any

one time. In the first stage one neglects all future and past variables;

in the second stage, where all these variables enter, the problem is reduced

to analyzingonly one equation per worker. In the one—step analysis an

analyst must include past, present, and future variables in every labor

supply equation of which there are several for each worker. Thus, the

one—step procedure forces one to consider the impact of all variables at

once. This results in greater complexity-and computational burden, and it

can result in serious difficulties with multicollinearity.

     The second advantage of the two—stage estimation procedure concerns

the potential correlation of unobserved permanent "person effects" with

exogenous variables. Such effects are captured by the disturbance term
a* in the relationship for A given by equation (13). In the specification

of labor supply given by either (21) or (22), this unobserved permanent

component ends up in the error term. If these unobserved individual

characteristics are correlated with the observed characteristics, the

one—step estimation procedure produces inconsistent estimators for all

parameters of the labor supply equation. This is not true in the case of

the two-step estimation scheme. Only the second-stage estimators are

inconsistent. Thus, using the two—step procedure one obtains 'clean"

estimates for at least the X constant labor supply function.

     29. Adding 5DLnN1(t) to both sides of equation (12) yields

         DtnN(t)(1+tS) =    b+6(DLnW1(t)+DLnN1(t))+c1(t)
or

         DLnNi(t)      j--j+ 1-1--DLnE(t)+c(t)

This new equation relates changes in hours to changes in earnings.

Replacing the reduced form equation for DLnWJt) by a reduced form
                                       58

equation for D&nE1(t) produces a new simultaneous equations model.

Notice that these two reduced forms will have the same set of explanatory

variables X2(t).
       30. All of these estimates are well within the —.068 to .44 range

of estimates for 6 obtained by Becker in Ghez—Becker (1975, pp. 112—13).

       31. Such a situation arises in the case of progressive taxes when

one approximates a consthner's budget constraint by a linear function that

is evaluated at the same point each period.

       32. I tried several remedies for this problem. Most of them

consisted of entering polynomials of age and education directly into the

labor supply equation to capture investment effects. The estimates of
were, for the most part, unaffected. As one would predict, all parameters

were estimated with very little precision.

       33. The following empirical results are not sensitive to the

particular estimate of b or 6 picked from Table 1.
                                                                   T
       34.     If y(t) is constant, we have:   y(T+1);     =   y  t; and
           T                                                   t=0
       ) t2.
       y      The restriction assumes that T+1 = 40.
   =                                                     In the actual
      t=O
empirical analysis t is defined as (consumer's age — 18)110.

       35. If one includes dummy variables for house ownership in equation

(32), these variables have coefficients that are typically negative. Such

variables are better proxies for permanent nonwage income than the income

measure reported in Table 3.

       36. The synthetic cohort data used here includes all education

groups. A small enough number of observations is present in each age

group without further dividing the sample into education groups as well.

The average number of observations per age group is about 25, with a

minimum of seven and a maximum of 44.
                                     59

     37. From the suary statistics reported in Appendix A, we see wide

variation in an individual's measured hours of work and wages in adjacent

years. Such evidence leads to a strong suspicion of an error in the

variables problem for wages. Given the small number of observations per

age cell (as few as seven),1 it is likely that this problem carries over

to group averages as well. Because this measurement error in wages is

correlated with the dependent variable, estimates of 6 are biased toward

negative values rather than zero.,

     38. Background variables include the consumer's father's education,

his mother's education, and a dununy variable representing the income

level of his parents.

     39. If one does not use predicted values for wages and income, the

wage coefficient is usually negative and the income coefficient is usually

positive, which is a coon finding in the literature. See DaVanzo,

Betray and Greenberg (1973).

     40. Notice that stage one of the estin.ation procedure prescribed in

this paper estimates a first—differenced version of equation (24). First

differencing eliminates all time—invariant effects and reduces the number

of maintained assumptions one requires to obtain consistent estimates of

the intertemporal substitution elasticity. The fact that this first—stage

estimation produced a more precise estimate of 6 is primarily due to the

use of an expanded set of explanatory variables and equality constraints

across years on reduced form equations. Using an expanded set of

explanatory variables to predict wages in estimating the parameters of

equation (24) produces estimates of 6 that are very near zero for all

years and a pooled estimate of 6 that is negative and significant at

conventional levels of significance. There are good reasons for preferring

the differenced equations.
                                                  60


                                         TABLE I

         SIMULTANEOUS EQUATION ESTIMATION OF FIRST DIFFERENCED
                LABOR SUPPLY EQUATION ESTIMATES OF THE
                 INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION ELASTICITY
              (absolute values of t-statistics in parentheses)

Estimation
          .
                                                           .
                                                                                   Average of.
Procedure         D(log wage)            D(log        earning)   Intercept         Year Dummies

  2SLS                .20                    ,                     —.0097
                    (2.05)                                        (4.31)

  3SLS                .16                         •    •           -.0089                  a

                    (2.01)                                        (4.52)

  2SLS              ••                           .33
                                             (3.88)
                                                                   -.009
                                                                  (6.36)
                                                                                      •.
  3SLS              . ..                         .20               —.0086             .
                                             (3.7)                (6.57)

  2SLS                .18                              ,            •. .              —.008
                    (1.14)

  3SLS                .10                    .    .    .            .                 -.008
                     (.75)

  2SLS              ...                          .25
                                             (1.77)
                                                                    ...               -.008


  3SLS                ..                         .18                    . .           -.007
                                             (1.48)


     aReduced form equations for log wage and earnings differences include
age, education, education squared, interactions between these variables and
year effects. Reduced form coefficients are restricted to be the same
across years.
     biqinii    the estimates in the second column refer to 6, the t-statistics
are computed for the coefficients on earnings w =                             To convert the
t-statistics reported for w to those for 6 requires multiplication by the
square of the quantity          =
                                    (1   +   6)
                                                 -
                                           61




                                   TABLE 2

            SIMULTANEOUS EQUATION ESTIMATION OF AVERAGED FIRST
              DIFFERENCED LABOR SUPPLY EQUATIONS ESTIMATES
                OF I NTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION ELASTICITY
             (absolute values of t-statistics in parentheses)

                                                                                           1
                  Averages
 Estimation       Computed        Averaged                 Averaged
 Procedure          over         D(log wage)            D(log earnings)        Intercept
    2SLS         Entire 8 year      .18                                        -.0095
                                  (1.10)                                      (3.04)
                    period

    2SLS            1968-1975                                .25               —.0086
                                                           (1.8)              (5.06)


         ame R2 for the reduced form for averaged wage and earnings differences
 is .025 and .04 respectively.
           Table I. note b.




                                  TABLE 3

                  SIMULTANEOUS EQUATION ESTIMATION OF
                         FIXED EFFECTS EQUATIONS
            (absolute values of t-statistics in parentheses)


                                                                    C          Intercept

  -.17             -4.69              —18.45                       .0246          7.72
 (1.5)              (1.3)                 (1.01)               (.3)               (56)

  —.10              —   .22                -.58                 .008              7.61
 (1.6)              (1.6)                 (1.6)                (.25)             (150)

        here is measured in decades and           is   0 when the consumer is 18 years
old (i.e.) t = (consumer's age - 18)110).
                                                              TABLE 4

                                              CROSS SECTION ESTIMATION
                                   (absolute value of t-statistics in parentheses)


Data and
Estimation
       •                                       ff icien
                                         — —Coe———— .     .
                                                       t on 2.n            IV
                                                                                                 —
                                                                                                                  Other InclugedC
Procedure             67      68       69        70       71        72          73      74       75     Pooleda     Variables

Synthetic Cohorts    -.10    -.15     -.18     -.17     -.15       -.13    -.21        -.04    -.04      -.17     Age
      LS            (1.15)   (1.69) (1.91)     (1.82)   (1.51)    (1.87)   (2.84)      (.52)    (.6)    (3.17)

Synthetic Cohorts     .07      .04      .04      .06      .08      -.01    -.06         .11      .05      .06     Age
      LS             (.8)     (.4)     (.4)     (.5)     (.7)      (.1)     (.6)      (1.29)    (.7)    (2.09)

individual Data       .04      .05      .07      .12      .32       .11         .11     .23      .12      .02     Predicted Income
     2SL.S          (.89)    (1.07)   (1.66)   (2.01)   (1.65)    (1.58)   (1.42)     (2,13)   (1.55)    (.8)

Individual Data       .13      .25      .27      .24      .20       .07     -.05        .28    -.07      -.03     Background Variables,
     2SLS            (.5)     (.6)     (.9)     (.6)     (.7)      (.3)     (.3)       (.6)     (.3)     (.2)     Education, and Age

Individual Data       .005   -.06     -.03       .05      .24       .07         .09     .18      .18      .04     Predicted Income,
     251.5           (.07)    (.51)    (.35)    (.8)    (1.32)    (1.14)   (1.3)      (1.8)    (1.9)    (1.03)    Age, and Age Squared

     aEstimates in the pooled column were obtained by estimating equations for 1967-75 by seemingly unrelated regres-
sion techniques for the synthetic cohort models and by 3SLS imposed on the wage coefficients across years for the
other models with an equality constraint.

     bintercept always included.
     CReduced form equations for log wages and earnings include education, education squared) age, age squared,
and background variables.
                                                     TABLE A-i

                                           SAMPLE SUMMARY STATISTICS


                                                          Standard      Minimum   Maximum
Variable Definitions             Variable        Mean                                        Skewness     Kurtosis
                                                          Deviation      Value     Value

                                  W6 7           4.08       2.16          0.75      25.76      2.82         19.42
                                  W68            426        2.18          0.41      21.57      2 .   04      8.94
                                  W69            4.48       2.37          0.22      20.87      2.11          8.45
W(t) = average hourly earnings    W7 0           4.53       2.40          0.34      21.49      1.94          7.04
       in year t                  W7 I           4.60       2.61          0.52      21.49      2.68         13.81
                                  W72            4.80       2.56          0.68      26. 17     1.80          5.71
                                  W73            4.96       2.83          0.68      19.24      2.52         10.55
                                  W74            4.94       2.90          0.71      24.61      2.48         10.08
                                  W75            4.82       2.92          0.31      25.42      2.91         15.22

                                  DW68           0.18       1.20          -5.09      9.12      1.66         13.50
                                  DW6 9          0.22       1.12          -6.24      8.20      0.80         11.07
                                  DW7 0          0.04       1.27         -10.24     10.34     -0.61         20.52
DW(t) = W(t) -       W(t-l)       DW7l           0 .07      1.45          -7.05     15.54      3.43        41,03
                                  EJW7 2         0.19       1.34         -14.06      5.33     -2.57         28.89
                                  0W73           0.15       1.41          -7.56     11.21      1 . 23       14.18
                                  DW7 4         -0.01       1.60          -7.67     10.52      1.50         12.26
                                  DW7 5         -0.12       1.48         —11.08      5.78     -2,04         13.49

                                  N6 7        2392,33     568 . 16       920.00   4368.00      0.97          1.56
                                  N68         2402.14     544.46        1031.99   4560.00      1.03          1.43
                                  N6 9        2363.22     543.38         400.00   4639.99      0.93          2.23
                                  N70         2315.52     522.58         520.00   4339.99      0.78          1.67
N(t) = annual hours worked        N7 1        2324.89     546.10         552.00   4455.00      0.79          1.48
       in year t                  N72         2351. 55    523.09         800.00   4310.00      0.80          1.41
                                  N7 3        2340.83     520.65         600.00   4420.00      1.06          2.14
                                  N74         2289.95     529.57         400.00   4215.00      0.63          1.28
                                  N7 5        2268 . 25   506.19         879.99   4160.00      0.61          1.03

                                  DN6 8          9.81     447.82       -2397.99   1920.00     -0.10         3.83
                                  DN6 9        -38.91     421.21       -2382.00   2186.00     -0.15         4.54
                                  ON 70        -47.69     431.45       -2366.99   1520 .00    -0.41         4.59
                     N(t-1)                               418.12       -1937.99   2660.00      0.62         5.72
DN(t) =   N(t)   -                0N7 1          9.36
                                  DN7 2         26.66     451 . 03     -2030.00   2136.99      0.23         3.89
                                  ON 73        -10.72     447 . 57     -1740.00   2150.00      0.11         3.79
                                  0N74         —50.88     431 . 80     -2508.00   1617.00     -0.51         4.32
                                  DN7S         -21.70     393.13       -2324.99   1324.00     -0.52         3.96
