                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                TAX RULES AND THE MISMANAGEMENT
                      OF MONETARY FLICY



                       Martin   Feldstein



                     Working Paper No. 122




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         January 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER Working Paper #422
                                                     December, 1979



                 Tax Rules and the Mismanagement
                         of Monetary Policy


                             ABSTRACT


     This paper emphasizes the importance of the interaction
between tax rules and the management of monetary policy. The

monetary authorities' failure to recognize the implications of
the tax structure has caused them to underestimate just how expan-

sionary monetary policy has been. Moreover, because of our fiscal

structure, attempts to encourage investment by an easy—money policy
have actually had an adverse impact on investment in plant and

equipment. The paper discusses the desirability of substituting
a policy of tight—money and positive fiscal incentives for the

traditional goals of easy money and fiscal restraint. More generally,
the paper stresses the significance of the fiscal structure as a
determinant of macroeconomic equilibrium.




                                            Martin Feldstein
                                            National Bureau of
                                            Economic Research
                                            1050 Mass. Avenue
                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                            (617) 868—3905
               Tax Rules and the Mismanagement of Monetary Policy

                               Martin Feldstein*


        It is now widely agreed that the mismanagement of monetary policy

over the past 15 years has been a major cause of our current obstinately

high rate of inflation. I believe that an important source of this rne—

tary mismanagement has been the failure of the monetary authorities (and of

economists in general) to understand how the interaction between inflation

and our tax rules influences the effects of monetary policy.

        Morespecifically, as I shall explain in the present paper, I
believe that the monetary authorities' failure to recognize the implica-
tions of   the fiscal structure has caused them to underestimate just how

expansionary monetary policy has been. Moreover, because of our fiscal

structure, attempts to encourage investment by an easy—money policy have

actually had an adverse impact on investment in plant and equipment. The

conventional    prescription of "easy money and a tight fiscal position" has
been   an unfortunate guide for macroeconomic policy. The switch to floating
exchange   rates and the relaxation of some of   the old restrictions on finan-
cial institutions have made it even more important to reject this conven.-

tional prescription and to pursue instead a policy mix of "tight money and

positive fiscal incentives".


I. Misjudging Monetary Tightness

          During the dozen years after the 1951 accord between the Treasury
                                        —2—


and the Fed, the interest rate on Baa      bonds   varied only in the narrow range

between 3 1/2 percent and 5 percent. In contrast, the past 15 years have

seen the Baa rate rise from less than 5 percent in 19614 to more than 10

percent at the beginning of 19T9. It is perhaps not surprising therefore

that the monetary authorities, other government officials, and many private

economists have worried throughout this period that interest rates might

be getting      "too high".   Critics of what was perceived as "tight money"

argued   that    such high interest rates would reduce investment and therefore

depress   aggregate demand.
         Against    all this it could be argued, and was argued,   that the real
interest rate had obviously gone up much less. The correct measure of the

real interest rate is of course the difference between the nominal interest

rate and the rate of inflation that is expected over the life of the bond.

A common rule of thumb approximates the expected future inflation by the

average inflation rate experienced during the preceding three years. In

19614, when the Baa rate was 14.8 percent, this three—year rise in the GNP

deflator averaged 1.14 percent; the implied real interest rate was thus 3.14

percent. By the beginning of 1969, when the Baa rate was 10.0 percent, the

rise in the GNP deflator for the previous 3 years had increased to 6.2 per-

cent, implying a real interest rate of 3.8 percent. Judged in this way,

the cost of credit has increased only slightly over the 15 year period.

          All of this ignores the role of taxes. Since interest expenses can

 be deducted by individuals and businesses in calculating taxable income,

 the net—of—tax interest cost is very much less than the interest rate
                                       —3—




itself.    Indeed, since the nominal interest expense can be deducted, the

real net—of—tax interest cost has actually varied inversely with the nomi-

nal rate of inflation. What appears to have been a rising interest rate

over the past 15 years was actually a sharply falling rei after—tax cost

of funds. The failure to recognize the rol" i taxes prevented the mone-

tary authorities from seeing how expansionary monetary policy had become.

          The implication of tax decutibility is seen most easily in the case

of owner—occupied housing. A married couple with a $30,000 taxable income

now has a. marginal federal income tax rate of 37 percent. The 10 percent

mortgage rate in effect at the beginning of 1979 implied a net—of—tax cost

of funds of 6.3    percent.   Subtracting the 6.2 percent estimate of the rate

of inflation leaves a real net—oftax cost of funds of only 0.1 percent. By

comparison, the 1.8    percent   interest rate for 196I translates into a 3.0

percent net—of—tax rate and a 1.6 percent real net—of—tax cost of funds.

Thus, although the nominal interest rate had more than doubled and the real

interest rate had also increased, the relevant net—of—tax real cost of

funds had actually fallen from 1.6 percent to only 0.1 percent.

           As this example shows, taking the effects of taxation into account

is particularly important because the tax rules are so non—neutral when

there is inflation. If the tax rules were completely indexed, the effect

of the tax system on the conduct of monetary policy would be much less

significant. But with existing tax rules, the movements of the pretax real

interest rate and of the after—tax real interest rates are completely dif—
                                          —it—




ferent. I think that monetary policy in the last decade was overly expan-

sionary because the monetary authorities and others believed that         the cost
of funds   was   rising   or steady when in fact it was falling   significantly.
         The fall in the real after—tax interest rate has caused a rapid
increase in the price of houses relative to the general price level (see

e.g., Hendershott and Hu, 1979) and has sustained a high rate of new resi-

dential construction. There were, of course, times when the ceilings on

the interest rates that financial institutions could pay          caused disinter—

mediation   and limited the funds available for housing. To that extent, the

high level of nominal interest rates restricted the supply of funds at the

same time that the corresponding low real after—tax interest cost increased

the demand    for   funds. More recently, the raising of certain interest rate

ceilings and the development of mortgage—backed bonds that can short—

circuit the disintermediation process have made the supply restrictions

much less important and have therefore made any interest level more expan-

sionary that it otherwise would have been.

           The low real after tax rate of interest has also encouraged the

growth   of consumer credit and the purchase of consumer durables. More
generally,    even households that do not itemize their tax deductions are

affected by the low real after—tax return that is available on savings.

Because individuals pay       tax   on nominal interest income, the real after—tax

 rate of return on saving has become negative. It seems very likely that

 this substantial fall in the real return on savings has contributed to the
                                             —5—


fall in the personal saving rate and the rise in consumer deniand.-

        For corporate borrowers, the analysis is nre complex because inflatiQn

changes the effective tax rate on investits as well as the real net—of—tax

interest rate. More specifically, historic cost depreciation and inventory

accounting rules reduce substantially the real after—tax return on corporate in-

vestments (see Feldstein and Sununers, 1979). An easy—money policy raises the

demand for corporate capital only if the real net cost of funds falls by more

than the return that firms can af fort to pay. This balance between the lower

real net interest cost and the lower real net return on investment depends on

the corporation's debt—equity ratio and on the difference between the real

yields that must be paid on   debt   and   on equity   funds. It   is difficult to say
just what has happened on balance. In a preliminary study, Lawrence Summers and
I concluded that the rise in the nominal interest rate caused by inflation was
slightly less than the rise in the maximum interest rate that firms could afford
to pay (Feldstein and Sunnners,   1978).     However, this analysis made no allowance

for the effect of inventory taxation or for the more complex effects of infla-

tion on equity yields that I have more recently investigated (Feldstein, 1979a).

My current view is that on balance monetary policy reduced the demand for busi-

ness investment at the same time that it increased the demand for residential

 investment and for consumption goods.

         It is useful to contrast the conclusion of this section with the con-

 ventional Keynesian wisdom. According to the traditional view, monetary expansion
                                     —6—

lowers interest rates which reduces the cost of funds to investors and therefore

encourages the accumulation of plant and equipment. This statement is wrong in

three ways. First, a sustained monetary expansion raises nominal interest

rates. Second, although the interest rate ir higher, the real net—of—tax cost

of funds is lower. And, third, the lower cost of funds produced in this way

encourages investment in housing and consumer durables (as well as greater con-

sumption in general) rather than more investment in plant and equipment.

II. The Correct Mix of Monetary and Fiscal Policies

        There is widespread agreement on two central goals for macroeconomic

policy: (1) achieving a level of aggregate demand that avoids both unemployment

and inflation, and (2) increasing the share of national income that is devoted

to business investment. Monetary and fiscal policy provide two instruments with

which to achieve these two goals. The traditional view of the effect of monetary

policy has led to the conventional prescription of easy money (to encourage in-

vestment) and a tight fiscal policy (to limit demand).

         This policy mix could in principle achieve its two goals. A government

surplus would permit a reduction in the supply of government liabilities

(money and bonds) and would thereby facilitate increased capital accumulation.

The required change in the interest rate would depend on the relative interest

sensitivities of the market demand for bonds and money. In the likely

case in which the demand for money is relatively inelastic, the government surplus

must be accompanied by a lower rate of interest and the substitution of real

capital for government bonds..2
                                       —7—


        Unfortunately, the traditional prescription of easy money and a tight

fiscal position is almost bound to fail in practice because of the political

difficulty of achieving and maintaining a government surplus. During the past

twenty years, there have not been any two successive years in which the federal

government budget shoved a surplus.   As a result, the pursuit of an easy money

                                               inflationary increase in the money
policy has produced inflation. Although ..ne

supply did reduce the real after—tax cost of funds, this only diverted the flow

of capital away from investment in plant and equipment and into owner—occupied

housing and consumer durables. By reducing the real net return to savers, the
                                      reduced the total amount of new saving.
easy money policy has probably also

         The inappropriateness of the traditional policy mix reflects not only

its overoptimistic view about the feasibility of government surpluses but also

its overly narrow conception of the role of fiscal policy.    In the current

macroeconomic tradition, fiscal policy has been almost synonymous with

variations in the net government surplus or deficit and has generally ignored

 the potentially powerful incentive effects of taxes that influence marginal pri-

 ces.

          A more appropriate policy mix for achieving the dual goals of balanced

 demand and increased business investment would combine a tight—money policy and

 fiscal incentives for investment and saving. A tight—money policy would prevent

 inflation and would raise the real net rate of interest. Although the higher

 real rate of interest would tend to deter all forms of investment, specific

 incentives for investment in plant and equipment could more than offset the

 higher cost of funds. The combination of the higher real net interest rate and
                                             —8—




the targeted investment incentives would restrict housing construction and the

purchase of consumer durables while increasing the flow of capital into new

plant and equipment. Since housing and consumer durables now account for

substantially more than half of the private capital stock, such a restructuring

of the investment mix could have a substantial favorable effect on the stock of

plant and equipment.

           A rise in the overall saving rate would permit a greater increase in

business investment. The higher real net rate of interest would in itself tend

to induce such a higher rate of saving. This could be supplemented by explicit

fiscal policies that      reduced   the tax rate on interest income and other income

from   saving.
           Switching   from an easy money policy to a policy mix with high real interest
rates would have a further advantage. Because of the current system of floating
exchange rates, a rise in the real interest rate would cause an appreciation        of the

dollar   which would in turn reduce the price level directly      (see e.g., Dornbusch and

Krugman,    1977). With less than perfect international capital mobility, higher
interest    rates could persist and would tend to attract some inflow of foreign capiti

that would further augment investment in the United States.


III. Macroeconomic Importance of the Fiscal Structure

            The misjudgement of monetary tightness and the advocacy of an

inappropriate policy mix suggest the importance of recognizing that the fiscal

structure of our        econonr is a key determinant of the macroeconomic

equilibrium and therefore of the effect of monetary policy. Conventional
                                          —9—



                                                                        that all
macroeconomic analyses that ignore the fiscal structure (or that assume
taxes are equivalent to lump suni taxes) can be seriously misleading.3 The fact

that the real interest rate can simultaneously rise on a pretax basis and fall

on a net—of—tax basis shows that fiscal efects with the existing U.S. tax law

are qualitatively as well as quantitatively important.

           The common tendency to ignore the tax structure in macroeconomic analy-

sis is due at least in part to the fact that taxes were much less important at

the time that the current nxdels of macroeconomic analysis were developed. When

Keynes' General Theory was first published, less than five percent of American

families were affected by the income tax and the median tax rate among those who

paid tax was less than five percent. The greater current significance of the

the   fiscal structure reflects not only the growth of the income tax but also the
increased importance of social insurance programs like unemployment insurance
and social security.
           The tax structure is particularly important as a cause of the macroeco-
nomic non—neutrality of inflation. Irving Fisherts (1930) famous       conclusion

that     inflation raises the nominal interest rate but leaves the real rate

 unchanged is appropriate for an economy with no taxes but not for an economy in

 which nominal interest payments are reflected in income and profits that are

 subject to substantial marginal tax rates. I have shown elsewhere (Feldstein,

 19T6)    that   in an economy with economic depreciation and a 50 percent   tax rate,
                                        —10—




each   on percent increased in the inflation rate raises the nominal interest rate
by two percent. With other depreciation rules, the effect of the inflation rate
on the interest rate can be more than one—to—one or less than one—to—one
(Feldstein, Green and Sheshinski, 1978).

          More   generally, the tax structure determines how inflation influences
the    real values of corporate equities (Feidstein, 1978b, 1979a and Hendershott,

1979) of residential real estate (Hendershott and Hu, 1979), and of such "store

of value" assets as land and gold (Feldstein, 1979b). As Hartrnan (1979) has

shown, the tax rules may also induce international capital flows in response to

changes in inflation that would have no real effect in the absence of taxation.


IV. Some Conclusions

            This paper has emphasized the importance of the fiscal structure as a

determinant of the macroeconomic equilibrium. It discussed the desirability of

substituting a policy of tight money and positive fiscal incentives for the tra-

ditional goals of easy money and fiscal restraint. More specifically, it iden-

tified the failure to recognize the effects of the tax rules as an important

reason for the mismanagement of monetary policy. Although the guidance of

shortrun monetary policy may now give more weight to controlling the money

supply and credit aggregates, interest rates will almost certainly continue to

influece the determination of longer—term      monetary policy. The correct
interpretation     of the relation between interest rates and inflation therefore

remains important and will become even more important if the authorities attempt

to shift to a policy of tighter money and an altered tax structure.
                                      —11—


                                 Bibliography


Boskin, Michael, J.,, "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of

        Political Economy, 86, No. 2, Part 2 (April 1978), S3-S27.

Dornbusch, Rudiger and P. Krugman, "Flexible Exchange Rates in the Short Run,"

         Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 1976, 537-584.

Feldstein, Martin, "Inflation, Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest: Theoretical

        Analysis," American Economic Rev3w, Vol. 66, No.      5,   December 1966,

         809-820.

                     "The Rate of Return, Taxation, and Personal Saving,"

         Economic Journal, Vol.88, No. 351, September, l978a, 482-487.

                     "Inflation and the Stock Market," American Economic Review,

         (1978b),

_________________"Inflation, Tax Rules, and the Stock Market," NBER Working

         Paper Series, No. 403 (1979a).

_________________"The Effect of Inflation on the Prices of Land and Gold,"

         NBER Working Paper Series, No. 296 (l979b).

                    "Fiscal Policies, Inflation and Capital Formation," American

         Economic Review, (1980).

_________________,    J.   Green and E. Sheshinski, "Inflation and Taxes in a Growing

         Economy with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal of Political Economy,

         86, No. 2, Part 2 (April 1978), S53-S70.

                     and L. Summers, "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Long-Term

         Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1978, 61-100.

_________________________________      "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital Income

         in the Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal, forthcoming.

Hartinan, David, "Taxation and tie Effects of Inflation on the Real Capital Stock

         in an Open Economy," International Economic Review, Vol.20, No.2,

         June 1979, 417-425.
                                    —12—




Hendershott, Patric, "The Decline in Aggregate Share Values:    Inflation and
         Taxation of the Returns from Equities and
                                                     Owlier-Occupied Housing,"

         NBER Working Paper Series, No. 370, 1979.

_____________________ and Sheng Cheng Hu, "Inflation and the Benefits from
                                                                           Owner-

         Occupied Housing," NBER Working Paper Series, No. 383, 1979.

Summers, Lawrence H., "Tax Policy in a Life Cycle Model," NBER Working Paper

         Series, No. 302, 1978, and American Economic Review,
                                                                forthcoming.
                                  —13—


                               Footnotes


*
    Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
paper will be presented at the annual meeting of the American Economic
Association on December 28, 1979. The views expressed here are the authorTs
and should not be attributed to any organization.

1Although the response of household saving to even a compensated change
in the interest rate is theoretically ambiguous (Feldstein, 1978A), plausible
parameter values and some econometric evdence support a positive saving
elasticity (Boskin, 1978; Summers, 1979).

2See Feldstein (1980) for a formal model of the relation of fiscal policy,
monetary policy and capital formation in a fully—employed economy.

3lgnoring the tax structure is analagous to ignoring the international
aspects of domestic economic equilibrium; there are issues for which both
taxes and international aspects can be ignored but there are others for
which doing so would be very inappropriate.
