                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            RISK SHIFTING, UNE!'1PLOYM'TT INSURANCE,
                            AND LAYOFFS




                     Herschel   I. Grossman



                     Working Paper No. h21.




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         January 1980




Presented at Conference on the Labour Market, sponsored by
Treasury, Department of Etiployment, and Manpower Services
Commission, at Magdalen College, Oxford, September 10—12, 1979.
The National Science Foundation and the John Simon Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation have supported this research. Dale Mortensen
gave me a number of useful suggestions. This paper will appear in
the forthcoming volume, The Economics of the Labour Market, (HMSO,
London). The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and, not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #424
                                                     December, 1979



                   Risk Shifting, Unemployment
                     Insurance, and Layoffs

                           ABSTRACT

     This paper develops an analysis of labor markets in which

the use of layoffs to effect employment separations does not
imply that markets fail to clear or that the amount of employment

is suboptimal relative to current perceptions. This analysis focuses
on the interaction between contractual arrangements for shifting
risk from workers to employers and tax—financed unemployment insurance.

The key element in the analysis is that unemployment insurance is

more attractive than risk shifting as a way for workers to obtain

income during unemployment. The paper also analyses the effects
of risk shifting and unemployment insurance on the magnitude of

employment fluctuations. The analysis implies that, given the
existence of unemployment insurance, the existence of risk—shifting
arrangements makes employment less variable.




                                      Professor Herschel I. Grossman
                                      Department of Economics
                                      Brown University
                                      Providence, RI 02912
                                      (401) 863—2606
 1.   A Market-Clearing Model of Layoffs

      The observation that cyclical fluctuations in real
 variables such as   aggregate employment appear to reflect
 predominately the effects of changes in aggregate demand
 for output poses two critical questions for macroeconomics.
 First, what are the causes of fluctuations in aggregate
 demand? Second, why do these fluctuations produce cycles in
 real variables, rather than being absorbed by price and
 wage adjustments as would be the case in a Wairasian model
 of general equilibrium?

     A broad concensus, which emerged at least a decade ago, seems
presently   to    prevail about the many issues associated
with the first question, concerned with the determinants
of aggregate demand. For example, there seems to be little
active current discussion about the relative influence that
monetary factors, fiscal actions, and endogenous phenomena
have on aggregate demand.   Recent years, however, have
'seen intense research interest and associated controversy
 directed towards the second question, concerned with
identifying the characteristics of the actual economy that
are responsible for the non—Wairasian responses of real
variables to cycles in aggregate demand.

     One popular approach, describable as Keynesian,
has been to attribute the causal relation between aggregate
demand and aggregate employment to a failure of wages and
prices to adjust to equate quantities demanded and supplied
in labor and product markets. An essential aspect of this
interpretation of the process of employment fluctuation is
that a contraction in employment resulting from a reduction
in aggregate demand involves a situation inwhich perceived
gains from trade are foregone. A frequent criticism of
this non-market-clearing paradigm has been that the theoretical
development in the existing literature provides no convincing
rationale, based on neoclassical premises, for such a persistent
                            —2—
failure to realize perceived gains from   trade.   For example, in the
book by Barro and myself, the determination of the vector of wages
and prices at which buyers and sellers are constrained to transact
is based on ad hoc gradual adjustment processes. The choice—
theoretic analysis is concerned mainly with the implications of
such essentially arbitrarily specified wage—price vectors for
the determination of employment. Some other models rationalize
gradual wage and price adjustment on the basis of adjustment costs,
which is logically adequate, but convincing stories about the
precise nature of these costs do not seem to exist.
      Despite this problem, the non-market-clearing paradigm
has remained popular primarily because it has seemed to be
realistic. The analysis in the present paper questions
the accuracy of this impression. It suggests that the prevalence
of layoffs as a mode of employment separation does not provide
evidence of chronic failure of labor markets to clear and
that the conventional view that in cyclical
contractions workers typically confront excess supply in
labor markets and are unable to obtain desired employment
may involve a misinterpretation of the facts.
     The basis for this revisionist argument is the recent
theoretical development of the hypothesis that actual
labor market transactions typically involve implicit contractual
arrangements that stabilize worker income by shifting risk
from workers to employers. This hypothesis suggests the
possibility of rationalizing stickiness of wage rates and
explaining the alleged symptoms of non—wage rationing of employ-
ment, such as layoffs, without invoking the failure of markets
to clear.

     The main specific objective of the present paper is to
develop an analysis of labor markets in which the use of
layoffs to effect employment separations does not imply that
the amount of employment is suboptimal relative to current
                              —3—
 perceptions.   This analysis suggests that the non—Wairasian causal
 relation between aggregate demand and aggregate employment results
 not from the failure of markets to clear, but from misperceptions
of the terms of trade between labor services and consumption goods,
as hypothesized by Friedman (1968), Lucas (1975), and others, and
 integrated into a model of risk shifting by Azariadis (1968).
Having focussed on these alternative explanations, it is worth
stressing that non—walrasjan fluctuations in.employment in either
case are wasteful and undesirable, whether they result from the
failure to realize perceived gains from trade or from the failure
to perceive gains from trade correctly.
     The risk—shifting hypothesis plays a critical part in the
present analysis, but by itself does not provide a full account
within a market-clearing framework of the diverse phenomena as-
sociated with layoffs. An adequate analysis of layoffs seems to
require, in addition, explicit allowance for the consequences of
tax—financed unemployment insurance.
     A   second specific Objective of this paper is to use the
model that   incorporates both risk shifting and unemployment
insurance to reconsider previous analysis of the effects of
risk shifting on the magnitude of employment fluctuations. The
present analysis shows that the quantitative effects of risk
shifting and unemplcymentinsurance are not additive.   When analyzed
separately, both risk—shifting arrangements and unemployment insurance
seem to magnify employment fluctuations by increasing the respon-
siveness of labor supply to shifts in labor's perceived real
compensation. However, in the analysis below, the introduction
of risk shifting into a model that allows for unemployment
insurance has the Opposite effect of reducing employment fluctuations.
                           —4-

2.   Layoffs as a Mode of Employment Separation

     Before reviewing recent analyses of risk shifting and
unemployment insurance, it will be useful to have clearly in
mind the characteristics of layoffs as a mode of employment
separation. Layoffs involve the following four phenomena:
(P1) Employers follow the administrative procedure of
assigning workers to the status of unemployment. Thus, the
term "layoff" in the present discussion refers broadly to
any separation, i.e., suspension or termination of   employ-
ment, that the employer initiates. In other words, the
status of being laid off denotes a proximately passive role
for the worker in becoming unemployed. For simplicity, the
analysis below also implicitly assumes that a worker who is
laid off is available to return to work whenever his employer
        him. HoweverehdIg th.e na1ysis to allow workers
to choose to change jobs would not alter the   main conclusions.
(P2) When employers lay off some workers, presumably indicating
a decrease in the demand for labor services, they typically do
not reduce wage rates for those other workers who continue
to be employed. This practice seems inconsistent with the
neoclassical inclination to view wage rates as changing to
equate quantities of labor services supplied and demanded.

(P3) Workers who are laid off usually receive no income from
their employers. In this respect, a layoff is not different
from other modes of job separation.

(P4) Employers typically use seniority classifications to
determine which workers are laid off. In practice, a worker's
seniority classification depends mainly on his length of
service with a particular employer, but can also depend on
other factors, a frequent one being his age. As the following
discussion indicates, rationalizations for (P1) and (P4) have
not been hard to invent, but no single approach has been able
to account readily for both (P2) and (P3)
                              —5—

 3.   Suirirnary of Recent Literature

      The essential idea in the theory of risk shifting in labor
markets is that a systematic difference between firms and their
workers with regard to risk aversion leads to long—term
commitments in which the firms absorb risk that would otherwise
be borne by the workers. These commitments imply that actual
relations between firms and workers implicitly involve two
transactions. First, firms purchase from workers labor
services for use in the production process and, second, firms
sell to workers private insurance against undesirable income
fluctuations. Workers engage in these transactions jointly
with a single firm, instead of selling labor services to
one firm and buying insurance from another, because the
                                                          -
 production relation between firms and workers mitigates the
 problems of monitoring and enforcement that arise in the
 insurance relation. As a result of these contractual
arrangements, a worker's wage income equals either the value of
his marginal contribution to output minus an implicit insurance
premium or the value of his marginal contribution to output
plus an implicit insurance indemnity, depending on whether
the perceived real value of labor's marginal product, which
is a stochastj variable, is high or low.

     Risk shifting in effect credits part of the value of product
when it is high to an implicit premium that yields an implicit
indemnity when the value of product is low. This arrangement
enables the worker to use product generated in states in
which consumption would otherwise be high to boost consumption
in states in which Consumption would Otherwise be low.
Consequently, risk shifting increases the attractiveness of
working when the value of product is high and decreases the
pressure to work when the value of product is low relative to
what would be the case if income and consumption in each state
were equal to the value of product in that state. This
reasoning explains the result, derived in Azariadis (1978)
and Grossman (1978) , that
                           risk shifting makes the level of
employment more variable.
                          —6—

     Turning to the characteristics of layoffs, the idea that
labor market transactions involve risk shifting has provided
what seems to be the only choice—theoretic explanation for (P2)
the surprising wage rate stickiness associated, with layoffs.
The basic observation is that the insurance aspect of labor
contracts serves to stabilize worker income and, thus,
explains why reductions in the quantity of employment typically
do not also involve reductions in wage rates.
     The relation between risk shifting and productive
efficiency also suggests a simple explanation for (P1) , the
administrative proôedures associated with layoffs. Efficiency
requires that a worker be employed in a particular state of
nature if the utility associated with being employed and
receiving the value of his marginal contribution to total
product equals or exceeds the utility associated with
not being employed.   However, with risk shifting in effect,
a worker's wage income does not equal the value of his
marginal contribution to total product. As a result, his
wage income cannot serve, as would the wage rate in a spot
market, to signal the worker as to whether it is efficient
for him to accept or to reject employment. Consequently,
in order to achieve efficiency, the implicit labor contracts
must specify each worker's employment status as a function
of the perceived real value of his marginal product.
Moreover, in order to economize on the costs of acquiring
and processing information, the contracts delegate to the
employer the administrative function of assigning workers
to employment or unemployment.
     Despite the essential nature of these insights, the basic
analysis of risk shifting has the problem that it seems to
imply too much. Specifically, it does not allow for (P3)
                           —7—
and (P4), the failure of employers to provide a constant, fully
insured income for all workers.

     The model in Grossman (1978) attempts to remedy this problem
by allowing for incompleteness and inter—worker differences in
risk shifting. This extended model rationalizes (P4), the role
of seniority in determining the incidence of layoffs by
assuming that worker productivity increases with age and with
length of service with a particular employer. In addition,
in an attempt to account for (P3), the fact that laid-off
workers typically receive no indemnity income from their
employers, this model assumes the worker reliability is related
to seniority. The problem of worker unreliability results
from the possibility that the prospect of short-run gains, when
the value of their marginal contributions to output are high,
can induce workers to quit their jobs. Differences between
more and less senior workers in their reputations for reli—
ability, which relate to their behavior when the perceived real
value of marginal product is high, produce differences in
the terms at which they can obtain income when the perceived
real value of marginal product is low. Specifically, less
senior workers, whose average reliability is low, contract
for less stable incomes.                                      -


    Whatever the actual importance of reliability considera-
tions, the correspondence between the implications of this model
and (P3) is unfortunately less than completely tight.
Specifically, the model provides no reason why lower seniority
classes should purchase from their employer exactly zero
insurance against reduced income in those instances when pro-
ductive efficiency dictates that they be unemployed.
                           —8—

      The effects of tax—financed unemployment insurance on
 the variability of employment are similar to the effects of
 risk shifting. The existence of unemployment insurance increases
the attractiveness of working when the value of product is high
because a worker both earns his wage income and becomes eligible
for unemployment insurance benefits and decreases the
attractiveness of working when the value of product is low
because benefits make unemployment more tolerable.
     With regard to the characteristics of layoffs, the key
characteristics of unemployment insurance are that an unemployed
worker can receive benefits only if his unemployment is
"involuntary" and that the amount of these benefits are reduced
by the amount of any other income that the worker receives
when unemployed. These eligibility rules provide inducements
for (P1), by which firms take proximate responsibility for
job separations, and for (P3), the discontinuance of income
payments by firms to laid off workers. In addition, in this
context, as in the analysis of risk—shifting arrangements,
the association of productivity with seniority can readily
account for (P4), the role of seniority in determining the
incidence of layoffs.

     The existence of unemployment insurance, however, provides
no explanation for P(2), the constancy of wages for employed
workers. Existing theoretical models of the effects of
unemployment insurance——for example, Baily (1977) and
Feldstein (l976)-—simply introduce (P2) as a realistic assump-
tion. However, (P2) is the only qualitative economic feature
of layoffs that is clearly distinctive. In contrast, (P1) is
Only an administrative procedure and (P3) and (P4) are
not peculiar to layoffs as a mode of job separation. Thus,
the inability to account for (P2) is a critical problem.
                            —9—


     Another possible objection to focusing on unemployment
insurance is that the use of the layoff mode to effect
employment separations has not been historically associated with
the advent of the current centrally administered programs of
income maintenance for the unemployed. However, this objection
is not serious if the eligibility rules and financing arrange-
ments of earlier privately and locally administered income-
maintenance programs generated the same incentives as current
programs.

     To summarize, existing analysis suggests that both risk
shifting and tax-financed unemployment insurance increase the
variability of employment. However, neither models of risk
shifting nor models of unemployment insurance can readily explain
the full set of phenomena associated with layoffs as a mode of
employment separation. The following sections show that
analysis of the interaction between risk shifting and unemployment
insurance both alters this conclusion about the effect of risk
shifting on employment fluctuations and also produces a more
Satisfactory theory of layoffs.

4.   Analytical Framework

     The simple economy analyzed in this paper differs from
the setup in Grossman (1978) by allowing for unemployment
insurance but abstracting from reliability considerations. In
this economy, there are two large groups of individuals that
differ in their attitudes to risk. One large group of
identical individuals behaves in a less risk averse, or even
risk neutral, manner. These individuals choose the role of
entrepreneurs, who organize production by forming firms and
employing inputs, including labor services.
                              10 -




      The second large group of individuals behave in a more
 risk averse manner. These individuals choose the role of
 employees, who work for the firms and provide labor services.
 As indicated above, this difference between the attitudes
 toward risk of entrepreneurs and workers provides the basis
 for risk—shifting arrangements.
      The analysis assumes, for simplicity, that all workers
 have the same utility function, and that this utility
 function is additively separable in consumption and the
 amount of time devoted to employment. Consumption here
 refers to consumable commodities purchased in the market place
 and employment refers to working as an employee of a firm.
 Individuals can use time not devoted to employment for home
 production of other consumable commodities.
      The analysis also assumes that labor services are
homogeneous and that each worker has only a single unit of
 time to devote to employment. It would seem fairly straight-
 forward, although not essential for present purposes, to
extend the analysis to take explicit account of variable hours
of work.

     A more important assumption is that individual workers
differ with. respect to the number of units of labor services
that they provide per unit of employment time. The analysis
assumes that the classification of potential workers according
to age and length of service with a particular employer
yields classes of increasing average productivity. It is
convenient to index these seniority classes according to
increasing seniority. Let the nonnegative variable k denote
the average productivity of the th class of workers, where
                                                               k
                                  — 11 —

measures the average number of units of labor services provided
by individuals in this class per unit of employment time.
Thus, the lowest seniority class has the lowest k and the
highest seniority class has the highest k.
        Workers exchange their labor services for consumption goods
through a network of markets. Let w denote the basic real
wage rate, which is the perceived exchange ratio between
consumption goods and a unit of labor services. Changes in w
represent perceived "real" disturbances, which is important
because, as Barro (1977) has stressed, the productive
efficiency of competitively determined contracts implies that
in a contractual labor market, as in a spot market, dis-
turbances percei.ved to be "monetary" would not affect employment.
Competition in the contractual labor market insures that w
equals the perceived value of the marginal product of a unit
of labor services. See Grossman (1978) for a derivation of
this result. Whether or not the relevant perceptions are
accurate does not matter for the present analysis.
     From the standpoint of the workers, the variable w is
stochastic and is determined at periodic intervals by serially
independent drawings from an exogenously determined population.
                                                                     -
The interval between these drawings defines a unit of time.
The population of w is such that

                    w with probability
           w=
                    w with probability ,

where    w2 > w > 0 and           + a. =   1.   Thus, w characterizes a
                1             1      2                2
good state of nature and w characterizes a bad state of nature.
                              1

The assumption that there are only two states is a convenient
simplification. See Grossman (1977) for a more general setup.
In the rest of the paper, the subscripts 1 and 2 denote the
values of each. relevant variable in the two states.
                              — 12 *

     The analysis abstracts from the holding of assets-—including
investment goods, commodity inventories, and financial assets——by
individuals. Allowing for the holding of either real or financial
assets would make the analysis both more realistic and more
complex, but would not seem to change the main conclusions. The
key observation in this context is that, because the accumulation
of assets involves foregoing consumption and because the
probability is always positive that the next state will be
bad, optimal worker or firm asset management would not involve
using stocks of assets to achieve complete stability of worker
Consumption.

5.   Employment Without Risk Shifting and Without Unemployment
     Insurance

     In order to appreciate the significance of risk shifting
and unemployment insurance and their interaction, this section
begins the analysis by abstracting from these arrangements.
This section and the next section, which allows for risk
shifting, review relevant aspects of the analysis presented
in Grossman (1978) .   Subsequent sections extend the analysis
to consider unemployment insurance and the interaction between
risk shifting and unemployment insurance.

     As indicated above, competition generates a vector of
basic real wage rates, denoted by (w,w), that are equal to
the perceived value of the marginal product of a unit of labor
services. Noreover, the standard theory of human capital
tells us that in the present context, which among other things
abstracts from training costs, employers could not take
advantage of the firm specificity of their senior workers'
productivity without impairing their-long-run ability to
attract employees. Consequently, income possibilities for
workers in the th class in the two possible states of nature
are w k. and w k..
     12.      21
     Given these income possibilities, each worker selects the
vector of employment and wage income that maximizes his
                                                           — 13 —

 expected utility. In formulating this problem, the present
 analysis assumes that workers take a myopic view that abstracts
 from the dependence of productivity on the length of service.
 Thus, suppressing the subscript 1, the worker's implicit problem
 is to choose the vector (2. ,2. ,12 ,12 ), where 2. measures units
                                2   1  2          .1



of employment time and                       12 measures wage income, so as to
maximize

     ECu—v) = a [u(.c ) —                    v(2 1 )]               + a (u(c ) — v(2.               )]
                    1           1                                      2       2                2

where c measures worker consumption, u(•) is increasing and
concave, and v(.) is increasing and convex, subject to the
constraints,

         2. ={O,1},
          1
                                    2.
                                         2
                                             =         {o,i}, c =       1
                                                                               12
                                                                                    1
                                                                                        ,   c =
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                             ,



         121 =wk2. ,
                    1   1
                                    and                12
                                                        2
                                                          =wkL
                                                                    2   2


These constraints say that in each state consumption equals
wage income and that wage income equals either the product of
the basic wage rate and productivity if the worker chooses
employment or zero if he chooses unemployment.

     Depending on a1 , a2 , w , w , and k, the solution to -
                                                       1        2

this problem can prescribe for a particular worker employment
either in both states, only in the good state, or in neither
state. In choosing among these options, the worker selects
the largest of the following possible values of E(u—v):
For employment in both states,
     E(u-v) = a u(w k) + a u(w k) -
               1            1                 2             2
                                                                        v(l)            A(1,l).

For employment only in the good state,
     E(u—v) = a u(O) + a u(w k) — a v(O) — a v(l)
               .1       2   2      1        2
                                                                                                         A(O,1)

For employment in neither state,
    E(u—v) = u(O) — v(O)                      E        A(O,O)
                             — 14 —

     Comparison of these expected values reveals the following:

     A(l,l) is largest iff wk > z,
     A(O,l) is largest if f w k < z < w k, and
                                 1             2

     A(O,O) is largest iff           z > wk,

where z satisfies u(z) = u(O)        —   v(O) + v(l)
This solution implies that a worker desires employment in a
particular state of nature if his possible income in that
state is sufficiently high to make the net utility associated
with. being employed and consuming this income at least as
large as the net utility associated with not being employed
and not consuming market goods.

     The determination of which classes of workers are
employed in each state of nature requires assumptions about
the distribution of the k1. Specifically, if ka is such
that w k =   z   and k , where
       2a             b          b > a,      is such that w k =
workers in class b and higher classes are employed in      both
states of nature and workers in classes a through b—i      are
employed only in the good state of nature. Individuals     whose
productivity is less than ka are not employed in either    state.

     An important aspect of this analysis that ignores risk
shifting and unemployment insurance is that the basic wage rate
varies from state to state in such a way that, in any state of
nature in which a worker is employed, his income is equal to
the value of his marginal contribution to output. Thus, each
worker's income and consumption, whether or not he is employed
in both states, is lower in the bad state than in the good state.
In addition, the basic wage rate in each state of nature,
which together with his productivity determines his potential
income in each state, signals the worker as to whether or not
the utility associated with being employed and receiving
the value of his marginal contribution to output in that state
equals or exceeds the utility associated with not being
                            — 15 —

 employed.   In other words, the active decisions of workers to
 accept or reject employment lead to productive efficiency.
 Consequently, there is no need for the labor contracts to
specify each worker's employment status as a function of the
state of nature and, hence, no need for employers to take on
the administrative task of assigning workers to employment or
unemployment. In this context, adjustments in employment
reflect solely wage—induced movements along the supply
schedule of labor services and, except for the relation
between employment and seniority, exhibit none of the
characteristics associated with layoffs.

     The observation that each worker, whether he is employed
in both. states or only in the good state, has higher consumption
in the good state than in the bad state also suggests that
the labor market in this analysis does not share risk in an
efficIent way. Specifically, the risk averse workers would
prefer more predictable and stable consumption and the less risk-
averse firms might be prepared to offer their workers a more
predictable and stable income schedule.

6.   Risk Shifting

      This section introduces risk shifting, but continues to
abstract from unemployment insurance. Risk shifting allows -
each. worker's wage income in a particular state of nature to
differ from the value of his marginal contribution to output
in that state. As a result, efficient risk shifting can
produce increased expected utility for the workers while at
the same time producing an increase or no decrease in expected
utility for the entrepreneurs.
     Competition in the market for labor contracts that implicitly
involve risk shifting generates, in addition to the basic real
wage rates, an exchange ratio, denoted by p, at which workers
give up income in the good state in return for income in the
bad state. Risk shifting in effect provides the worker with
additional income in state one equal to (2 —   wkL)   in exchange
                                                              —16 —

for   a reduction in income in state two equal to (w ki —
                                                                                         2   2   2

The price of risk shifting, p, is the ratio of the expected
value of the reduction, a (w k2. -
                          2  2  2   2
                                            the expected                    c ), to
value of the addition, a (                                        — w k2. ).
                                                      1       1         1   1

     A hypothetical value of p equal to unity would
characterized an actuarially "fair" price for risk shifting
and would imply that workers could obtain a constant income
at no cost to themselves in average income.   Actually,
we seem to observe that risk shifting reduces but does
not eliminate income variability, even for workers who
are employed in all states of nature. Specifically,
although wage rates are sticky, they are not fixed. In
addition, although not explicitly modelled in this paper,
worker incomes vary with changes in hours of work.
      These observations suggest that in fact p exceeds
unity, but is not so large as to make risk shifting unattrac-
tive.    According to the analysis in Grossman (1977; 1978)
a value of p above unity implies either that entrepreneurs
are iisk averse, or that w is much. larger than w, or that
workers sometimes behave unreliably.

     With risk shifting, the worker's problem is to choose
the vector (2. ,2. ,c ,c ) so as to maximize E(u—v) , subject to
                  2-12  2
the constraints

          2. ={O,i},                             2. =CO,1},
                                                  2
                                             =
           1

          c =
           1                1
                                ,   c
                                         2        2
                                                      ,           and

          pa (.c2               -w       k2. )    =a          (w k2.        -       ).
               1        1            1       1            2        2    2       2


This last constraint describes the terms of risk shifting.
For example, for the special case of p equal to unity, it
would say that the worker can exchange with his employer
income in the good state for income in the bad state subject
only to the condition that the expected value of his income
                                       — 17

 equals the expected value of his marginal contribution to
 output, which is equivalent to the expected value of the
 product of the basic wage rate, his productivity index, and
 his employment status.

       We can describe the solution to this problem in two
parts. One part says that, given his choice of employment in
each. state of nature, the worker allocates his income between
the two states to satisfy the first-order condition

           u'Cc )
                    1
                        = put(c 2 ),
where u'(.•).is the marginal utility function. For the
special case of p equal to unity, this condition would imply
that the worker sets 2 equal to 2 , so that c equals c
                               1                .2          1          2
which means that his consumption is perfectly stable and
predictable.

       To obtain solutions for                 and 22 for the case of p
                                           1


greater than unity, consider a family of u(c) functions that
exhibit constant relative risk aversion. The members of this
family are u =          (.l-r)             for r     1 and u =   ln   c for
r =   1,where r measures relative risk aversion.                  For this
family, the above first—order condition becomes

                =   l/r ,
which, when substituted into the constraints,               implies

                =
                    pctwk.
                      11 1 +cwk2.
                             22 2
           1
                        pcL+p l/r
                    l/r
                                       2
and             =
           2



     The second part of the solution to the worker's problem
says that, given thecrjterjon for allocation of consumption
between the two states, the worker determines his employment
                                      — 18 —

in   each. state. Depending now on ct, a, w, w, k, and p,
the worker again can choose employment in both states, only in
the good state, or in neither state. In deciding among
these options, the worker now selects the largest of the
following possible values of E(u-v):
For employment in both states,

                      pctwk+ciwk                                pcLwk+wk
  E(u—v) =       u(
                        11      2        + a
                                               2
                                                       U(Pl/r
                                                                    1       i        2   —   v(l)   S(.i,l
             1
                      pa ÷p   a

For employment only in the good state,
                        awk
                         2                                   22
  E(u—v) = a u(         2l'r ) + a 2 u(                                     ) — a v(O) — a v(l)
             1
                  pa1 + p / a 2                         1
                                                            + L/r       2
                                                                                 1           2



             E    S(O,l).
For employment in neither state,
      E(u—v) = u(O) — v(O)            S(O,O).

      In corttparing the worker's options with and without risk
shifting, observe that S(O,O) is identical to A(O,O), but that
concavity of u() implies that S(O,l) is larger than A(O,i)
and that S(.l,l) is larger than A(l,l). Moreover, concavity
of u(•) also implies that the value of wk that is necessary
and sufficient for S(l,l) to be larger than S(O,l) is larger
than z and is an increasing function of wk.
     These results mean that risk shifting increases the
range of combinations of w k and w k for which the worker
                              1             2

chooses employment only in the good state and decreases the
ranges of combinations of w k and w k for which the worker
                                  1                2
chooses employment in both states and neither state.
Because risk shifting allows the worker to use the value of
his marginal contribution to output in the good state to
supplement his actual income and consumption in the bad state,
the value of working in the good state is larger and he
                             — 19 —

desires   not to be employed in the good state only if wk is
sufficiently less than z. In addition, because risk shifting
allows the worker to consume market goods in the bad state
without working in the bad state, h.e desires to be employed in
the bad state as well as in the good state only if wk is
sufficiently more than z. Moreover, the larger is wk, the
larger has to be wk for the worker to desire employment in
both states.

     As before, the determination of which workers are employed
in each state of nature depends on the distribution of the k.
Again, the higher productivity classes of workers choose
contracts that specify employment in both states of nature,
whereas lower productivity classes of workers choose contracts
that specify employment only in the good state of nature, and
the lowest productivity individuals are not employed in
either state of nature. However, this analysis confirms that
with. risk, shifting fewer classes of workers are employed in
both. states of nature and more classes of workers are employed
in at least one state of nature. Both of these changes mean
that more individuals now experience variable employment.

     The most important implication of this section relating
to phenomena associated with layoffs is that risk shifting
gives all workers, including those who are employed in both
states or only one state, less variable wage income. In
addition, as noted above, an essential consequence of the
shifting of risk from workers to firms is that a worker's
contractual income does not equal the value of his marginal
contribution to total product, and, hence, it does not serve,
as would the wage rate in a spot auction market, to signal
the worker as to whether or not it is efficient for him to
accept employment. Thus, this analysis confirms that allowing
for risk shifting readily accounts for (P1) and (P2) and is
consistent with (P4) , but that the implications of risk
shifting at the same time seem to be inconsistent with (P3),
                                — 20 —

 the fact that workers who are laid off usually receive no income
 from their employer.

 7.    Unemployment Insurance
      This section introduces tax—financed unemployment
 insurance, but abstracts from risk shifting. The analysis
 assumes that the unemployment insurance works as follows:
 A fund is financed by taxes and pay benefits to unemployed
 workers. The net transactions of this fund are the only
 difference between the aggregate value of current consumption
 and the aggregate value of current output. Only workers
 who are not proximately responsible for the change in their
 own status from employed to unemployed can receive benefits.
 Use of the administrative procedure. (P1) satisfies this
 restriction.

       The amount of the benefits received by an unemployed
worker depends directly on his earnings when employed.
—For the United States, the average replacement ratio of
 benefits, which until recently have not been taxable, to
 after—tax income seems to be slightly larger than one—
half——Feldstejn (1978) .   For simplicitly, the analysis assumes
that average and marginal replacement ratios are equal.
However, the analysis specifies that the amount of benefits
would be reduced by the amount of any income that the
unemployed worker received from his usual employer. This
provision is apparently realistic and is crucial for the
interaction, analyzed in the next section, between unrnp1oyment
insurance and risk shifting.

     For unemployment insurance to be actuarially "fair,"
the expected value of the taxes effectively paid to the
unemployment insurance fund by each worker would have to equal
the expected value of the net benefits he receives from the
fund. It is possible that such an outcome would obtain if
there were full experience rating in the calculation of each
                                                              —21—
 firm's contribution to the fund and benefits were taxed like
 other income. Actual unemployment insurance does not satisfy
 these conditions and apparently is actuarially favorable to
 workers who receive positive benefits and actuarially
 unfavorable to workers who do not receive benefjts——Feldstejn
 (1976). For simplicity, the analysis abstracts from taxes,
 except for the financing of the unemployment insurance
 fund.


 (p,,
        1

COnstraints
            , ,c
             2  1
                   ,
             The worker's problem now is to choose the vector
                   2
                     ) so as to maximize E(u-v), subject to the



                       1
                           =   {o,i},                 2
                                                          =   {0,l},
                   c       = tl—T)2               +   b, c =
                       1                      1                     (l—r)Q 2
                   2
                       1
                           =wk, 2 2=wki,
                                1        1                      2   2



                   b =
                               B,    2
                                                  if £2 =1 and .Q =0
                                                                1

                                    0,   -
                                              otherwise,

                   T       =
                               g,            if    b=0
                               h,         otherwise,

where r is the effective tax rate on wage income for the
unemployment insurance fund and b is the amount of the
unemployment benefit. According to these specificatjois, if
an individual works only in the good                                     state, b equals 2
and r equals h. Otherwise, b                                            equals zero and r equals
g. Consumption in state two equals after—tax wage income.
Consumption in state one equals either after—tax wage income
or b.

            Actuarially fair unemployment insurance would have                              g
equal to zero and h equal to act/ct. As suggested above,
                                   — 22 —

it is probably more realistically to suppose that g is
positive and that h. is less than                                  Ia ,       which makes the
                                                               1     2
system actuarially unfavorable to workers who are employed
in both states and actuarially favorable to workers who
are employed only in the good state.
     The net replacement ratio is equal to /(l-h). We
can easily calculate that unemployment insurance that was
actuarially fair and complete, which would mean a net
replacement ratio equal to unity, would have g equal to
zero, h equal to a, and       equal to a.
     Depending now on a , a
                          1    2
                                   ,   w
                                           1
                                               ,   w
                                                       2
                                                           ,       k, g, h, and ,
the solution to the worker's problem again can prescribe
employment either in both states, only in the good state, or
in neither state. In choosing among these options, the
worker now selects the largest of the following possible
values of E(u—v)

For employment in both states,

     E(u—v) =   auf(l—g)wkj+aU((l—g)wk]                                       —   v(1)       1(1,1).

For employment only in the good state,

     E(u—v) = a u(w k) +a u[(l—h)w ki — a v(0) — a v(l)                                                1(0,1).
               1    2     2       2                                       1              2

For employment in neither state,
     E(u—v) = u(.0) —   v(0)       1(0,0).

     In comparing the worker's options with and without
unemployment insurance, observe that 1(0,0) is identical to
A(0,0) and S(0,0), and that, for actuarially fair and
complete unemployment insurance and actuarially fair risk
shifting, 1(0,1) is identical to S(0,l) and larger than
A(0,l) , and 1(1,1) is identical to A(1,1) and smaller than
S(1,1) .  These relations mean that fair and complete unemploy-
ment insurance implies a range of values of w k for which
                                                                                  2

the worker chooses employment in neither state that is the same
                               — 23 —

as with fair risk shifting, a range of combinations of
                                                       w1k and
w 2k for which the worker chooses employment only in the good
state that is larger than with fair risk shifting, and a
range of combinations of w k and w k for which the worker
                           1            2
chooses employment in both states that is smaller than with
fair risk shifting. These results mean that the introduction
of fair and complete unemployment insurance would cause
fewer classes of workers to be employed in neither state
of nature, more classes of workers to be employed in only
one state of nature, and fewer classes to be employed in
both states of nature, and that the latter two effects are
larger than would result from the introduction of fair-
risk shifting.

     Extensions of these results are straightforward.
Given actuarially fair unemployment insurance, making the
net replacement ratio less than unity——which would mean
g = 0, h =    /cL , but  h < a   and    < a -—would reduce
             1   2             1            2
1(0,1) and, hence, reduce the increase in the variability
of employment. Alternatively, given complete unemployment
insurance, making taxes actuarially favorable to individuals
whose employment is variable——which would mean      1—h,
but h < a and     > a——would raise 1(0,1) , and making taxes
actuarially unfavorable to individuals whose employment
is constant——which would mean g > 0——would reduce 1(1,1)
Both of these changes would boost the increase in the
variability of employment.

     It is worth noting that the effect of actuarially fair
unemployment insurance on the variability of employment
depends on workers' being risk averse. If workers were
not risk averse, unemployment insurance would make employment
more variable only if it were actuarially favorable to
workers who are employed only in the good state, as in
Feldstejn (1976), or actuarially unfavorable to workers who
are employed in both states.
                                                     — 24 —

     This analysis also confirms that focusing only on
unemployment insurance does not provide an adequate model of
layoffs, because, although it is consistent with (P1), (P3)
and (P4) , this analysis cannot account for (P2) . Specifically,
in this section, the actual wage rate and income received
by a worker who is employed in both states varies with the
value of his marginal contribution to output.

8.   Risk Shifting and Unemployment Insurance
     This section combines the analyses of the previous two
sections to consider the interactions between risk shifting
and unemployment insurance. With both risk shifting and
unemployment insurance available, the worker's problem is to
choose the vector (2. ,2. ,1 ,2 )                         so as to maximize E(.u—v),
                                  1        2     1    2

subject to the constraints

     £ =
      1
            {0,l},                £ =
                                  2
                                               {0,l},
     c =    (l—T)c2           + b, c = (l—t)2
      1               1             2         2


     pct(Q
       1 1
           -wk2.)=c(wk2.
            1      2 2
                         —2),
                     -,
                       2   2  1




                 2        1
                                      if       2. =1 and
                                                 2
                                                               2. =0
     b=                                                         1




            0,       otherwise,
            g, if b=0
            h, otherwise.

     This set of constraints creates the complication that a
worker who chooses employment in the good state and
unemployment in the bad state has the alternative of receiving
income in the bad state either from risk—shifting arrangements
with his employer or from unemployment insurance benefits.
Note that, because benefits are paid only to replace lost
income, this worker has no motivation to choose a combination
                                          — 25 —

 of   risk shifting and unemployment insurance benefits.              If he
 chooses risk shifting, his net income is (l-g)cLwk/(pcj +                     p1"cL)
 in the bad state and                                           in the good state.
 If he chooses unemployment insurance, his net income is
 (1—h)w2 k in the good state and w k in the bad state.
                                  2
       If riskshifting were actuarially fair-—i.e., p = 1——and
 unemployment insurance were actuarially fair and complete——i.e.,
 g = 0 and h = 8cr/a——these alternatives would both provide

constant net income equal to cwk and would be equally
attractive. However, as discussed above, p actually seems
to exceed unity, which makes risk shifting less attractive,
and actual unemployment insurance is incomplete but seems to
be actuarially favorable to unemployed workers,
characteristics that have offsetting effects on its
attractiveness. These considerations suggest that it is
reasonable to suppose that workers who choose employment
 only in the good state find unemployment insurance to be
preferable to risk shifting. Note, however, that even if
such workers find risk shifting unattractive relative to
unemployment insurance, risk shifting remains attractive in
reducing income variability for other workers who choose to -
be employed in both states.

     Under these conditions, the worker now selects the
employment status that corresponds to the largest of the
following possible values of E(u-v):
For employment in both states,

      E(u—v) =
                             Pawk+cLwk
                                    22                           1/   pctwk+cwk
                 ctu[(l—g)                         j + ctu[(1—g)p r
                              1   1                                    1   1  2
                                      +
                                               2                      pa+p          2
             — v(1)     SI(1,l).
                                                  — 26 —

 For employment only in the good state,
      E(u—v) =   cs.       u(w 2k) +    ci.       [(l—h)w k] — c v(0) —   ci.       v(l)       SI(0,l).
                       1                      2            2    1               2

 For employment in neither state,
      E(u—v) =   u(0)        —   v(0)             SI(0,0).


      In evaluating the worker's options with both unemployment
 insurance and risk shifting, observe that SI(0,0) is identical
 to 1(0,0), that SI(0,l) is identical to 1(0,1), and that
 SI(1,l) is larger than 1(1,1). These observations imply that
 the range of values of w k for which the worker chooses
                                    2

employment in neither state is the same with both unemployment
insurance and risk shifting as with only unemployment
insurance, but that the range of combinations of w k and w k
                                                                          1                2
for  which a worker chooses employment in both states is
 larger with both unemployment insurance and risk shifting than
-with only unemployment insurance.
      These results enable us to draw the following two con-
clusions: First, although the .introduction of risk shifting
into a model without unemployment insurance would tend to
magnify employment fluctuations, the actual effect of risk
shifting in economies that have unemployment insurance is
probably to make employment less variable. This result
obtains as long as unemployment insurance is more attractive
than risk shifting for most workers as a way to obtain, income
during states of unemployment. Under these conditions
the availability of risk shifting does not make unemployment
any more tolerable, but it does make stable employment more
attractive.

     Second, allowing for the effects of both risk shifting
and unemployment insurance enables us to account for the full
set of diverse phenomena associated with layoffs. The
                              — 27 —


  administrative assignment of workers, (P1) , results from the
  fact that risk shifting makes wage income unequal to the value
  of product and/or from the eligibility rules for unemployment
 insurance benefits. The constancy of wages for employed
 workers, (.P2), directly reflects risk shifting. The fact
 that workers who are laid off usually receive no income
 from their employer, (P3), results from the attractiveness
 to them of unemployment insurance relative to risk shifting.
 Finally, the role of seniority in determining the incidence
 of layoffs, (P4), reflects the relation between age and
 length of service and productivity.

 9.   General Implications

      As indicated by the preceding paragraph, this paper
 has developed explanations for the phenomena associated with
 layoffs without reference to a failure of labor markets to
 clear and a loss of perceived gains from trade. This analysis
-implies that, although a laid—off worker migh.t want to work
 if offered either the wage rate he received when he was
 employed or the wage rate inclusive of insurance indemnity
 received currently by more senior workers who are employed,
 he would typically not want to work at the wage rate equal to
 the perceived value of his marginal product. Thus, the
 use of layoffs to effect employment separations does not imply
 that the amount of employment is suboptimal relative to current
 perceptions.

     This interpretation of layoffs suggests that, as mentioned
above, it may be realistic to attribute the causal relation between
aggregate demand and aggregate employment to misperceptions of the
exchange ratio between consumption goods and labor services,
resulting from the limited ability of economic agents to
distinguish aggregate disturbances from relative disturbances,
rather than to an alleged failure of markets to clear. Other
                            — 28


recent work incorporating risk shifting arrangements into
the paradigm of incomplete information supports this point of
view. For example, Grossman (1979) shows that the
existence of risk—shifting arrangements in labor markets
strengthens the substitution effects that influence the
choice ofthe efficient level of employment, implying that
only weak restrictions on worker utility functions are
necessary for changes in current nominal marginal products
relative to perceived prices or expected future marginal
products to have a strongly positive effect in employment.
Finally, it is worth stressing again that emphasizing the
failure to perceive gains from trade correctly does not mitigate
in any way the wastefulness of non—Wairasian fluctuations in
aggregate employment and the undesirability of monetary and
fiscal policies which produce fluctuations in aggregate demand.
                             — 29 —

                           REFERENCES

 C. Azariadjs, "Escalator Clauses and the Allocation of
      Cyclical Risks," Journal of Economic Theory, 18, June,
      1978, 119—155.
M.N. Baily, "On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment,"
     Econometrica, 45, July, 1977, 1043—1063.
R.J. Barro, "Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and
     Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 3,
     July, 1977, 305—316.
R.J. Barro and H.I. Grossman, Money, Employment, and Inflation,
     (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1976).
M. Feldstein, "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemploy-
     ment," Journal of Political Economy, 84, October, 1976,
     937—957.

M. Feldstein, "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on
     Temporary Layoff Unemployment," American Economic Review,
     68, December, 1978, 834—846.


M. Friedman, "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic
     Review, 58, March 1968, 1—17.
H.I. Grossman, "Risk Shifting and Reliability in Labor Markets,"
      Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 79, No. 2/1977, 187—
      209.
H.I. Grossman, "Risk Shifting, Layoffs, and Seniority,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 4, November, 1978, 661-686.
H.I. Grossman, "Incomplete Information, Risk Shifting, and
     Employment Fluctuations," unpublished manuscript, April,
     1979.
R.E. Lucas, Jr., "Understanding Business Cycles," in K. Brunner
     and A. Meltzer, eds., Stabilization of the Domestic and
    International Economy, (New York:   North Holland, 1977), 7—29.
