                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          COMPARISON OF INTERWAR AND POSTWAR CYCLES:
                    MONETARISM RECONSIDERED



                      Christopher A. Sims



                     Working Paper No. 1430




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         January 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
University of Minnesota and National Bureau of Economic Research.
Thomas Doan executed the computations. Funds to support this
research came from NSF grant SOC—78180l2.
                                                                NBER Working Paper 11430
                                                                          January, 1980



               Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business Cycles:
                            Monetarism Reconsidered




                                   ABSTRACT




        When monthly data on production, prices, and the money stock are interpreted,

via a vector autoregression, as generated by dynamic responses to "surprises" in

each of the variables, a remarkable similarity in dynamics between interwar and

postwar business cycles emerges, though the size of the "surprises" is much larger

in the interwar period. Furthermore, the money stock emerges as firmly causally

prior, in Granger's sense, in both periods and accounts for a substantial frac—

tion of variance in production in both periods.

        When a short interest rate is added to the vector autoregression, the remarkable

similarity in dynamics between periods persists, but the central role of the money

stock surprises evaporates for the postwar period. While there are potential mone—

tarist explanations for such an observation, none of them seem to fit comfortably

the estimated dynamics. A non—monetarist explanation of the dynamics, based on the

role of expectations in investment behavior, seems to fit the estimated dynamics

better. That this explanation, which is consistent with a passive role for money,

could account for so much of the observed postwar relation between money stock and

income may raise doubts about the monetarist interpretation even of the interwar

data.



                                                            Prof. Christopher A. Sims
                                                            Department of Economics
                                                            University of Minnesota
                                                            1035 Business Administration
                                                            Minneapolis, MN 55455

                                                            (612) 373—5447
I. Monetarists and evidence


        I take monetarists to be the view that monetary policy is of central

importance in the business cycle and that the time path of the money stock

is a good single index of monetary policy. As set forth by Milton Fried-

man and Anna Schwartz               ,   monetarism emphasizes the relation of the

level of the money stock to the level of aggregate real economic activity,

without a detailed theory of why money fails to be neutral in the short

run. In its more recent guise, as surveyed recently by Barro

monetarists develops an explicit basis for non—neutrality by positing bar-

riers to information flow about prices.

       Whether in its earlier or more recent form, monetarists claims support

in the observed behavior of aggregate economic time series. At least over

some time periods, the money stock and income are highly correlated. Such

correlation, while it is an implication of the theory and hence corroborates

it, is easy to explain as non—causal, representing a passive response of the

money stock to real activity. Friedman                   therefore has documented

a tendency for movements in the money stock or its rate of change to precede

movements in aggregate activity. This is a more complicated implication

of   the theory, and hence is   stronger corroboration than the correlation by

itself.    It is   also harder to explain as a passive response of the money stock

to real activity. James Tobin,                   however, showed that such timing

patterns could be explained by a model in which money played a passive role.

        Friedman and Schwartz did not rely only on statistical timing relation-

ships, however. Through detailed analysis of historical episodes,they attempted

to document the existence of major swings in the money stock which not only

preceded major swings in real activity, but were not themselves reflex responses

to developments in real activity. In the postwar period, though, the relatively

smooth behavior of the money stock, and the acceptance by the governnent of
                                      —2—




full—employment goals make isolation of convincingly "non—reflex" movements

in :the money stock very difficult. At the same time, the pre—war episodes

involve, for the most part, banking panics and international capital movements.

The panics, at least, are almost inevitably sudden and unanticipated, but

neither they nor the capital movements are ordinarily without antecedents in

real economic activity. Furthermore, even to the extent one accepts such

episodes as shocks to the money stock which produced subsequent real develop-

ments, it is not obvious that one should extrapolate the dynamics of such

events to the postwar period, where the movements in the money stock are at least

thought to represent deliberate government policy moves to a much greater

extent. Thus my 1972 demonstration that the money stock could be taken as

exogenous in GNP on money stock distributed lag regressions was an important

piece of support for the monetarist position. Despite the possibility that

a substantial part of money—GNP correlation in the postwar period represented

policy responsás to developments in the economy, the data showed no evidence

of such feedback; the observed statistical correlations and timing relationships

were consistently interprable as representing entirely causal effects of money

on income.

      Modern rational—expectations monetarism has shifted attention away from

structural intefpretation of distributed lag regressions of GNP on money stock.

Nonetheless the fact that the money stock is causally prior to GNP in Cranger's

sense in postwar U.S. data is important for the modern monetarist position.

Rational—expectations monetarism suggests that it is the surprises in movements

in the money stock which generate non—neutrality.   This implies a difference

in the way data are examined for support for the monetarist position. Instead

of finding the percentage of variation in real activity which can be explained

by a distributed lag on the levels of the money stock, one looks
                                     —3—



for the percentage which can be explained by a distributed lag on surprises in

the money stock. Now when "surprise" is taken to mean "innovation" in the tech-

nical time series sense of "the prediction error in a best linear predictor," it

is easy to show that Granger causal priority Qf the money stock amounts to the

equivalence of the percentages of variance in GNP accounted for by a distributed

lag on the money stock and by a distributed lag on money stock surprises. Rational

expectations monetarism yields a drastically different economic interpretation of

the coefficients in distributed lag regression of output on money, but it gives

the same interpretation to the substantial fraction of variance explained by such

regressions. With money Granger causally prior, this fraction of variance

represents under new or old monetarist views an unnecessary source of variability

which could be eliminated by reform to make monetary policy more predictable.

Innovation accounting for interwar and postwar data

      A multivariate linear time series model generates, according to the Woid

Decomposition theorem, a representation of each series in the model as a linear

combinationof current and past innovations in the variables in the system. These

innovations are by construction serially uncorrelated, and if they are transformed

to be contemporaneously uncorrelated as :Well, variance in the variables in the

system can be unambiguously decomposed into components attributable to each innova-

tion. The results reported in this paper come from autoregressive systems linear

in the logs of the varlables,using twelve lags of each variable, monthly data, and

a constant term but no trend term. Estimation was by unconstrained least squares.

The "postwar" period refers to 1948—78, using1 data on 1947 for initial

conditions, while the "interwar" period refers to 1920—41, using data on

1919 for initial conditions.
                                        —4.-




      Table 1 shows that data on money, industrial production, and wholesale prices

fit, in most respects, a familiar monetarist mold. For both periods, money is

nearly entirely accounted for by its own innovations ——   i.e.   behaves as if Granger

causally prior. Tests of the hypothesis that all 12 lagged values of industrial

production or of prices have zero coefficients in the money equation easily accept

the null hypothesis. The smallest marginal significance level on these four F—tests

is .18, confirming that the upper left corner of Table 1 is insignificantly dif-

ferent from 100 in both periods. Money innovations explain a substantial fraction

of variance in industrial production in both periods, with the fraction notably more

substantial in the interwar period The fraction of price variance attributable

to money innovations for the postwar period is smaller than what I had found in the

earlier work with quarterly data already cited; this may be due at least in part

to the use here of the more volatile WPI in place of the implicit price deflator,

so that the long—run component of price variance is a smaller portion of the total.

      In both periods the patterns:of response of the system to innovations in

the variables largely fit the monetarist framework. Production and prices respond

positively to money innovations, both responses being smooth in both periods. Somewhat

at variance with rational—expectations monetarism is the lackof a tendency for

production responses to money to be temporary in either period. Though both periods'

responses peak at about 18 months, neither has decayed to half its peak level after

four years. Despite the tendency of monetary shocks to persist in both periods,

price responses in the interwar (not the postwar) period do show up as temporary,

with the price response gone after four years. Production responses to a given

shock in the log of money are larger in the postwar period, and price responses are
                                      -5-




smaller. This type of result has been interpreted in some recent work

as evfdence of greater price rigidity postwar, yielding greater real effects
of given nominal surprises.

        The most striking difference between the periods is in the variances of

the innovations. Innovations in the log of money have a larger variance in the

Interwar period by a factor of about 22, for prices the factor is about 13.5,

and for production the factor is 5. This fits the monetarist story that larger

real fluctuations should be associated with larger monetary surprises, though the

large difference in production innovation variances suggests that not all of

the difference between periods is attributable to monetary policy and institutions ——

as most monetarists would certainly agree. Contemporaneous correlations among

innovations are all much weaker in these monthly data than in quarterly data. For

the postwar period they are all at most marginally significantly different from

zero; for the interwar period output innovations have significant correlations of

.22 and .30, respectively, with money and prices.

        The monetarist interpretation of these results could be. explored in more depth,

but let us turn instead to the more exotic pattern of results which emerges when short

interest rates (the rate on 4—6 month. prime commercial paper) are introduced into

the system. I had found in earlier work with larger (9—variablei systems of quarterly

data for the U.S. and Germany and of annual data for the U.Sq that the proportion

of variance in real variables attributable to money innovations shrank considerably

in the larger systems.    I had not been sure of the source of the difference between

the larger and smaller systems. Meditation on the results of Yash Pal Mehra

who showed that money's causal priority clearly evaporates in systems including

an interest rate, led me to try a system with the added interest rate variable to

see if the behavior of this variable would fit into the monetarist story about the

data.

        As Mehra's results would lead one to expect, Table 2 shows that with interest

rates included, the money stock is no longer strongly Granger causally prior. This
                                      —6—




result is in itself not counter to the monetarist position; the strikingly

non—monetarist aspect bf Table 2 is that in the postwar period at the 48

month horizon only four percent of the variance of production is accounted for

by money innovations. If this result is taken at face value, a rational expecta-

tions monetarist must admit that surprise changes in the money stock have in

fact played a trivial role in postwar business cycles, that therefore imposition

of a monetarist rule to make the quantity of money more predictable could have

had little real effect.

      If one examines the moving average representation (partially described in

Table 3) in detail, one finds that the response of the log of production to a sur-

prise unit increase in the log of the interest rate is essentially zero for about

6 months, followed Thy a smooth decline reaching a minimum around 18 months, with

the minimum at —.17 with interwar data and at —.23 with the postwar data. After 48

months the output response has in the interwar data begun to turn back down again,

being by this point —.20, and in the postwar data it has begun turning back up,

being —.12. For the log of money stock, responses to an upward unit surprise in

the log of interest rate are also in the form of a sustained, smooth decline.

The shapes of these responses are similar across periods and their differences are

marginally statistically significant at most, as can be seen from Table 3.

      Thus in both periods some of the observed co—movements of industrial production

and money stock are attributed o common responses to surprise changes in the

interest rate. With this shift in attribution, surprise changes in the money

stock are left with a very small role in explaining production variance in

the postwar period.

      Though there is not space here to discuss Table 3 in detail, it is worth

noting a few things about it. In nearly every case, estimated response patterns

are smooth in between the points for which. data are displayed. While the responses
                                               —7—



are broadly similar, there are apparently important differences in the responses

of interest rates to money and production, both these responses being much stronger

in the postwar period. Also, response of production to prices is significantly

negative in the postwar period in the first year, and is not negative in the

first year in the interwar period. Because of the computational expense, standard

errors have not yet been calculated for the interwar responses, so some of these

apparently significant differences between the periods may not be in fact. A

chi—squared test for constancy of the dynamics, scaling residual variances in the

triangularized autoregression to be constant across periods, yields a x2 (202) =
378.2      .   While this would certainly reject the null hypothesis of constancy

if the asymptotic distribution tIeory were taken seriously, it is smaller than

the Akaike criterion            which   aims   at rejecting only restrictions "false

enough" to increase mean square prediction error.

Possible monetarist explanations

        A rational expectations monetarist, to avoid the conclusion that monetary

policy surprises are not important in explaining the real component of postwar

business cycles, must argue that in the results described above monetary policy

surprises are being mismeasured. One possibility is that interest rate and monetary

surprises are being confounded. The decompositions in Table 2 use a triangular

orthogonalization of the innovations, in effect attributing to effects of interest

innovations, and so on down the list displayed in the Tables in the order interest,

money, prices, production. This ordering was chosen because it maximizes the

extent to which inter—period differences show up as differences in innovation—variances

rather than differences in responses to innovations. However, because the postwar data

yield such small correlations among innovations, the results that money innovations

account for a trivial proportion of production variance is robust to the ordering

of the orthogonalization. In other words, there is not much relation in the data

between interest and money surprises.
                                        —8—



      But the innovations might be inismeasured because the time unit is wrong.

If the time delay relevant to rational expectations business cycle theory is longer

than a month, it may be that some of the true money stock surprise shows up spur-

iously as interest rate surprise with this fine time unit. This possibility seems

ruled out, however, by the fact that the decompositions of variance with annual

data show precisely the same anti— monetarist phenomenon —— money surprises account

for less than ten percent of output variance when an interest rate is included

in the system..

      What about the possibility that some people in fact often anticipate policy—

induced movements in the money stock? In this case one might expect the interest

rate to rise in anticipation of forthcoming monetary tightness. If in addition

the true time de1ayrelevant to the rational expectations theory exceeds a month,

one might then get the pattern of results we have displayed. This line of argument

deserves further exploration, but it is not immediately clear that it can avoid

internal contradictions. It certainly requires that some economic agents ig-

nore published information on current interest rates.

      A monetarist not maintaining the rational expectations stance might have

an easier time explaining the results. If one is not claiming that changes in the

money stock must be unanticipated in order to have a real effect, the notion that

some money stock changes are anticipated,are therefore preceded by upward move-

ments in short interest rates, and nonetheless have real effects just as if they

were unanticipated, is quite acceptable. In fact one reason that this might happen

 leaps to mind.2 Change in base money might be transmitted to the stock of cur-

rency and demand deposits only with a delay, while having quick effects on

 the interest rate.
                                             —9 —




          When    the   postwar systemis estimated with reserves or base money re-

    placing the money stock, however, almost precisely the same pattern of results

    emerges. The percentages of variance in industrial production explained by

    money innovations remain     at    or below 10 percent. The only notable difference

    is that base money, unlike currency plus demand deposits or reserves, shows

    no negative response to interest rate innovations; production still shows

    the same negative response to interest—rate innovations in the system with

    base money.

          More generally, there is another difficulty with interpreting irterest

    rate innovations as simply anticipated movements in the money stock. For both

    interwar and postwar data, the price level responds to money shocks with a

    steady price inflation over a year, while interest rate shocks, despite their

    effects on money supply, produce no substantial effect on prices. If interest

    rate innovations are simply anticipated money stock innovations, it is hard

    to see why they should affect prices so differently. Of course the rational

    expectations monetarist view does predict a difference here, but of the

-   opposite   sort ——   anticipated   money stock changes should have more effect on

    prices.

          In   the interwar years there were "panics" and in the postwar years there
    were "liquidity crunches." If these are interpreted as shifts in the public's
- preferences toward cash, away from deposits, they might be the source of the observed
    response to interest innovations. If,       as   the public tries to convert   deposits
    to cash, the Federal Reserve responds       weakly or not at all with injections of

    reserves, one would expect a quick rise in interest rates, a fall in the money

    stock, and a decline in output as if there had been a deliberate monetary tighten-

    ing. This story is not "monetarist" in the sense I gave the        term at the outset,
    in that it does not attribute the observed pattern to surprises in monetary
                                    —10—




policy directly. On the other hand, this story is in the spirit of Friedman

and Schwartz's own discussion of the depression, in which they claim not that

the initial shocks came from arbitrary monetary policy, but rather that failure

of monetary policy to respond appropriately to shocks originating elsewhere

magnified the effects of those shocks.

      This explanation is not implausible to me. It does have defects. It

leaves open the question of why price responses to this type of shock are

different from those to innovations in money supply. It seems to require that

the monetary authorities in the postwar period respond in almost the same

pattern to an increased demand for cash as did the monetary authorities in

the interwar period, which might seem implausible. And it leaves unexplained

the origin of these sudden, cyclically important shifts in the demand for cash:

A non—monetarist expectational theory to fit the facts.


      A Keynesian view of the business cycle centers attention on the relation

of capital purchases to expectations of future profitability. As is now widely

understood, in order for expectations of the future to play the central role

in investment behavior which Keynesian theory gives them, it must be costly to

adjust the capital stock rapidly. The theory which emerges is much the same,

whether one has adjustment costs internal to the firm or external, in the form

of a capital goods industry with increasing costs. In the latter case, firms

which are capital—goods pricetakers will have as an equilibrium condition



              r =
                    kk     +
                                        —11—




where     is the effective price of capital goods (including discounts, the

cost of obtaining prompt delivery, etc.) r is the instantaneous interest rate,

and V is the real marginal product of a physical unit of capital. Suppose informa-

tion becomes available indicating that the real yield on capital,
                                                                    V   ,   will   de-

cline at some point several months from now. It seems plausible that this would

lead to a drop in the rate of investment, and hence to a drop in            If this

drop in investment is persistent over several months,     must remain small in-

itially. From (*) above we can see that this means that r must rise.

        This story does of course depend on some implicit assumptions. If           is


held rigid either by a very flat capital—goods supply curve or by a rate of

saving whih is insensitive tà returns, even over the short run, then (*) will

be satisfied by a persistently tight link between r andir .   Knowledge of a future

 decline in iT could not then raise current r.

        Clearly this story fits the response of production to interest rate innova-

 tions, in particular to the 6—month period following the shock, in both interwar

 and postwar response patterns, during which production remains flat. The observed

 responses of money stock to the interest shocks could simply be the tail following

 the dog: non—monetary economic developments raise interest rates, then push pro-

 duction down; and the demand for money declines smoothly in response, as standard

 theories lead one to expect.

        This theory explains the similarity in response to interest shocks across

 periods by similarity in the short run supply elasticity for capital goods and

 similarity in short—run yield—elasticities of savings. This seems more plausible

 to me than the similarity of persistent patterns of monetary policy errors which

  the monetary theories seem to require. The theory does not directly explain

 why price—responses to interest and to money—stock innovations should be different,
                                        —12—



but such differences are certainly no paradox from the point of view of the

theory. For monetarist theories, the absence of price response to a change

in money stock following an interest rate surprise does seem a problem.

       It should be noted that this theory Is not contradictory to the inter-

pretation of interest rate shocks as representing "liquidity crunches." The

interest—rate surprise in this theory represents a surprise decline in valua-

tion of existing assets while current real productivities of capital remain

high. One would expect such a situation to result in problems in maintaining

collateral for ba.nk'loans and complaints that loans for legitimate working

capital purposes are available only at high interest rates.

                                                          -              -     -
Conclusions and implications

       Certainly   the theory put forth in the preceding section must at this point

have only the status of an interesting working hypothesis. It should also be noted

that, despite elements giving it a Keynesian flavor, it has no direct implications

for whether active countercyclical monetary or fiscal policy can have good effects,

or any effects .

       Even   as a working hypothesis, though, the theory raises some interesting
issues. The theory treats an historically reliable pattern of dynamic statistical
relations, whibh look like causal relations ought to look, as reflective of the
workings   of anticipations through financial markets. It has long been recognized
(as   pointed out in some detail in my 1977     paper )          that   prices of

freely traded durable goods, including especially financial assets, should behave

to a close approximation as if "Granger causally prior" to any time series observable

by market participants.       The stock of money is not the price of an asset,

and we are used to thinking of it as determined by the Federal Reserve, with shifts

in demand for money having little immediate impact on the stock. But the demand

for thoney ought certainly
                                    —13—




in principle to be related to the value of existing assets. If we view the

stockof money as quickly responsive on amonth,to—month basis to shifts in

demand for it, the prospect arises that distributed lag regressions of pro-

duction on money have predictive value for the same reason that similar re-

gressions using stock prices do. A theory which rigorously developed this

possibility would amount to a stochastic version of Tobin's "Money and Income:

Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?" Exploring the implications of theory in this line

seems to me a major item on the agenda for macro—economic research. Money

innovations after all still seem to explain most of the interwar business

cycle. Is this because surprises in monetary policy were really more important

in that period, -or would the result evaporate in a model which treated monetary

surprises symmetrically with a wider array of financial surprises?
                                Table 1

                 Three—Variable Innovation Accounting
  Percentages of 48—month Forecast—Error Variance Explained,
                        Interwar/Pos twar.


                                      by Innovations in
Variables
Explained                Ml                                wPI

   Ml                   92/97               4/2            4/1

   IP                   66/37              28/44           6/18

  WPI                   38/14              19/7           43/80




                                Table 2

                Four—Variable Innovation Accounting
   Percentages of 48—Month Forecast—Error Variance Explained
                        Interwar/Postwar

                           by Innovations in
Variables                                                         .
Explained         R             Ml           WPL            Ip

   R            63/50         28/19          7/4           1/28

   Ml           39/56         58/42          1/1           1/1

   WPI           1/2          54/32         43/60          3/6
            -
    IP          16/30         58/4           7/14         18/52
                                                               Table      3


                                                        Responses    to   Unit Shocks

Variable Months                Responses: Enterwar, Postwar                                  Approximate Postwar Standard Error
shocked later        R                 M           P                  IP                     R           M          P           IP


                                                                                                         —        .001           —
          1       1.0 1.0         —.05    —.01    .02 .01      —.04        .02           .02
          3       1.1 1.4         —.06    —.03    .02 .01       .01        .05           .06            .004      .01           .02
          8       .89 .68         —.12    —.07    .05 .02      —.07 —.09                 .11            .01       .02           .05
   R     16       .59 —.07        —.15    —.10    .02 .01      —.13 —.24                 .23            .02       .04           .07
         24       .65—.59         —.19    —.10   —.Ol—.0l      —.!14—.19                j27             .02       .05           .07
         48       .46   —.11      —.23    —.10    .01   —.04   —.20 —.12                 .27            .02       .04           .06

                                                                                             —           —        .03           .06
          1    0.0       0.0       1.0     1.0    .01 .10       .47        .42
          3   —.25 3.02            .94 1.19      .34 .24        .85        .95          1.40            .08       .15           .26
          8    .06 10.08           1.32 1.52     1.18 .71      2.43 1.51                2.78            .26       .33           .57
  M      16   2.32 11.71           1.76 1.51      1.80 1.40    3.06 1.58                4.62       •    .36       .64          1.20
         24   3.25 13.38           1.63 1.34      1.31 1.76    1.89 .16                 4.92            .38       .87          1.04
         48   3.56 —.31             .51 1.37     —.06 2.04      .51  .53                2.61           •.48      1.03          1.04

                                                                                          —              —         —             —
          1 0.0 0.0                0.0 0.0        1.0 1.0       .39 .03
          3 —.31 .79               .17    .03    1.39 1.37     1.15 —.12.               1.0             .05      .07            .20
          8    .93 —1.84           .25 —.08      1.58 1.74      .58 —.78                1.9             .11      .22            .43
  P      16   1.21 —.08            .08 —.03       .67   1.70   —.46 —1.51               2.6             .20      .39            .54
         24   1.14 —1.26         —.06 —.06        .26 1.38     —.66 —1.53               2.0             .28      .47            .72
        48    1.32 —2.18         —.21 —.22        .16 .78      —.10 —.81                2.1             .43      .47           1.02

          1 0.0      0.0          0.0 0.0         0.0 0.0                                —               —         —             —
                                                               1.0 1.0
                                                                                                                           •
          3 —.33     1.37          .09    .05     .05    .12   1.48 1.48                 .42            .02      .04            .11
         8    .65 3.40             .08    .03     .17    .24   .94 1.24                  .98            .05      .08            .21
  IP    16    .34 3.24            '.21   —.01     .28    .25   .48 .72                   .97            .08      .14            .27
        24    .22 1.32             .18 0.0        .13    .05   .11 .49                   .97            .10      .16            .32
        48    .24 1.45             .01 .09       —.06 —.23     .02 .87                  1.03            .15      .24            .47
NOTES ON THE TABLES:


A linear model for a vector stochastic process x can be expressed as



                x
                 t
                         Z
                         s=O
                                 As et—s


where e =
            x — E(xIxi,x2,...).                   If we then choose a lower triangular

matrix B such that Be has a diagonal covariance matrix and B has ones

on its diagonal, we can replace A by C =             AB1   and e by f    Be, to obtain



                     t   s=O
                             Z   .C f
                                     s t—s
                                             .




For thelinear model fit to logs of the variables of this paper, the coefficients

in C are:what is reported in Table 3 as "responses to innovations." The variance—

covariance matrix of x —                                          the k—period—ahead forecast
                                     E(xtlxt_k,   Xt_k_lT ...),

of x, is given by
                                     k
            I       V =          E
                                 s0 Bs Vár(f t)B's
                     k                               -




This formula, with k=48, is used to generate Tables 1 and 2. The approximate
standard errors in Table 3 were generated by Monte—Carlo integration of: the

 likelihood, and correspond to the standard errors of Bayesian posterior

 distributions with a flat prior. They are approximate not mainly because of

 their Monte Carlo source, but rather mainly because they were generated with the

 data orthogonalized in a different order than that used to generate the

 responses tabulated. Because of the near—orthogonàlity of the postwar residuals,

 this makes little difference to the responses, but it does affect the standard

 errors of first and second period responses quite a bit, in percentage terms.
Data Sources



All postwar data are from the Citibase data base maintained on the TROLL

system at MIT. Definitions and primary sources are: Ml: Currency plus demand

deposits, seasonally adjusted; Federal Reserve. R: Rate on prime commercial

paper, 4—6 months; Federal Riserve. IP: Industrial production, total index,

seasonally adjusted; Federal Reserve. P: Producer price index for finished

goods, seasonally adjusted; Bureau of Labor Statistics.

For the interwar data, definitions and sources are as follows: Ml: Currency

plus demand deposits, seasonally adjusted; Friedman and Schwartz. R: Rate

on prime connnercial paper, 4—6 months; Banking and Monetary Statistics, a volune

published by th& Federal Reserve Board. IP: Industrial production, total index,

seasonally adjusted; from the Federal Rkserve Board publication Industrial

duction, 1971. P: Wholesale price index; total index from a 1970 mimeographed

BLS release.
FOOTNOTES:



1Space limitations prevent my providing adequate documentation of

 the methods used, or even of the statistical results. The methods

are described in more detail in my 1978 and 1980 papers. I intend

 that the results will be presented in more detail in a forthcoming

discussion paper. Estimation was carried out with the assistance of

Thomas Doan, using his recently minted program for econometric time

series analysis, RATS.




    leaped to my mind, howeveronly after Robert Gordon had pointed

it out to me.                                               -
REFERENCES:


Akaike, H., "A New Look at the Statistical Model Identification," IEEE

             Transactions on Automatic Control, 1974, AC—l, 716—723.

Barro, Robert, "The Equilibrium Approach to Business Cycles," University

             of Rochester working paper, November 1979..


Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, Anna J., 'Money and Business Cycles," Review

             of Economics and Statistics, supp. 1963, 32—64.

Friednian,Milton and Schwartz, Anna J., A Monetary History of the United

             States, Princeton; Princeton University Press, 1963.


Granger, C.W.J.-,'Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and

             Cross—Spectral Methods," Econometrjca, l969, 37, 424—438.

Sims, C.A., "Money, Income, and Causality," American Economic Review, 1972,

             62, 540—552.


___________,"Exogeneity and Causal Ordering in Macroeconomic Models," In:

          New Methods in Business Cycle Research, Federal Reserve Bank Minneapolis,

          1977, 23—44.


_________     "Small   Econometric Models of the U.S. and Germany,"

         University of Minnesota discussion paper, December 1978.

__________    "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrica January 1980.

Tobin, James, "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?", Quarterly

         Journal of Economics.
