                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   MONEY AND THE DISPERSION
                      OF RELATIVE PRICES



                         Zvi Hercowitz



                     Working Paper No. 13l




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138
                         January   1980




This paper is part of my doctoral dissertation at the University of
Rochester. The National Science Foundation has supported this
research. I wich to express my gratitude to Robert Barro for his
guidance and helful suggestions. I have also benefited from
discussions with Bill Bomberger, Rudiger Dornbusch, Chip Miller,
Mark Rush, and Hal White. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #431
                                                                 January, 1980



                Money and the Dispersion of Relative Prices



                                 ABSTRACT



     A price dispersion equation is tested with data from the German hyper—

inflation. The equation is derived from a version of Lucas' (1973) and Barro's

(1976) partial information—localized market models. In this extension, different

excess demand elasticities across commodities imply a testable dispersion equation,

in which the explanatory variable is the magnitude of the unperceived money

growth. The testing of this hypothesis requires two preliminary steps. First,

a price dispersion series is computed using an interesting set of data. It con-

sists of monthly average wholesale prices of 68 commoditIes ranging from foods

to metals, for the period of January, 1921 to July, 1923. The next step is

the delicate one of measuring unperceived money growth. This estimation implies

the postulation of an available information set and also a function relating

the variables in this set to money creation. The function used was based on con-

siderations related to government demand for revenue. The model receives support

from the empirical analysis although it is evident that unincluded variables have

important effects on price dispersion.




                                                      Zvi Hercowitz
                                                      Department of Economics
                                                      University of Rochester
                                                      Rochester, NY 14627

                                                       (716) 275—2236
     The existence of a positive correlation between absolute price level

variability and the dispersion of relative prices was observed by, for

example, Mills (1927), Graham (1930), and recently by Vining and Elwertowski

(1976). In his study of U.S. price behavior during the period 1920-26,

Mills says:


          We have not however exhausted the possibility of dis-
          covering a relationship between price level and dis-
          persion. It may be that dispersion depends upon the
          violence of the price change, regardless of direction.
          (1927, p. 284)


Graham finds in the post-World War I German hyperinflation an additional

dynamic element of price behavior

          It is clear that with the initiation of an upward
          movement in general prices a series of lags in indi-
          vidual prices developed, that these lags tended quickly
          to disappear when stability of general prices was
          reached on a new level, or when general prices fell,
          but that they were nevertheless progressively eliminated
          even though the general price level continued to rise.
          (1930, p. 175).


This observation suggests that unexpected events may have an important role

in the determination of price dispersion. Individual prices disperse at

the beginning of an upward swing in the price level when the acceleration

is prestnnably unexpected. As inflation continues the element of surprise

wanes and prices tend to converge.

     The studies cited above failed to offer an economic rationale for the

observed statistical correlation. Recently, a theoretical explanation of

the relationship between price level variance and relative price dispersion
was offered by Barro (1976). Using a localized markets framework of the

type described by Phelps (1970) and employed by Lucas (1973), Barro links

the dispersion of relative prices to the variance of the money supply.

The key elements of this model are, on the one hand, individuals posses-

sing incomplete current information, and on the other, demand and supply in

each market reacting to relative prices as they are locally perceived.

Thus, agents are confronted with the problem of determining whether

locally observed price movements are caused by general inflation or by

shifts in relative excess demand. The larger the variance of the money

supply, the more likely are agents to attribute local price movements to

general inflation rather than relative shifts. Accordingly, as the money

variance rises local price changes induce smaller supply and demand responses.--

that is, excess demand becomes less elastic. Consequently, stochastic shifts

to local excess demand produce larger changes in individual prices, so that

the dispersion of prices across markets tends to increase with the variance

of money. In this specification of the model, in which all markets have the

same structure,   dispersion is   unrelated to the magnitude of realized money

shocks.

     This paper modifies Barrots framework by interpreting each location to

be the market of a specific coodity, characterized by a particular excess

demand elasticity. Because elasticities vary across markets, aggregate shocks

affect each commodity price differently. Therefore, in this modified setup

price dispersion is positively related to the magnitude of these shocks.

     The model also predicts that systematic or perceived money growth is

neutral with respect to price relationships. Accordingly, a money shock in

this model is defined to be the component of money growth that is currently
                                    -3-




 unobservable and cannot be inferred from currently available information.

 Whereas the quotation from Graham suggested that sudden- -presumably un-

 expected--shifts in money growth cause dispersion, in this model, unexpected

monetary expansion disperses prices only if it is, at least partially,

currently unperceived.

     The main task of this study is to evaluate this hypothesis with data

from the German hyperinflation, a period of predominantly monetary distur-

bances. The period considered runs from January 1921 to July 1923. The

vertiginous monetary eocpansion initiated in August 1923 differentiates the

last phase of the hyperinflation and thus it is not included in the sample.

     The theoretical framework, presented in section I, neglects some

important facets of the hyperinflation. Specifically, it ignores the foreign

exchange market and the sustained divergence between the internal and ex-

ternal values of the niark,1 which obviously are related to relative prices.

Also ignored in the main text are changes in the velocity of monetary

circulation. However, in a brief discussion, some general conditions are

given under which price dispersion is neutral with respect to velocity

changes. Finally, the only aggregate exogenous disturbances assumed to

be affecting the economy are periodic infusions of new money made by the

government. Real aggregate shocks are ignored .   Empirically,   they are

probably of relatively minor importance, and can be considered to be part

of the error term in the estimated equations.

     The testing of the dispersion equation requires two important pre-

liminary steps. First, a price dispersion series is computed in Section II

using an interesting set of data.   It consists of monthly averages of 68

commodity prices ranging from foods to metals, for the period of January 1921
                                  -4-




through July 1923 (31 months). Data were unavailable for the months prior

to January 1921. Next, a money growth equation is set up and estimated
in section III. To do so, both an information set available to agents

economy-wide and a functional form relating this set to money creation

are postulated and discussed. The explained part of money growth in the

estimated equation is taken as a measure of the perceived rate of monetary

expansion. Correspondingly, the unexplained part is interpreted as the

money growth rate that could not be perceived from the assumed information

set. These figures, in conjunction with the price dispersion series, are

used in section IV to test the price dispersion equation.

     Parks (1977) has also tested a model of price dispersion using pre-

and post-World War II U.S. data. In Parks's model dispersion is explained

by changes in real income and the unexpected part of inflation, as measured

by the innovation in the inflation rate. In this specification expected

inflation and changes in real income are treated as exogenous variables.

He finds a strong positive correlation between unexpected inflation and

price dispersion. His tests also suggest a separate but smaller effect

of the actual inflation rate.

     The present paper estimates an equation that relates price change

dispersion to the exogenous shocks affecting the economy, in this case

unperceived monetary injections. An additional monetary variable that is

theoretically relevant for price dispersion is the variance of money

shocks. An estimate for this variance is obtained from the money growth

analysis and is included in the estimation. The model receives significant

support from the empirical analysis. In particular, the variable measur-

ing unperceived money growth has substantial explanatory power for price
                                             -5—




dispersion. The results also make clear that unincluded variables have

important effects on price dispersion. Some of these are briefly considered

in Section V.



I. The Model

       The economy consists of an arbitrarily large number of physically

separated markets indexed by z.          In each location a specific commodity is

produced and traded. At each date t the agents, assumed to be risk neutral,

exchange money only for the commodity being traded in the market in which

they are currently located. At date t+1, agents change location at random

and the process is repeated. Consider now the information set available tO

 the agents. It contains not only lagged values of all relevant variables,
but also current information which is limited to the local market price

         and some economy-wide shared knowledge about current variables related

to money creation. Actual money growth, however, includes a random term

which is assumed unknown.

       The supply and demand for commodity z assume the log-linear forms:

             S          S                          5
 (1)
                    =       (z) [Pt(z)_EPtJ +
            y(z)

 (2)        yd(z)       d[p(z)_Ep]       +
                                              [M_EP]
                                                       +
                                                           (z)       (z) > a,   d >

The operator E is the mathematical expectation taken conditional on the

 information available in market z at time t. For each commodity z,

 P(z) - EPt is the locally perceived relative price. c(z) and                   (z)


 represent relative shifts to supply and demand respectively. The excess de-

 mand shift, £(z)(z) -(z) is assumed serially uncorrelated, normally
 distributed with zero mean and variance a             .   This   variance is assumed to
                                    -6-




to be equal in all markets. For each z, c15(z) is the short run relative

price elasticity of supply. Disparity in the supply elasticities of

different goods follows from heterogeneous production functions. However,

in the long run relative prices are assumed fixed because of perfect sub-

stitutability on the supply side. The long run is measured here by one period,

after which all suppliers can shift to other markets.

       Looking one period ahead, all the markets offer the same mean price,

but as shown below the corresponding variances differ according to the

excess demand elasticities. Because agents are risk neutral, they are in-

different between the markets and thus they choose a market for the next

period randomly. There is an additional point related to the ex-ante

variability of the individual prices. Intuitively, one would expect a

market with more price variance to be less desirable because local informa-

tion would yield price level estimates of lower precision. However, as

shown below, this turns out not to be the case.

       On the demand side, the relative price elasticities are assumed constant

across markets. The demand function also includes the term Mt -     which
                                                                EPt
accounts for a real balance effect.

       At the beginning of each period the stock of money in the economy is

increased by transfers from the government to the public. This new money

is assumed to be distributed equally across the markets. Within each market,

however, the transfers are allocated randomly among a large number of agents.

The rate of growth of the money stock,    m = Mt   -          obeys
                                                       Mt_i
   =          +         +



where the X.'s are variables (past or current) that can be observed in all

locations and the 's are known coefficients.
                                                   m    is a random variable with
                                                -7-




zero mean and variance              .
                                        g    is thus the expectation about money growth

formed from all the economy-wide shared information. It can be considered

the prior expectation. The posterior is formed using the additional informa-

tion conveyed by the local price. Thus, while                  is the same everywhere, the

posterior expectation Em is conditional on location-specific information as

well, and therefore varies across markets.

       From equations (1) and (2) market clearing implies that


(3)         P(z) = [1   -   l/(S(z)            ad)EP + [l/(c&5(z)   +   d)UM

For each z, the sum (z) +               d     is the relative price elasticity of excess

demand. Let X(z)l/(c5(z) +              d)      Each market has a constant X(z), but

across markets, A(z) is distributed according to a given density function

with average value A and "varianc&' c. Consistent with the assumption

that agents possess accurate knowledge about the structure of the economy,

this distribution is assumed to be known.

       Following Lucas (1973) and Barro (1976), the solution for prices

in terms of exogenous variables is obtained using the method of undetermined

coefficients. Given the log-linearity of the model, the solution for the

aggregate price level has the form


 (4)        Pt =   TIiMti   +               + fl3m

Namely, the aggregate price level will be related to the current money stock,

which is divided into its different components. Lagged values, if added

 to (4) yield zero coefficients. Since Mt_i and                 are fully perceived at

 time t, taking the expectation of both sides yields


 (5)        EPt =   iMti        +           + 3Ern
                                          —8—




        The conditional expectation of                is now computed. Rewrite (3) as:
                 =       +    ÷


where

             (z) = [l/X(z)]P(z)       —
                                          [l/A(z)          —           -
                                                               1JEPt       Mt_i
6(z), the total disturbance affecting market z, is partly nominal and partly

real. Agents perceive 6(z) and form their expectations about its components.

Given the stochastic specification of m and t(z), the mean of

the distribution of in conditional on 6(z) is
                                  2



                             - ÷6tz
                         +
            Em =                                -
                                                    g],        or



                              2

(6)         Em =     g   +



      Observe that X(z) does not appear in (6). Since agents located in z

know this elasticity, they are able to isolate the composite disturbance

independently of X(z). Thus, while the ex-ante variance of prices depends

on the particular elasticity (this follows from equation (26) below), the

precision obtainable from the local information is independent of X(z).

P(z) would indeed convey less valuable information in higher price variance

markets if the differential variability was due to a disparity in                 .   In
this model, however,          is the same across markets.

      Substitute (6) into (5) and the resulting expression for EP into (3)

to obtain


(7)         EPt = tIIMt 1 +
                              "2 +rr—     a      +a
                                                    2[rn       +

                                              in
                                                -9-




(8)           P(z) =    [l_X(z)]ll1Mti              +
                                                        fl2 +         a
                                                                          2t
                                                                          m
                                                                           2


                                                                            +
                                                                                   +
                                                                                       t(z)1}   +




                           + g      +       +



        A new expression for the general price level can be computed from (8)

by averaging with respect to the densities of X(z) and



                                                                                           +
(9)           Pt = (1_A) [fliMt_i +         fl2g    +
                                                        113
                                                                            +
                                                                                A[Mi   +




Since equation (9) is identical to (4), the solution for 111,fl2, and 113
is obtained by equating the corresponding coefficients in the two equations:




               =   1



 (10)       112_i
                        ain2 + 2c
                       2            2




        Substituting (10) into (8), (9) and rearranging terms yields the

solution for the individual commodity price and the average price level


                                            a2 +        A(z)(l/X)a2
                                        +
 (11)        P(z) =    Mti   +
                                                2
                                                    + (i/X)a 2
                                                                  {m +
                                               —10—




            P =           +     +          + A(z)(1/A)c2
(12)         t    Mt -1                                              t
                                      In
                                           +   (1/X)o2


       The resulting actual relative price is:


(13)         Pt(z) — Pt                                 + [9 + A(z) (1 —
                                (l_9)A(z)m

                                               2

where X(z) A(z) -         A   and 9
                                           2                 2
                                                   + (l/X)


       The hypothesis expressed by equation (13) is that only the unperceived

part of money growth can affect price relationships. Note that the realized

values of the unperceived money growth appear in the relative price expres-

Sion. This follows from the confusion between m and Et(z). Since in

general Em m1, part of the money shocks in mistakenly perceived to be a

shift in relative excess demand. The ensuing short run supply reactions

differ across markets according to S(z) thus causing dispersion among

actual prices. On the other hand,                     is correctly identified as an aggre-

gate disturbance and therefore cannot be confused with a relative shift of

excess demand. The neutrality of perceived money follows from y(z) and

y(z) being functions of the relative price, and from the one-to-one rela-

tionship between          and the expected price level (equations (7) and (10)).

Given some value for             the quantities along the supply and demand schedules

are the same as before, for local nominal prices higher by an amount equal

to the adjustment en EP__which equals                            Therefore,   the market clears at

a P(z) which is higher by the same degree in all markets.2
                                                                                          N
       The variance of relative prices at time t, defined as                       2_l
                                                                                    = —
                                                                                                         2
                                                                N z=1                         [P(z)_P]
where N is the 'very large' total number of markets in the economy, can be
                                      —11—




computed now from equation (13)



(14)                f(lQ)2a + [9+A(l-G)   )   }a   +   (l9)2a2ii2

        An empirical test of this equation requires a measure of dispersion
among prices or price indexes of different commodities.             Mills

(1927, Ch. III) discusses problems that the interpretation of this disper-

sion measure presents. For example, long run differential technological

changes will cause prices to disperse over time. One would like to filter

out such effects, because the focus here is on short run distortions caused

by incomplete current information. The problem is alleviated by using rates

of price change rather than price levels. Different trends do not affect

the variation of price change dispersion over time--although alterations

in these trends will. Thus, some of the long run relative price movements

effect can be filtered from the dispersion measure. What remains can be

considered to be captured by the random term in the dispersion equation.

        The variance of the rates of change in individual prices is calculated

using equation (13) and the equivalent for t-l. This variance, defined as


                       {[P(z)Ptl(z)1 tt-l' follows;as

 (15)           =
                    (lQ)2      +   2[9+A(1-)2]a2   +


        Equation (15) is the final price dispersion equation that is generated

by the model. Because it deals with the dispersion of price changes, the

 ??ro?riate ionetary s;ocks variable is te iaitude of cianges in rn.

        Consider next the   irn1ied relationship   between the variance of money

shocks ai he disesicn of riaiv'              rizes. 3ros eortica rsul'
                                      -12—



was that a2      is positively correlated with relative price variability.

However, the effect of a       is ambiguous in this extent version of the model,

since it has different arid opposite effects on the three terms    in the
expression.   The second term on the right hand side of (15) is the remainder

of the expression when all markets are alike; that is when, as in Barro's

case, all have the same excess demand elasticity (a     = 0).   This term

corresponds to his relative price variance, which depends positively ona

when 0 <   A <   1.   This condition is the counterpart to Barro's assumption

that substitution effects dominate wealth effects.

     The first term accounts for the positive interaction between the diver-

sity in elasticities and the strength of the relative shifts. A term of

this sort would be included also in the dispersion expression under full

current information. In the present case of partial information, the

fraction (1-0) appears here because agents typically underestimate the

magnitude of the relative shifts, thus diminishing their effect on price

dispersion. Because this underestimation increases with a the first

term is negatively related to the money variance. The other, more interest-

ing negative effect of a        appears in the third term, namely in the co-

efficient of (m -               If a increases--or more precisely when the
                      m1)2.
public perceives it doing so--money disturbances are less confused with

real shifts, implying that a given shock induces smaller dispersion. This

effect is a relative price equivalent of Lucas's hypothesis about the link

between the variance of the nominal disturbances and the slope of the Phillips

curve.

     In the testing of equation (15), reported in section IV, an attempt is

made to capture the different effects of          and its net influence on
                                   -13-




 price dispersion. However, the procedure adopted does not indicate that

 shifts in 2 have an important effect.



 II. Construction of the Price Dispersion Series


     This section reports the computation of a measure of price dispersion

for the hyperinflation in Germany during the period January 1921-July 1923.

The data set, consisting of 68 series of monthly averages of wholesale

commodity prices, is obtained from the German statistical yearbook, issues

of 1921/22 and 1923 (see reference under Statistisches Reichsamt). Other

series from this source, some reported only until December 1921 (7 commodities)

and others beginning only in January 1922 (21 commodities) were deleted in

order not to introduce a bias due to changes in the sample size and com-

position.

     Prices are quoted from commodity exchanges of several German cities.4

Each series, however, originates in a single location.   The 68 commodities

include 27 food stuffs, 19 textiles and leathers, and 22 metals, oils and

coals. They are not finished goods but materials in a rather raw state.

Because weights for the different commodities are unfortunately not avail-

able, unweighted rates of price change are used.   Hopefully, the wide range
of commodities in the sample approximates the general relative price insta-

bility during that period.

    The individual price rates of change are computed as the first difference

of the logarits of the prices.    Average values and variances   are then
calculated   using
                                    -14-



                               Table I



Mean and   Variance of Wholesale Rates of Price Changes.
           Germany, February 1921-July 1923.



                                                    Mumber of
                                            2
                                                    Coimnodities
   Month                 Pt                •Yt




   1921
                          -   .09          .015         63
   February
                          -.05             .011         66
   March
                          -.02             .007         66
   April                                                66
                          -.01             .026
   May
                           .06             .032         67
   June
                           .04             .034         66
   July                                                 66
                           .19             .081
   August                                               68
                           .19             .033
   September                                            68
   October                 .24             .034
                           .38             .043         68
   November
                          -.03              .062         66
   December

    1922
                              .05           .018         66
    January                                              68
                              .12           .013
    February
                              .25           .011         65
    March
                              .12           .018         65
    April                                                66
                              .04           .013
    May                                                  66
    June                      .09           .007
                              .36           .017         67
    July                                                 68
                              .70           .097
    August                                               66
                               .40           .071
    September                                            66
    October                    .68           .064
                               .78           .038        66
    November
     December                  .22           .062        66


    1923
                               .70           .064         66
    January                                               66
                               .69           .099
    February                                              65
    March                     -.17           .041
                               .11           .018         65
    April                                                 66
                               .50           .039
    May                                                   62
    June                       .82           .048
                              1.25           .151         63
    July



     Source: Based on monthly average price data from Statistisches
              Jahrbuch fur das Deutche Reich 1921/22, p. 232-83
                and   1923, p. 286-89.
                                    -15—




            pt =
                   Pit
               =     (iP)2   -
                                 (P)2

where       is the price of commodity i and      =   log P. - log    t-]
Table I contains the comDuted values of       and      .   Jue to missing

observations, the actual number of commodities included in the calculations

varies slightly from month to month. The third column in table I indicates

the number of commodities for which both       and '-i are available.


III. Estimation of the Unperceived Part of Money Growth


    Determinationof the unperceived component of money growth during

the hyperinflation requires a specification of the information set assumed

to have been available to the public and the functional form for calculating

the conditional expectation of money growth. Consider the expectation

conditioned on economy-wide or "global" information           This   term was

defined in section I to be the prior expectation, and is distinguished from

the posterior expectation because it does not incorporate the additional

information derived from local price observations.

        This global information is assumed to consist of the current govern-

ment spending in foreign exchange units, S, the current exchange rate, e,

and one month lagged data on the money stock, price level and all other

macroeconomic variables. Not included is government revenue from taxation

and other sources, because this variable depends on the current level of

economic activity and is unlikely to be preannounced and to be widely known

contemporaneously. It is natural to assume that the part of government
                                         -16-




 expenditure consisting of the reparations to the Allied Powers was known

 in foreign exchange terms. With respect to the other expenditure, the

 implication is that nominal spending was observable and could be readily

 converted given the exchange rate.

         The prior expectation of money growth is derived from the government

monthly budget constraint, namely


 (1.6)       -
                      = Se-     (other forms of nominal government revenue)



         The superscript o indicates that the variables are not in logs but in

 their original form. Equation (16) indicates that creation of high-powered

 money equals the part of nominal expenditure that is not financed in some

 other way.        would correspond here to the end of month money stock. The

 other forms of government finance are taxes, net sale of bills, gold sold

 to the public, etc.

         If this other revenue comprised an approximately fixed proportion of

 total expenditure over time, the budget equation above could be expressed as


          M° -        =         + random term
(17)
                 M1       kSe

where k (G<k<l) is the average fraction of the
                                                      expenditure financed by money
issue.


         The first attempt to generate a perceived money growth series was made

using an equation of this type. Dividing (17)
                                                       through by M1, money growth
appears linearly related to Se/M1. The three variables in this ratio

are assumed currently known, and therefore this specification is consistent

with the notion that the conditional expectation can be formed using only

currently observable variables.
                                          -17-


       However, a regression of this form,5 including a constant, shows
that k was probably not constant over the period. Specifically, the

existence and pattern of residual serial correlation,6 plus some additional

considerations discussed below, suggest a nonlinear relationship between

money issue and spending during that period.

       Assuming then that the fraction k is not constant over time, the

question is whether something can be said about its determinants. In

order to suggest an answer to this question, rewrite equation (17) as



            M0MO
             t   tl    =   k
                               s°
                                t
                                    +   random term



       Equation (18) preserves the positive correlation between money growth

and the ratio of real expenditure to real cash balances, but unlike (17)

the fraction k is now allowed to vary over time.              It is now argued that

k is itself correlated with M/e and S.

       To examine this correlation, assume first that S is fixed at some

value S0. This level of real spending can be financed by different mixes

of inflationary finance on the one hand, and taxation, debt issue, etc.

on the other; where the amount to be collected by money issue is expressed

as kS°.     In   the usual diagram plotting the demand for real balances as a

function of the inflation rate, ktS° is measured in             steady states by the
area   of the rectangle defined by i.t--the inflation rate--and M/e.

       Consider now an increment in .            Real balances decline according to

the money demand function, and the revenue from inflation, ktS°, increases

as long as .i    is   below the rate that corresponds to a unitary demand elas-

ticity for real balances. Because real spending is constant, k increases
                                             —18—



and hence the fraction of S° financed by other means declines.

    This shift from taxation to money issue can be viewed as the policy

variable that brings about higher inflation rates. Classic works on the

German hyperinflation, like those by Graham (1930) and Bresciani-Turroni (1937),

describe an opposite direction of effect. Namely, the rate of depreciation

of the currency had a negative effect on the real yield from taxation due to

the interval of time existing between the occurrence of taxable transactions

and the actual payment of the taxes.7 The present discussion relies on the

correlation between the fraction of expenditure financed by money issue and

the inflation rate, rather than on a specific mechanism relating these two

variables. This positive correlation implies that kt and 1/(M /e) move in

the same direction. However, this coincidental movement does not hold for

all j.    When   .i   reaches the rate that maximizes the revenue from inflation

kt also reaches its highest level, and when it rises above that rate, k must

decline. In other words, the correlation between kt and l/(M/e) turns

negative in that range.

        This decline in kt implies that the revenue from other sources must

go up. If tax collection and debt issue cannot be increased, (for example

due to the negative effect of inflation mentioned above) spending must be

partially financed by extraordinary means, such as sales of gold from the

Central Bank's stock. In fact, the balance sheet of the German Central Bank

shows that the stock of gold begins to decline significantly in April 1923,

after being fairly stable since 1920.8

        Given this behavior of k when S is constant, equation (13) can be

approximated by the seinilogarithmic form


             M0 -M°
 (19)
              t t-l      =   constant   +   b'   log (   ) + u'
                 M
                                            -19-



where b' is a positive coefficient, U' iS a random term of zero mean, and

the constant term is affected by the level of S°. In this specification, the

implicit fraction kt increases along with 1/(M/e) at lower and middle

ranges of this variable, but eventually declines when real balances fall

below a certain value.9

     Equation (19) acquires more empirical content if real spending is not

fixed but rather fluctuates about a constant level. In fact, real government

spending exhibits this pattern during the period under study. From equation

(18), money growth varies positively with S. These fluctuations, which

can be interpreted as temporary deviations from a "normal level", are

assumed also to be correlated with the fraction k.-_while holding constant

       which captures the longer run trend in the finance mix. The assump-

tion here is that given relatively high costs associated with temporary shifts

in tax collection and debt issue, transitory movements in spending would be

financed primarily by adjustments in money issue. A positive correlation

between S and k would then result. However, a sufficiently high value

of S could be presumed to require extraordinary finance of the sort pre-

viously mentioned, so that kt might eventually decline.

     Incorporating an approximation of this effect into equation (19) results

in the following generalized expression,




               Mt -1
                       = a'   +   b'            1
                                       log (_________   +   c' log S + u'
                                                  -20-




which can be rewritten as


           -
                           a'                                   e]
(20)                   =         -
                                     b'[Mi   + (Mt_Mti) -.           + c'S + u'
           M
where variables without a superscript are again in logarithmic terms.

        In order to proceed with the formulation of the prior expectation,

it is convenient to replace the logarithmic growth rate (Mt -                     Mt_i)    n
                                                                                          While
the right hand side by the growth rate measured by (H -                     M1)/M.
this rate is always lower than Mt -                    Mi     the gap widening the higher the

growth rates, this effect can hopefully be captured approximately by the

coefficients in the estimated equation. Then, equation (20) can be solved

for (M -
               M1)/M            to yield



               M° M0
(21)            tt-lal+b_—-—(M
                           l+b t-l
                                                       -    e1
                                                             t'
                                                                +—2-—S
                                                                 l÷b t
                                                                       +-J—u
                                                                        l+b t
                   t



The prior àonditional expectation is defined accordingly as


                           A                                    A
                                                                c
 (22)              =             —
                                           (Mt1
                                                   -
                                                       e)   + (-j-)S



The unperceived part of money growth m0 is then computed by the difference

between actual growth and                    namely


               -
                           0 -       0     0 -
                   =
                       (Mt       M1)/M
                                -21-



    The coefficients in equation (22) are those which result from regressing

                 on St and (Mt_i - es).     However, the exchange rate is
(M -   M1)/M
not in general an exogenous variable in a money growth equation.   A correla-

tion between e and the error term u will exist via some unspecified

condition for equilibrium in the foreign exchange market. Therefore, the

cofficients in (22) do not correspond exactly to those in equation (21).

This property is not a drawback. On the contrary, the bias in the estimated

coefficients (relative to those in (21) ) reflects the part of u that can

be estimated from e. It therefore should be taken into account in cal-

culating gU
       Turn now to the estimation of equation (21). There is a problem in

matching the available data on money with those on prices for the German

hyperinflation. Unlike the price series, which consist of monthly averages,

the available data on the money stock until January 1923 are end of month

figures.12     From January 1923 onwards, four quotations per month are

available. Thus, a proxy is constructed for the monthly average money

 stock. For the period January/July 1923 it contains averages of the

beginning of month, end of month, and the three intermediate quotations

 available. Until December 1922, the monthly averages are approximated

 by linear interpolation of the end of month figures.

       A further consideration arises. The estimation of equation (21)

 from monthly average data on the money stock, rather than end of month

 figures, means that both the current month's spending and that of the

 previous month should be considered. Spending financed by money issue

 during the previous month increases one-to-one the current monthly aver-

 age stock but has, in general, a weaker effect on the prior month's
                                              -22-



  average stock.13 To account for this
                                                       effect, lagged spending is incor-
  porated into the framework of the
                                                     semilogarithmic function in equation
  (32). First, define the variables
                                                    S and e by S log[S +                     (l-)
  and elog [S +           (l-)       S1}. After substituting                 s      and
                                                                                          e for S
  and       in (32),          is estimated, simutaneously with the

  other coefficients in the equation, using a nonlinear maximum likelihood

 procedure under normally-distributed errors. 14

        The estimated nonlinear equation is

                -
 (23)                     =    660     -    .166              -
                                                     (Mt -l       e)   +    .115    S
                              (.071)       (.007)                          (.014)



              = .75
               (.11)




            R2 =    .98         D.W = 1.63                         =   .026         33 observations

 where the numbers in parenthesis are the standard errors of the

 coefficients. With respect to the number of observations the
                                                               starting
 month was taken as november 1920 in
                                     order to test lagged effects of
-monetary shocks on price dispersions.
                                                      According to the argument of
 footnote 13, the value .75 for
                                              suggests a pattern of spending that is
biased towards the beginning of. the month. In order to proceed with

the analysis on the more familiar ground of linear equations estimation,

  is assumed henceforth to equal .75. Given this value, the standard

errors of the other coefficients,
                                               linearly estimated, are not materially
different from those obtained above.                  In order of their appearence

in (23) they are .068, .005, and .014. The standard error of the
                                                      -23-




regression is now .0256. The other regression statistics and the coefficients

remain obviously the same.

        The pattern of the residuals from equation (23), which are reported in

the appendix, table III, suggests that their variance increased during the

sample period            as inflation progressed. A method similar to that proposed

by Glejser (1969), is adopted to correct for the apparent heteroscedasticity

by assuming a specific model for the variance of the error term. In this

procedure the variance is postulated to be determined by a set of variables

z1} in the linear form:


                   2     =
(24)




        If the values of the true money shocks m were available, one could
use them as follows. Since the.expectation of in2 is                         It follows that


               ln*2 =
                   t
                             2mt   +   vt

where v IS of zero mean. Combining the last two equations yields


                             wzj v
(25)           m*2 =                    +




Estimates of the coefficients in equation (24) could be obtained by regressing

       on the z.       variables.           The heteroscedasticity problem is also present here

but it will be ignored in what follows.

        The va1us of               are however unknown; only the estimated residuals

are available from te O.L.S. money growth equation. Since m converges to

m* asymptotically, the variance estimated using m values obtained from                    small
samples will be biased.                 This bias is neglected hoping that it is of relative-

ly small importance.
                                              -24-



       In order to proceed with the implementation of this procedure the. set

of the z. variables must be specified. The presumption is that the same

variables used to explain the growth rates are also correlated with the

variances. Thus S, e and Mt_i are candidates. The lagged squared residual

         is also included as an explanatory variable. It is presumably captur-

ing the effect of serially-correlated omitted variables, and perhaps a

direct correlation between                   and the current variance. The estimated
                                    mt-i
variance equation is


(26)          m2 =   -.007   -   .00038 S' -        .00026 e' +          .00090 M           .281 in2
                     (.003) (.00047)               (.00031)             (.00047)           (.130)


              R2 =   .57          D.W. =     2.5                     = .001          33 observations15


       Nothing in this procedure for estimating the series of money variances

guarantees that all the fitted values from equation (26) would be positive.

Indeed, two of the fitted values have a negative sign. In order to use

the estimated series as a measure of variances, these two negative values

are replaced with the smallest positive value in the series. The series of

the square roots of these estimates are reported in column (4) of table III.

       Using this series as weights for the corresponding observations, equation

(23) is reestiinated with the following results:


(27)          (M - M°
                    t 1)/M° =
                                      .700    -     .154   (Mt - .    - e)    -    .094
                                     (.047) (.006)                                (.012)

              R2 = .95               D.W. =       1.8                = 1.01       33 observations


Observe that the coefficient of S here is somewhat lower than in the

O.L.S. equation and that the coefficient of (Mi -
                                                                          e)      is somewhat higher.
                                                 -25-




The general form of the equation is, however, robust to this transformation

of the data.

       The next step is to test the stability of the coefficients in equation

(27) across two subperiods. Stability of the coefficients has particular

relevance here. If the equation is approximately stable, it seems easier to

asswne that it was known from the beginning of the period and that percep-

tions about money growth were formed using the same equation during the entire

sample.16 The period is divided into an approximately non-accelerating money

supply period until May 1922 and an accelerating phase beginning in June 1922.

An F-test applied to these two sub-periods yields the statistic F7 =                            1.7,
with a corresponding 5 percent critical value of 3.0. Therefore, the hypothesis

of stable coefficients across these two sub-periods cannot be rejected at

the 5 percent significance level.

       A regression in which the coefficients of Mt_l and e are unconstrained

produce coefficients of similar magnitude for the two variables. The F-test

for the linear constraint of equal coefficients yielded the statistic

F9 = 2.3, where the 5 percent critical value is 4.2.

V. Empirical Test of the Dispersion Equation


       The tests of the price dispersion model in equation (15) are performed

using the dispersion series computed in section II and the unperceived

monetary shocks as measured by the residuals in equation (27).

       For convenience equation (15) is rewritten here

               2                 22                                     '2
                                                                          xt
                   =                                    2   2
(15)
               t       { (1—9)        + 2   [9 +A(1—Q)] }       +   (l—0)a (m —
                                                            .                     m
                                                                                      t-i
                                                                                            )




       Importantly, this equation has a simple linear form--and can therefore
                                            -26-




be tested by an ordinary least squares procedure- -only under constant money

and   relative   shocks variances. However, the analysis of money growth in

the previous section suggested that                increased during the hyperinflation.

If this is indeed the case, it would not be appropriate to test the model

with a specification that relates price dispersion to money shocks with a

constant coefficient.

      Two different procedures are adopted here to deal with the possibility

of a chaBging money variance. The first uses a linear approximation in
                                                                A2
which the variance of money--as measured by the                       series from section III--

is kept constant by including it additively in the equation. As discussed

in section I,           has different and opposite effects ony, and therefore

on a a-priori basis the coefficient of                  could take either sign. The

other attempt is to estimate (15) as a nonlinear equation. The results

of this procedure, reported later in the section, are quite poor.

        The estimated equation in which            is added linearly is:

                                                                  A2
 (28)
                 2
                         .03. + 17.4 (m -      -
                                                    2
                                                        - 15.8    a
                                                                     mt
                        (.010)  (3.2)                     (8.6)

                 R2 =    .59       D.W. =   1.2           a =    .022       30 observations


        The monetary shocks appear to have considerable explanatory power for

price dispersion. The coefficient of                     is negative, and therefore

 suggests a dominant Lucas-type effect of the money variance on price

dispersion. That is, the degree of dispersion associated with given shocks

diminishes the higher their variance. The explanatory power of                         however,

is fairly low; its coefficient is significantly different from zero at

the 5% level but fails to be so at the 2.5% level.
                                                 -27-




        Theoretically, the one month lagged money variance t.i belongs also in

 the equation. However, when included, its coefficient is insignificant

 with a t-statjstjc of .8.

        The Durbin.. Watson statistic indicates
                                                               autocorrelated residuals, which
 may be caused by omitted real variables (like changes in the pattern of

 government spending,17 in income distribution, etc.) that are serially

 correlated, or by the fact that the ni variable includes an estimation error.

 In order to check wether the degree of significance of the estimated co-

 efficient.s in (28) is affected by this autocorrelation, the equation is

 reestimated using the Cochrane-Orcutt               technique. The results are quite
 similar to those obtained before,


                     =    .038   +   16.8 (m -
 (29)
                                                 m1)2
                                                           -    18.5
                         (.008) (2.9)                           (9.8)



               R2 = .67                     D.W. =   2.2           a =        .020   29 observations.

                 =    .36
                     (.17)



         Including 2             in this regression yielded at t-statistic of only
                         mt-i
1.0 for its coefficient. The possibility of lagged effects of monetary shocks

on price dispersion was explored by including the variable                           (m1 -
in   the equation, but the estimated coefficient was found statistically insig-

nificant. The t-ratio was 0.3 in the 0.L.S. regression and 1.4 using the

Cchrane-0rcutt technique.

        The next step is to see whether the dispersion equation is stable over

the entire period. In fact, the inclusion of the 2 variable is an attempt
                                                                        nit

to control one source of instability in the coefficients. In order to carry
                                                                                        —28-

                                                                                    Table II

                                                              Estimated Price Change Oispersion Equations


                                                                                                        Dec. 1922                                       Feb. 1921 -       July       1923
                 Feb.        1921 - May 1922                                        Feb. 1921 -

                                                                      0.L.S.                                                             0.L.S.
O.L.S.
                                                                                                                             A2                                                       15.8
                                                       A2                                      -   in
                        -                 -                           .024 + 34.4        Cm                                                                           - 1)2 -
                                              28.2                                                                                        .033 + 17.4 (m -
.030 + 18.3      Cm                 )2                  mt                                          t 1)2                                                                             (8.6)
                                                                     (.009      (12.1)                              (190)nlt             (.010)       (3.2)
(.012) (15.8)                                 (32.2)

                                                                                                                     a = .022             R2 =        .59     D.W. = 1.2              a   =   .022
                                              o    =   .019             =    .29         D.W. =         1.1
        .22       D.W. = 1.2


                                                                      Cochrane-Orcutt                                                    Cochrane -Orcutt
Cochrane-Orcutt
                                                                                                                -             A2                  +           -                  -   18.5
                         -                -   43.1                     .041     +   30.7(m     -   in                35.1                 .038                        —   1)2
  .035 +                        —   1)2                  m                                               1)2                      mt                  l6.8(ni
         27.7(m                                                       (.012)        (9.0)                           (21.2)               (.008)       (2.9)                          (9.8)
 (.012) (13.5)                                (32.0)

                                                                                                                         =                 R2    = .67         D.W.   =    2.2        a   =   .020
    =   .47           D.W. =    2.5            a =     .016          R2 = 53                D.W. =      2.2          a       .018




                      June 1922 - July 1923                                     Jan.   1923    - July         1923

 0.L.S.                                                               0.L.S.
                                                        A2                      +
                         -                -                             .036        16.6(m                )2 - 16.4
  .054 + 17.5(m                      )2        28.1 mt                                                                            Iflt

                                              (11.6)                   (.026)        (3.2)                          (15.0)
 (.012)       (3.6)

                      [LW. =    1.6            a   = .022              R2 =    .87            D.W. =      3.1        a = .020
 R2 =.70
                                         -29-



out this test the sample is divided first after May 1922, estimating the

equation separately for the two subperiods. This partition of the sample

is the same one adopted previously to test the stability of the money growth

equation. Then, the exercise is repeated dividing the sample at the end of

1922. The aim of this partition is cc sce how the model performs after re-

moving from the sample the 7 months of i923, which had a much more uRstable

monetary growth.

       The results of these regressiocs, renorted in table II, can he summarized

as follows. When the sample is divided             in    1ay 1922 (column (1)), the results

for the first subperiod are fair! veak. Both coefficients are insignificant

in the O.L.S. equation. Using the Cochrari.e Orcutt technique t.he coefficient
                  2
of       -
             _         tus ow. ignificari t at : on        it; i   eve!,   although   that corre-
sponding to            is still insignificant.                 the second suberiod--from
June   1922 to July 1923--the stattsca1                 rfcrma-;ce ;f the eqoation is much
stronger.
       Column C2) reports the ecuatj:nst.T:ated fr the periods through and
after December 1922. ;bserve :hzt the removal of the 1923 portion of the
sample worsens the performance of the          judged by the size of the
                                               model az

t-ratios. However, the coefficient of the monetary shccks ti1l remain quite
significant.

       Formal F-tests fail cc reject too ;oothesis or stable coefficients

across the mentioned subperiods. When the saao1r i divided in May 1922,
the   resulting   statistic in F4 1.d. hie the i critical value is 30.

Partitioning     the   sample at the end of 1922 yieldc the statistic of only 0.3.

       The other approach adopted to     test tne        dspersicn equation was          to   treat
it as a nonlinear relationshi:.        Vhen.   :         chang±n over tine, equation
                                          -30-




(15) generalizes to



                                                                                 2 2
                                                                               Xamt +A
                                                                       2
(30)          =                                                    +




                                                                                         T2
                                                         2
                      X 2mt—i
                           +Xc2                   2i ______
                  I    2         2                 I   2 2                 2
                                                                                -




                  Lmt-1                            Lmt'

       As discussed in section I, the third term in this equation reflects the

negative effect of           on the impact of monetary shocks

The second term corresponds to Barro's (1976) relative price variance expres-

 sion that is affected positively by               when 0<A<l. Recall that A is defined

 as the average of l/[(z) +          d]   across markets, and aS(z)+ad is the excess
                                                             A2
 demand elasticity of commodity z. Using again the                series, the parameters
                             2       2
 of equation (30)-- A, o and              --are   estimated using a nonlinear least—-

 squares procedure with fairly weak results.           The additional structure given

 to the equation seems to be rejected by the data, as judged by a higher sum

 of squared errors than in the linear equation.

       Observe that a value of zero for A reduces the equation to the linear

 form of equation (15), in which the money variance is constant. The estimated

 value for this parameter was .056 with a standard error of            .0658 The

 interpretation of this result is not that the average 1/[cI(z)+o.] is likely

 to be close to zero. Instead, it suggests that the detailed specification

 of equation (30) is too stringent. For example, if the variance of the
                                           -31-



 relative excess demand shifts,            ,   also    changes over time, this is more
 of a problem in this approach, since c itself is being estimated as a

 Constant.


 V. Actual money growth    and   inflation in the dispersion equation


        In this section additional variables that were mentioned in the litera-

 ture as being related to price dispersion are tried in the equation. There

 is no rigorous theoretical justification for their inclusion. Thus, only

 loose verbal explanations are given.               Also, the variables related to infla-

 tion are clearly not exogenous and therefore any              observed    correlation cannot
 imply causality.

        Actual money growth and      price     dispersion: A variable that can be

 considered exogenous and, if one assumption of section I is violated, in

principle also relevant for price dispersion is the actual money growth.

Changes in the money stock can affect the dispersion of prices (even when

perceived) if the new money is spread unevenly across the economy, thereby

affecting relative demand in different sectors. This                       of   effect was
                                                                    type
discussed by Cairnes (1873) with respect to gold discoveries. In the

framework of the present model this type of effect could be represented

by changes in the relative excess demand variance                   .     Since here the
focus is on price change dispersion, the corresponding variable in this

context is the change in the growth rate, or the degree of acceleration!

deceleration in the money stock.

       In order to test this sort of effect, and            also   to see whether (m -
is   only a proxy for changes in actual
                                                   money growth, price dispersion was
regressed on        -
                        Mj)/Mt   -
                                     (M1
                                               -
                                                   M,)/Mi]2        with the following results
                                                 -32-




                                            0         0           0     -     0
          2 =
               .033 + 2.1                  Mt -      Mtl          t-l         t-2
              (.006) (.6)                       M°
                                                 t                          t-i




         R2 = .33               D.W. =          1.5                   a =    .028      30 observations



    The monetary acceleration /deceleration variable has a statistically

significant correlation with price dispersion. Remarkably however, its
                                                 -                            A2
                                                                  2
              power vanishes when (m -                                  and          are also included in
explanatory                                               mt_i)
the regression. The equation including the three variables is
                                                                                                         -
                                                                            A2               M -   M1
                               16.6             -m                16.5             + .25
         t     = .034      +
                               (4.0)
                                       (
                                                      t1 )2   -
                                                                   (9.0) flit       (.77)       M

              R2 =   .59              D.W. =1.3                       a = .022              30 observations


     This result denies the existence of any effect of relative demands following

the introduction of new money during this period. It supports the hypothesis

that money affects relative prices only if it is currently unperceived.

     Inflation and price dispersion: In his analysis of price behavior during

the hyperinflation, Graham describes a positive correlation between the accelera-

tion of price level and         the    dispersion of prices. Mills's findings in his

study of U.S. prices suggest that dispersion is positively correlated with both

acceleration or deceleration of the price level.

     If the acceleration/deceleration in the price level is related to an

unperceived monetary expansion or contraction, the theory tested here pre-

dicts that the correlation mentioned above should be captured by a variable

measuring unperceived money growth. To test whether this is the
                                                            -33-




  case here, the variable                -
                                              i.)2 is                also included in the equation-.-

 where    is the inflation rate from month t-l to month t computed from the

wholesale price index (see table III). The results suggest that there is a

 separate correlation between                      -
                                                           -l)           and price dispersion. The equation
 estimated by 0.L.S. is

                                                                                           A2
              y2 =    .02 + 18.6                       -                     -    24.2     a         +    .074          -
                                                                                                                            2
                                             (in
                                                            lilt -
                     (005) (3.0)                                                  (8.7)                  (.031)

              R = 67                          D.W. =          .9                    a =    .020           30 observations


Given the low D.W. -statistic, the equation was reestimated by Cochrane-Orcutt,

               2 =
                                                                                 25.3 A2
                                                                     2
                      .033        19.5
                     (.008)
                              +              (n1 -         mi)           -            a
                                                                                 (9.0) Tilt
                                                                                                +    .077
                                                                                                             (i.z
                                                                                                                    -
                                  (2.6)                                                             (.022)

                    = .77                D.W. =            2.00              a =    .017                 29 observations
                =    .49
                    (.16)



Not only does (-
                       1li)2       have        a statistically significant correlation with

price dispersion, but its inclusion in the equation also sharpens the perform-

ance of the original two variables. Possible explanations of this correlation

could be related for example, to income redistribution following from unantici-

pated inflation, or substitution between money and certain commodities as Stores

of value when their relative costs changes.

         Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) consider a model of a monopolistic firm

in which costs involved in changing the price of the commodity produced generate

discrete periodic price adjustments whose magnitude increases with the

inflation rate. They suggest that if the timing of these adjustments is
Sheshinski, E. and Weiss, Y., "Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment,"

    The Review of Economic Studies, 137(June 1977): 287 - 303.



Sonderhefte zur Wirtschaft und Statistic: Zahien zur Geldenwertung in

    Dutchiand 1914 bis 1923, Berlin 1925.



Statistisches Reichsaint: Statistisches Jahrbuch fur das Deutche Reich,

    1921/22 and 1923.



Stiglér, G. J. and Kindahi, J.K., The Behavior of Industrial Prices,

    New York 1970.



Vining, D.R. and Elwertowski, T.C., "The Relationship between Relative

    Prices and the General Price Level," American Economic Review,

    66(September 1976): 699 - 708.
                                         Footnotes



        1See for example Bresciani.Turroni.

        21n order to consider the effects of changes in
                                                        the velocity of money
 circulation on price dispersion, I worked out a similar simple model in

 which there is some current
                                 public information about future money growth.
 This information may be conveyed by political or military events that
                                                                       are
 believed to have implications for
                                          the future state of government finances.
 The prediction of future monetary expansion, which generates inflationary

 expectations, affects the velocity of circulation in the current period.

      With respect to relative prices, if the knowledge about future
                                                                     money
 growth is shared economy-wide, they will be unaffected by the change in

 velocity. This neutral effect follows from the same mechanism determining

 the neutrality of perceived
                            money. Since all agents share the same knowledge
and are assumed to use it in the same model to predict its effects,
                                                                    they
will equally adjust their
                             EPt according to the change in velocity taking
place. A "one-time-junip" in all prices
                                               therefore occurs, without affecting
their dispersion.

     3For this computation, since ct(z) and
                                                             are independent of
A(z), [A(z)]2 and A(z), the following equalities are used:


(l/N)Et(z).x(z) = O.A   =                              =
                            O,(l/N)E[t(z)J2[A(z)j2
             2
(I/N)Z[(z)) [X(z)] =
                    2       22   +   2
                                     A ).



     4Given this source, these data do not
                                           present the problem of reported
wholesale price data in the U.S., discussed by Stigler and Kindahi (1970),

that they do not always reflect discounts from list prices.
     5The estimated O.L.S. equation is the following (see below for the

inclusion of the lagged spending variable).



             ________ =   -.049   + .317
                                           Se    + .381
                                                                S1e1
                          (.019) (.033) M1        (.089)



             R2 = .95             D.W. =   1.0             =.067


     6The residuals are generally negative at the beginning and the end

of the period, approximately the low and high values of money growth, and

generally positive for the rest of the sample.

     7See e.g., Bresciani-Turroni, p. 66 and Graham, p. 44.

     8See Sonderhefte. zur Wirtschaft und Statistic p.53.

     9The graph of the semilogarithmic function y =                +   8log(x)     is




                                                     x



     10The unperceived growth m does not correspond exactly to the error

term u. On this point, see below.
      11
           For example, in the general linear model y =         X      +   u,   where the

variables in X are correlated with u, the estimated vector of coefficients

is


                    =   (X'X) 1X'y =   (X'X)X'(X+u),       or


                    =     + (X'XY'X'u

where (X'X)X'u is the regression coefficient of u on X. The prediction
 f ' given   the values of the vector
                                             x is accordingly

               =
                   x'[   +       (X!X)XtuJ

i.e., it is composed of the systematic part x, plus the conditional ex-

pectation of u given
                         x.
     12Another problem stems from the form of the prior expectation, which

as it stands requires the use of end of month money stocks. See the

discussion below.

     13mis effect can be seen by considering first a case where each month's

spending is spread evenly over the month, and say, it is financed only by

the issue of new money, In this
                                        case the money stock grows linearly at,

in general, different rates within each monthly period. Then, if M_2,end

denotes the money stock at the end of month t-2, the inontly average for

t-l equals '1t-2,end +
                         4 S_1e_1       and that corresponding to month t equals
                             1
t-2,end      _ie1 + - S e.            Thus the increase in the monthly average

                          0 0 10
from t-l to t equals 4
                         S1e + .- Se.           Namely, spending evenly spread over

each month would imply equal weights for current and lagged spending in the

money growth equation.

      Alternatively if spending is concentrated. at the beginning of the month,

the relative weight of lagged expenditure would be lower. At the extreme,

for example, if all spending is made only on the first day of each month

both t-l and t monthly averages increase equally by the amount of the t-1

expenditure. In this case lagged spending does not belong in the money growth

equation.

              procedure is from the TSP Regression Package.
    151n order to estimate the 33 variances needed to reestimateequation

(34), the m       series   were obtained from running the money growth equation

after adding the additional observation of October 1920.

     16Estimation of a money growth equation in a similar context, using

the entire sample (for U.S., 1941 - 1973), was discussed and performed in

Barro (1977).

     17The   magnitude of changes in the amount of      real government spending,

however,    does not have any significant explanatory power.
     l8 was 17.7 with a standard ertO of 8.4 and                 was .0008 with a
                                                             C
        x
standard    error of .0004.

     19However, the empirical implications of Sheshinski and Weiss's analysis

for price dispersion do not seem clear to me. An ambiguity arises

because of the probably positive effect of inflation on the frequency of

price changes that they derived. If the length of the observation period is

kept constant, a higher frequency of price change may diminish the measured

dispersion of price changes. The possibility of a negative effect of infla-

 tion on price dispersion in this framework can be seen in the following

 example. Assume that the optimal frequency of price adjustments for all firms

 is two months, and that part of the firms adjust their prices during odd-

 numbered months and the rest during even-numbered months. Using monthly

 data, dispersion of price changes will depend on the magnitude of price

 changes corresponding to the group of firms currently adjusting prices.            Now

 assume that inflation increases; as a consequence the magnitude of price adjust-

 ments.    goes   up, and also the optimal frequency is increased--say, to one per

• month. Since now all the firms adjust prices during the same month the disper-

sion of price changes collapes to zero, in spite of the larger individual price

changes.
                                        Table III

                          Values of Money Growth and Inflation


                                                                      '
              (-M1)/M       MMt                (l)-(2)
                                                            A
                                                                m         g1.
                                                                            '•
                                                                                   m
                   (1.)          (2                 (3)         (4)        (5)      (6)        (7)

Nov. 1922         .010         .003                .008                   .006 .004        .029
                                                           .008(*)
Dec.              .026         .025                .001    .011           .024 .002       -. 047
Jan. 1921         .008        - .006               .014    .014           .003 .011        .001
Feb.             -.011         .010            - .021      .010           .008 -.019      - .045
Mar.              .010         .009                .001    .008(*)        .008   .002     - .028
Apr.              .007         .005                .002    .012           .004   .003     - . 009
May               .008        - . 009              .017    .014           .001   .015     - .014
June              .022         .019                .003    .009           .017   .005      .043
July              .029         .012                .017    .014           .012   .016       044
Aug.              .022         .042            -   . 020   .009           .038 -.016       .294
Sept.             .045         .036                .009    .008           .036 .009        .075
Oct.              .057         .041                 016    .017           .046 .011         174
Nov.              .069         .076            -. 007      .018           .083   -.014     .328
Dec.               100         .117            -.017       .013           .113   -.013     .021
Jan. 1922         .061         .065            -. 003      .017           .067   -.006     .050
Feb.              .024         .037            -   .013    .023           .044   -.021     .113
Mar.              .060          074            - .014      .020           .079   -.019     .281
Apr.              .075         .072                  003   .021           .078   -.003     .158
May               .070         .071            -   . 001   .024           .076   -.006     .015
June              .088         .059                .028    .026           .066 .022        .085
July              .106         .066                 040    .025                            .358
                                                                          .O77 .029
Aug.              .158          161            -. 002      .020           .l66-.0O8        .646
Sept.             .221         .260           - . 038      .023           .251   -. 029    .402
Oct.              .285         .310           - . 025      .016           .30O-.0l5        .679
Nov.              .349         .347                .002    .027           .339: .010       .712
Dec.              • 393        .372                .021    .032           .355 .038            245
Jan. 1923         • 339        .367            - .027      .036           .355..0l6        .636
Feb.              .431         .380                .050    .038           •367 .063        .696
Mar.              .385         .364                .021                   .342 .043
                                                           .034                           -.   133
Apr.              .252         .275           -. 024       .047           .261-.009        .064
May               .205         .268           -. 064       .050           .260-.056        .450
June              .371         .399           —    .028    .037           .378-.007        .864
July              .572         .518                .054    .049           .488 .084       1.350


Notes to Table Ill:


(Mt -
        Mt1)/M    is the estimated value of money growth from equation (34).


        square root of the estimated value from equation (26). The entries with an
 asterisk are those with a negative fitted. value that were replaced by the
 •mallest positive value in the series.

 estimated value from the weighted least-squares regression (equation 38),
 where the series      are used as weights.



(1- M1)/M -

 first difference of the logs of the Wholesale Price Index. Data obtained
 from Sonderhefte zur Wirtschaft und Statistic.
                                   Table IV

Values (in logarithms) of Real Expenditure, Exchange Rate and Money Stock




                             S                e                   Mt
 Oct. 1920                  5.85          2.79                   11.24
 Nov.                       6.44          2.91                   11.25
 Dec.                       6.58          2.86                   11.28
 Jan. 1921                  6.42          2.74
 Feb.                                                            11.29
                            6.80          2.68                   11.28
 Mar.                       6.66          2.70                  11.29
 Apr.                      6.65           2.71                  11.30
 May                       6.53           2.69
 June                                                           11.30
                           6.76          2.80                   11.33
 July                      6.43          2.91                   11.36
 Aug.                      6.16          3.00                   11.38
 Sept.                     6.23          3.22
 Oct.                                                           11.42
                           5.95          3.58                   11.48
 Nov.                      5.54          4.14                   11.55
 Dec.                      6.44          3.82                   11.66
 Jan. 1922                 5.96          3.82
 Feb.                                                           11.72
                           5.84          3.90
 Mar.                                                           11.75
                           5.85          4.22                   11.81
 Apr.                      5.77          4.24                   11.88
May                        5.93          4.24
June                                                            11.96
                           5.75          4.33                  12.05
July                       5.34          477                   12.16
Aug.                      5.32            5.60                 12.33
Sept.                     6.08           5.86
Oct.                                                           12.58
                          5.60           6.63
Nov.                                                           12.92
                          5.30           7.44
Dec.                                                           13.35
                          6.08           7.50
Jan. 1923                                                      13.85
                          5.32           8.36
Feb.                                                           14.26
                          5.63           8.80                  14.82
Mar.                      6.55           8.53                  15.31
Apr.                      6.15           8.67                  15.60
May                       5.65           9.34
June                                                           15.83
                          6.21          10.17                  16.29
July                      6.16          11.34                  17.14

Notes to table III:

St: log of the monthly government expenditure in millions of gold marks.
     Source: Brescjanj-Tuonj p. 436-37.

e: log of the monthly average exchange rate of the gold marks in
     millions of paper marks. Source: Bresciani-Turroni:
                                                         p. 441.

M: log of the monthly average money stock in millions of paper marks.
     Source: based on fixed days
                                 quotations from Sonderhefte zur Wirtschaft
     und Statistic, p. 45-47.
