                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            R&D AND THE PRODUCTIVITY SLOWDOWN



                       Zvi Griliches



                  Working Paper No. 434




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                       January 1980




This research has been supported by NSF grants No. SOC78-
04279 and PRA 79-13740. I am indebted to Alan Siu for
very able research assistance and to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Office of Economic Growth, for making its
unpublished data series available to me. This paper was
presented at the American Economic Association Meetings,
Atlanta, Georgia, December 28, 1979, Session on
Productivity. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Productivity. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #434
                                                                    Janua~y, 1980




                     R&D and the Productivity Slowdown


                                 ABSTRACT



     Can the recent productivity slowdown be explained by the slowdown

in the growth of R&D expenditures that has occurred since the mid 60's?

The earlier estimated rates of return to R&D together with the observed

magnitude of the decline in R&D cannot account for much of the productivity

decline.   A new econometric study based on recently released BLS data for

39 2- and 3-digit manufacturing industries covering the 1959-1977 time

period is used,therefore, to investigate the relationship between produc-

tivity, physical capital, and different measures of cumulated past R&D ex-

penditures.     It confirms the earlier conclusions and reveals an apparent

decline in the effectiveness of R&D expenditures in the latter half (1969-

1977) of this   pe~iod.The    interpretation of these results is clouded, however,

by problems with the data and doubts about the applicability of standard

modes of analysis to disequilibrlum     ~ituations.   Also, many of the effects of

the R&D slowdown may still be in the future, while many other important con-

tributions are not reflected at   ~ll   in the official productivity measures as

they are currently defined and constructed.




                                                Zvi Griliches
                                                National Bureau of Economic Research
                                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                                (617) 868-3920
.-


                             R&D and the Productivity     Slowdo~~*
                                       Zvi Griliches

                           Nationa~   Bureau of Economic Research
                                  and Harvard University




               The question I shall address in this paper is "Can the slowdown

     in productivity growth be explained, wholly or in part, by the recent

     slowdown in the growth of real R&D expenditures?".         But first we have to

     review the following questions: (1) What is to be explained?            Which pro-

     ductivity and what slowdown?       (2) What is the mechanism by which R&D

     could have contributed to this slowdown?        And, (3) What did happen to

     R&D in the relevant period?      Besides traversing this somewhat fami.1iar

     ground and reviewing some of the recent literature on this topic, I shall

     also report on some estimates of my own.

               The direct answer to the opening question is "Probably not."         But

     how we get there needs documenting and may prove instructive on its own

     merits.

                                             I

               There are several productivity "slovldowns"which may be candidates


     *This research has been supported by NSF grants No.       SOC78~04279    and PPA79-

     13740.     I am indebted to Alan Siu for very able research assistance and to

     the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Office of Economic Growth, for making its un-

     published data series available to me.         This paper- was presented at the

     American Economic Association     ~feetings,   Atlanta, Ceorgia, December 28, 1979,

     Session on Productivity.
                                      -2':'




for an explanation.    The literature defines two slowdowns in the growth of

labor productivity: 1965-73 and 1973-78. The first "slowdown" occurs almost entirely'

outside of manufacturing.     The second is pervasive and steep but seems to be

associated with the aftermath of the energy crisis which began in 1974 ,and

the deep recession of 1974-75.     If one looks at total factor productivity (as
                                                                      ,

estimated by Frank Go1lop and Dale Jorgenson or John         Kendrick) the picture

is murkier.     In Go110p and Jorgenson there is no evidence that total factor

productivity grew more slowly in manufacturing in         1966~73   than earlier (1960-

66).   Among the 20 2-digit industries reported by them 11 had higher (or equal

rates of growth in the later period and 9 had lower ones.           Kendrick estimates

that the rate of growth of total factor productivity in manufacturing in 1966-

73 was below that in 1957-66 but comparable
                                   -
                                            to ...the average rate of growth

between 1948 and 1957 (2.1, 3.0 and 2.0 respectively).          Looking at 95 BLS

growth sectors in manufacturing (most of.which are at the 3-digit SIC level)

which are thenulllbers I have been analyzing recently, one cannot discern a

clear slowdown in labor productivity before the mid-70's.

          In what follows I shall concentrate primarily on manufacturing because

this is where one would expect to be able to observe the effects of R&D on

productivity best.     In most other areas, such as services or government, out-

put is not measured distinctly enough from input to be worth analyzing in any

detail.    The only other major sectors where measured productivity could be

affected by R&D expenditures in the longer run are agriculture, communications,

transportation and public utilities.       There hasbeenho     r~cent     productivity decline

to speak of in the    firstth~ee, 'while      the decline in the utilities sector is
                                                                                      1
largely. due to :the energy crisis induced reduction in capacity utilization.
                                            -3-


                                            II

       R&D is an investment flow.           What affects output is presumably some

cumulated stock of the previous results of such investments.                          Since such

results are not easily measurable, most growth accountants have constructed

some stock of R&D capital measure:              K
                                                 t
                                                         = [.~w i Rt-i'   where the "stock"     K is

a function of past investments         R,       and the w's reflect the assumed lag and

depreciation schemes.     Given such a measure, the contribution of                       K to out-

put growth is measured by     yk, where              y        is the elasticity of aggregate

output with respect to R&D capital and                    k    is its rate of growth.         An alter-

native form is given by     pNR/Q, where                 p     is the gross rate of return to R&D

investments,   NR   is the net investment in research capital and                        Q is total
or sectoral output.     Thus, we need at least three parameters, facts, or

assumptions before we can proceed to an estimate of the effects of -R&D on

growth: (1) an estimate of    y       or    p    j       (2) a measurement of the relevant

rate of R&D expenditures; and (3) evidence or assumption about its lag struc-
                                  2
ture and depreciation pattern.

       The R&D to GNP ratio peaked at about 2.9% in 1964 and declined slowly

to about 2.3 in 1975.    Not all of this R&D is contributing to productivity

growth as it is currently measured.             Much of it is spent on defense and

space exploration, on health and environment, and on goods and services

(such as computers) where quality improvements brought about by such expendi-

tures are not cap.tured in our national accounts.                         Since much of the slowdown

in R&D occurred in these sectors, the slowdown in R&D that could have had a

measurable impact was not as large as the crude figures might indicate.                             I
.'
                                           -4-



     have previously estimated (1973) that only about half of total R&D as

     measured is likely to affect measured productivity and that only about half

     of the remainder represents net additions to the stock of research results.

     If these ratios have remained constant, the "effective" R&D to GNP ratio

     may have declined from about 0.72 to .57, or about .25 percentage points.

     Even assuming a relatively high    ra~e   of return of 40 percent would

     account at most for a .1 percent decline in the rate of growth.

            But how about its timing?    The fact that R&D investments in constant

     dollars peaked in the mid-60's does not imply that the associated stock

     measures peaked at the same time.     Figure 1 plots the rates of growth of

     output per manhour in manufacturing (adjusted for interindustry shifts) and

     the rates of growth in two measures of the stock of applied research and

     'development capital.   The first R&D capital measure is based on a no deprecia-

     tion assumption while the second assumes a 20 percent per,annum decline in the

     effectiveness of past R&D investments.      Since the vertical scale is logarith-

     mic, the slope of the curves is equal to the relevant rates of growth.

            Looking at this plot, it is hard to discern a clear decline in the

     growth rate    of labor productivity in manufacturing, though it has been

     hitting new lows in the 70's.   There is, however, a clear decline in the

     rate of growth of R&D capital, of about 3 to 6 percentage points, depending

     on the exact comparison period and the particular series chosen for the com-

     parison.   The same numbers, averaged for the 1960-65, 1965-73, and 1973-77

     periods, are summarized in Table 1.

                                           III

            To assess the impact of such a substantial decline in the rate of
                                       -5-



growth of R&D capital on productivity growth we need an estimate of the

elasticity of aggregate or sectoral output with respect to changes in the
              /


R&D capital.      In previous work (1979) using 1957-65 data on 883 large U.S.

eorporations, I estimated this elasticity to be about .06 (corresponding

to a no depreciation concept of R&D capital).        This estimate together with

a lowering of the R&D capital rate of growth by about 2.3 percent (see Table

1) imply a contribution of about .14 percent to the productivity slowdown in

'manufacturing, accounting for about one-tenth of it.

          This could be an underestimate for two reasons: (a) my earlier esti-

mates are based on firm data and hence do not capture social returns and

the spillover effects of R&D, and, (b) they are based on an earlier period,

when everything was growing together.        In the more recent period there has

been more variance in the R&D variable and perhaps one could get better and

also possibly higher estimates if the analysis were extended to the 70's.

          I turn, therefore, to an analysis of R&D and productivity at an

approximately 3-digit SIC level, using the newly released BLS growth sector

output, manhours, and capital stock data (see BLS Bulletins         2018 and 2034),

and the NSF data on Applied Research and Development expenditures by product

fields.    The 95 BLS sectors were aggregated into 39 sectors and the 29 NSF

product fields were disaggregated to match.       The R&D series were deflated and
                                                              3
cumulated using a declining balance depreciation scheme.          A capital service

flow measure was defined as Depreciation in constant dollars plus .08x Net

Stock of Fixed Capital.     The BLS numbers are for gross output, not value

added, but I shall proceed on the assumption that the two moved proportionately'

for most of the period in question.     Both the numbers and the measures con-

structed from them are rather crude.     The purpose, however, was not to do a
                                      -6-



detailed industry level total factor productivity analysis but rather to

see whether there is some prima facie evidence for R&D being the major cul-

prit in the recent slowdown.

        The basic approach is to allow for industrial differences in both the

average level of productivity and in the capital elasticity.       This is accom-

plished by estimating everything "within" industries, i.e., after subtracting

the   mea~   levels of each variable within each industry"and by multiplying the

capital variable in each industry by its estimated share in value added.

Table 2 presents the major results of this analysis using the no depreciation

version of R&D capital.~      If one starts with a definition of total factor

productivity and allows only R&D to affect it (besides time dummies), the

estimated coefficients are high and very significant.     If one adds, however,

other variables to the equation," such as the average age of capital and total

manhours (raflecting the short run phenomenon of increasing returns to scale

during the business cycle), the R&D coefficierus decline and so does also

their statistical significance.     If we do not impose the TFP framework and

allow the capital variable to have its own coefficient, the results are better

both in terms of fit and in the significance of the R&D variables, though the

capital variable gets a coefficient of less than half    it~   expected size.   ~~en


the period is broken into two, 1959-68 and 1969-77, the results for the first

period are strengthened, with the estimated coefficient being about the same

.(.07) as I had found earlier at the micro level, but there is nothing to be
found in the second period.     The contribution of R&D goes to zero or at least

cannot be discerned in these data and in this period.

        In part this could be a data problem: price indexes get differentially

bad as inflation be'3i'l\S' to accelerate, the proportionality between gross output
                                        -7-



and value added begins to break down in this period, and there are rather

large swings in capacity utilization unaccounted for by our theories and by

the measures used here.       I have a sneaking suspicion, however, that the effect

may be real.      First, various attempts to improve upon these results by allow-

ing for differential materials and energy intensity of the different industries,

adding capacity utilization measures in the 1967~77 period, and by throwing out

industries whose price deflators are of dubious quality led to no appreciable

improvement.      Second, the lack of published results of the contribution of R&D

to productivity     bas~on   post 1968 data leads me to suspect that this is not an

isolated finding or peculiar to the specific data set used here.         I know of

only three studies whose results are based on data which go past 1968: M.I.

Nadiri, R. Brinner, and E.C. Agnew and D.E. Wise.         All three studies include

parts of the later period in their total sample but only Nadiri examines it

separately.      He has, however, to resort to ridge regression techniques to

get   s~nsible   looking results and does not include a separate trend variable,

attributing all of TFP growth to R&D.         Brinner's estimates are based on total

domestic GNP, including many sectors where productivity is either not measured

at all (such as residential capital formati.on) or measured very badly (such as

services).     His estimates are of similar order of magnitude (.06) but are not

very robust to the inclusion of other variables (they fall to .03 when labor

is adjusted for quality change).      The Agnew-Wise study fits TFP estimates for

11 2-digit U.S. manufacturing industries for the period 1957-75 to various

R&D measures and R&D spillover measures and gets essentially nothing.         I also

have seen a number of unpublished papers where passing remarks are made which

imply that the authors tried to extend their study to the more recent period

but with little or no success.
                                       -8';'




       If these f{ndings are to be taken at their face value, they imply a
larger effect of R&D on the slowdown with the effect coming not so much from

the slowdown in R&D as from the collapse in the productivity. of R&D.    If one

assumes that previously R&D capital was growing at a rate of 6 percent per

year and the associated R&D output elasticity was .07, then its contribution

to the rate of growth of productivity in manufacturing was .42 percent per

year in the earlier period.   The total disappearance of this contribution

could account for more than a quarter of the recent productivity slowdown.

       How can one explain this collapse of the R&D coefficient in the 70's?

It is possible that a large fraction of recent R&D investments has been diverted

to finding ways of complying with various new environmental and other regulatory

constraints.   But that should not have happened across the board.    Notall indus-

tries have been subject to the same regulatory pressures.     Nor should it depre-

ciate all of the "older" R&D investments down to zero.     It is also possible that

much of the effect of past R&D is embodied in new equipment and a slowdown in

capital growth may induce also a decline (a postponement) in the effect of R&D

on productivity.   This may be testable and would imply that a pick-up in invest-

ment would also induce a recovery in the R&D coefficient.     The most likely

explanation is one of confusion: the large energy price shocks, the resulting

fluctuations in capacity utilization, the substantial increase in uncertainty

about future absolute and relative prices may have forcromany firms away from

their long-run production frontiers.     What we see in the data are not movements

along the technological frontier and hence they should not and cannot be

attributed to a variable whose role is to shift this frontier outward.
       The other point to remember as space constraints close in on us, is

that even though the measured effects of R&D on measured productivity may

be small, its true effects may be quite a bit larger.   First, we have yet to
                                                                                   ·5
learn how to measure the spillover effects of R&D within and across industries.

Second, much of past   and current R&D is spent on socially valuable activities

such as our health and the health of our environment, items that are not

valued positively in the national accounts as currentlyconstitute1.     Finally,

R&D is a chancy and fickle process.   Even i~ it has run intO a dry spell, this

does not imply that current expenditures may not have future returns or that

there are no major productivity gains already on the drawing boards.    All sub-

stantive surveys of new technologies and new technological possibilities seem

to contradict the notion that we have exhausted our innovation possibilities.

Thus I interpret my lack.of findings as reflecting data difficulties and the

turmoil of the times rather than a trlle underlying trend shift.   In any case,

it is unlikely that the recent productivity slowdown can be blamed primarily

on the R&D slowdown.   If anything, causality may run in the other direction.
                                     -10-

                                   !teferences .



E.C. Agnew and D.E. Wise, "The Impact of R&D on Productivity: A Pre-

       liminary Report," Mathtech Inc., Princeton, New Jersey, 1978.       Paper

       presented at the 1978 Southern Economic Association Meeting.

R. Brinner, Technology, Labor, and Economic Potential, Data Resources

       Study No. 29, Lexington, Mass., 1979.

E. F. Denison, "Explorationsof     Dec1i~ing Productivity Growth," Survey of

      Current Business, 1979, 59(8), Part II, 1-24.

F.M. Gollop and D.W. Jorgenson, "U.S. Productivity Growth by Industry,
      1947-73," in J.W. Kendrick and B. Vaccara, eds., New Developments in

      Productivity Measurement, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 41, in

      press.     1979.
_____________, U.S. Economic Growth 1948-1973, unpublished manuscript, 1979b.


z.   Griliches, "Research Expenditures and Growth Accounting," in B.R.

      Williams, ed., Science and Technology in Economic Growth, London,

      1973, 59-95.

-------,           "Returns of Research and Development Expenditures in the

      Private Scector," in J.W. Kendrick and B. Vaccara, Eds., New Develop-

      ments in Productivity Measurement, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 41,

       in press.    1979.

_________, "Issues in Assessing the Contribution of Research and Develop-

       ment to Productivity Growth," The Bell J. Econ., Spring 1979, 10(1),

       92-116.

J. W. Kendrick, "P.roductivi ty Trends and the Recent Slowdown," in W. Fellner,
                                                                   i   -
       ed.,    Contemporary Economic Problems 1979, 17-69.
                                    -11-




R.E. Kutscher, J. A. Mark and J.R. Norsworthy, "The Productivity Slowdown

     and the Outlook to 1985," Monthly Labor Review, May 1977, 3-8.

E. Mansfield, "Rates of Return from Industrial Research and Development,"
     Am. Econ. Rev., 1965, LL(2)
M.I. Nadiri, "Contributions and Determinants of R&D Expenditures in the

     U.S. Manufacturing Industries," NBER Working Paper 260, 1979.

J.R. Norsworthy, M.J. Harper and K•.Kunze, "The Slowdown in Productivity

     Growth: Analysis of Some Contributing Factors," Brookings Papers,

     forthcoming.

M.A. Schankerman,   Essays in The Economics of Technological Change, unpub-

     lished Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University, 1979.

N.E. Terleckyj, Effects of R&D on the Productivity Growth of Industries:

     An ExploratorY Study, Washington s D.C.: National Planning Association,

     1974.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Time Series Data

     for Input-Output Industries, Bulletin 2018, 1979.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - , Capital Stock Estimates

     for Input-Output Industries:   Methods and Data, Bulletin 2034, 1979.
                                       -12~




                                     Footnotes


 1.   Because of space limitation I am not documenting the various statements

. made in the text.   They are consistent with the facts as reported by Denison,

 Gollop and Jorgenson,   Kendric~   and Norsworthy et al.

 2.   See Griliches (1979b) for a more detailed exposition.      See also Griliches

 (1973), Mansfield and Terleckyj for earlier npplications of this kind of

 framework.

 3.   The AR&D data by product field were used rather than the R&D industry

 figures because (a) they are more compatible with the establishment based

productivity series and (b) they provide somewhat more industrial detail.

 Basic research is not broken down by product field and hence is not included

 in these stock measures.   Since it accounts for only 3 percent of total R&D

 in industry, its inclusion would not affect the overall picture.          Note that

 one could quarrel with a measure of social R&D capital that may decline just

 due to the passage of time.   But to open this issue here would take us too

 far afield.

 4.   Experiments with (geometric) depreciation rates of 10, 20 and 30 percent

 per year led largely to the same results.       The data can hardly distinguish
                                                                       I

between them, showing a slight preference for 0 or 10 percent.       The only

noticable difference in the results are negativ~ though insignifican~R&D

 coefficients for the 1964-77 period when higher depreciation rates are used.

s.    See Griliches (1979b) for more discussion, also Agnew-Wise (1979) and

 Schankerman (1979) for examples of such attempts.       (There has been no convincing
 ahowing of spillover effects using post-1968 data.) .
                                       -13-




Table 1.   Average Growth Rates Within Manufacturing Industries
                         (Percent per Year)
            -'




                                                   R&D Stock

                 Output per Man hour    <5    =0     <5    = .1   <5    =    .2

1960-65                 3.4            10.3               8.5          7.0

1965-73                 2.8                  7.9          6.4          5.6

1973-77                1.4                   5.6          3.0          1.4


                       Decre1eration

60-65 to 65-73         0.6                   2.4          2.1      1.4

65-73 to 73-77         1.4                   2.3          3.4          4.2
                                               -14-


Table' 2-:   R&D Stock' Coefficients in Various Spe'e:l:fications:       Within 39
             u.S.   Man~facturing   Sectors,    N = 741.



Period and Dependent       R&D Stock Coefiicient       S.E.E.    Other Variables in
                             (Standard Errors)
      Variable                                                          Equation


1. TFP, 1959-77                .058                    .124      None
                              (.030)

2. TFP, 1959-77                .029                    .110      Age C, 'NlIRS
                              (.027)

3. LPROD, 1959-77              .044                    .106      (l-LS)·L(SFC/MHRS),
                              (.026)                             Age C, MHRS

4. LPROD, 1959-68              .067                    .064      (l-LS)·L(SFC/~lliRS),
                              (.029)                             Age.Q, UHRS

5. LPROD, 1969-77              .026                    .078      (l-LS)·L(SFC/MlIRS),
                              (.046)                             Age C, MHRS


TFP   = LPROD-(l-LS)    [LSFC-~mRS]

LPROD   = Log output per manhour
'(l-LS)[L(SFC{MHRS)]    = (I-Average 71-75 labor share in value added) (Log service
        flow measure of fixed capital minus log total manhours)

R&D Stock: log (cumulated sum of deflated applied research and development ex-

       penditures from 1959 on plus 1958 initial value).          1958 initial value     =

       R !g, where g is the estimated rate of growth of R in a particular indus-
        58
        try during 1959-64.

S.E.E. - standard deviation of residuals.

All equations contain an intercept and year dummies.            "Within" means that all
variables are measured around their respective industry means.
              Fig. 1   Growth   rates (lnyt-ln y t _ 1 ), in percent




ci
u
'Z.
'" < •
0.
.'
N·

"'I
o~
w'~
l'
'"o:J
'"




.       ~I

        Z

        .,
        :r
        ~

        o
        <II
        "-
        (,
        <II
