                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY AS A SOURCE
       OF AND RESTRAINT ON UNITED STATES INFLATION



                    Michael R. Darby


                  Working Paper No. 137




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                      January 1980




The author acknowledges comments from Arthur Gandolfi,
James Lothian, and Anna Schwartz and the generous support
of the National Science Foundation (grant APR78—13O12),
the Relm Foundation, the Scaife Family Trusts, and the
Alex C. Walker Foundation. Michael T. Melvin and Andrew
A. Vogel provided able research assistance. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper #437
                                                                       January, 1980



                 The International Economy as a Source of
                 and Restraint on United States Inflation


                                ABSTRACT



     The balance of payments, changes in our terms of trade, and other foreign

influences are widely believed to be a major, if not the dominant, cause of

U.S. inflation. This is possible only if the international economy has caused

a significant increase in the growth rate of the nominal quantity of money sup-

plied, a significant decrease in the growth rate of the real quantity of money

demanded, or both. Unlike nonreserve countries maintaining pegged exchange rates,

the balance of payments need not influence the growth rate of the nominal quantity

of money supplied by the Federal Reserve System. The Fed's reaction function is

estimated and no effects of the (scaled) balance—of—payments can be detected. Nor

is found any other channel by which the international economy has affected the

growth rate of the nominal money supply. Changes in the terms of trade will cause

some transitory self—reversing effects on real income, real money demand, and

the price level and also some permanent shifts in these variables. Because the

permanent shifts in the level are nonrecurring, they average out when we examine

the average growth rate over substantial periods. Indeed for four year averages,

all autonomous variability (domestic and foreign) contributes negligibly (standard

errorof O.4percent per annum) to variations in average inflation. Thus, except

possibly a suport1ng role In the short run, international economy has contributed

negligibly to U.S. inflation.


                                                   Michael R. Darby
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   University of California, Los Angeles
                                                   Los Angeles, California 90024

                                                   (213) 825—3343
                                For presentation at the Annual Meeting of
                                the American Association for the Advance-
                                ment of Science, San Francisco, January 7,
                                1980.

                                Not for quotation without the authors
                                pernhi ssion.
                                D.3: January 8, 1980


               THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY AS A SOURCE OF
               AND RESTRAINT ON UNITED STATES INFLATION

                           Michael R. Darby*
                 University of California, Los Angeles
                 National Bureau of Economic Research


    The balance of payments, changes in our terms of trade, and other for-

eign influences are widely believed to be a major, if not the dominant,

cause of United States inflation. This paper shows that such beliefs imply

that the international economy influences the growth rate of the nominal

quantity of money supplied or of the real quantity of money demanded or

both in particular, testable ways. The postwar United States data are used

to test these hypotheses. It is shown that the international economy has

had at most trivial effects on the average inflation rate over a period of

four years or more. Although the effects of the international economy are

negligible in terms of American inflationary trends, they may be significant

in terms of quarterly or even annual inflation rates and of inflationary

trends in some other countries which maintained fixed exchange rates.



     *The author acknowledges comments from Arthur Gandolfi, James Lothian,

and Anna Schwartz and the generous support of the National Science Foundation

(grant APR7S-l3072), the Relm Foundation, the Scaife Family Trusts, and the

Alex C. Walker Foundation. Michael T. Melvin and Andrew A. Vogel provided

able research assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBER's

research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those

of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                             2




     In Section I, the inflation rate is shown to equal the difference bet-

ween the growth rates of the nominal quantity of money supplied by the Federal

Reserve System and of the real quantity of money demanded by the public.

International influences on the behavior of the Federal Reserve System are

examined in Section II.    International influences affect real money demand,

particularly via changes in real income, but because these effects are once-

and-for-all shifts their effect on the average inflation rate over four

years is negligible, as seen in Section III. Summary and conclusions are

presented in Section IV.
                                                                                 3




              I. Proximate Determinants of the Inflation Rate


     The price level P states the amount of money which exchanges for a

standard basket of goods and services. We call this basket --   the   average

amounts bought with $1 in the arbitrary base year —- a base—year dollar

(B$), and the price level is measured as dollars per base-year dollar. The

inverse of the price level, 1/P or the amount of goods per dollar, is the

price or value of money. As with any commodity it is useful to organize our

discussion of the determination of its price by examining the conditions of

supply on the one hand and demand on the other.

     The nominal quantity of money supplied MS is the total amount of

currency, coin, and checking deposits held by the public. It is measured

in nominal or dollar amounts. Operating throucih the commercial banking

system, our central bank, the Federal Reserve System or Fed, determines

The factors which affect the Fed's behavior are the subject of Section II.

     The nominal demand for money has the useful property of being homo-

geneous of degree one in the price level. That is, a doubling of the price

level, other things equal, doubles the nominal quantity of money demanded.

This is so because people are concerned with the real quantity of money measured in

terms of base-year dollars and not its nominal amount whether measured in

dollars or dimes or whatever. Thus, we normally write the nominal quantity

of money demanded Md as the product of the real quantity demanded md and the

price level


                                 MdEmdP                                    (1)



The determinants of the real quantity of money demanded will be examined in

detail in Section III with particular reference to channels of international

influence.
                                                                                  4




     In equilibrium, the nominal quantities of money supplied and demanded

must be equal, so substituting in (1) and solving for the price level:


                                                                           (2)


This equation states the price level in terms of the ratio of its proximate

determinants: the nominal quantity of money supplied and the real quantity

of money demanded.

     We are concerned here with inflation, which is the growth rate of the

price level. Let us define        as the growth rate operator such that

                            log X —   log   X

                     r3x=
                                                3foranyX>O                  (3)



where X is the value of X j years previously. Thus           computes the con-

tinuously compounded growth rate per annum of a variable averaged over a

period of j years. The j-year-average inflation rate FP is, therefore,


                              rP = rM5          rmd                         (4)



The inflation rate is the difference in the average growth rates of the

nominal quantity of money supplied and of the real quantity of money demand

over the same period.

      For the observable nominal and real quantities of money, equation (4)

 is true by definition; the usefulness of the approach comes from our ability

 to explain those quantities in terms of supply and demand conditions. Fig-

 ure 1 illustrates the main channels by which the international economy

 might influence these supply and demand conditions. The balance of payments

 is hypothesized to influence the quantity of money which the Federal Reserve

 System chooses to supply. This influence has been observed for other countries
                                                                                5




which fix their exchange rate to the dollar, but this evidence is not

necessarily applicable to a reserve-currency country like the United States.

Factors which influence our terms of trade —- such as the creation and de-

cisions of OPEC --   affect   our real income which is a major determinant of

the real quantity of money demanded. We must examine empirically whether

these factors have had a sufficiently large impact to cause significant

variations in the growth rate of the real quantity of money demanded.

     The general-equilibrium approach embodied in equation (4) elucidates

the error in the partial-equilibrium or adding-up approach. This latter ap-

proach explains the inflation rate as a weighted sum of the inflation rates

of individual goods and services without due allowance for the adjustment of

wages, profits, and rents to make equation (4) hold. That is, the partial

equilibrium approach starts from the definition of the price level as a

weighted sum of the prices P8 of in comodities identified by the subscript a:


                                   P                                        (5)
                                               wj a
                                         1=1


For growth rates, the following formula therefore holds approximately

                                        m wP
                                           aa                               (6)
                              rP       a=l       r 'a

The argument goes that a rapid increase in the price of an individual

coniiiodity, such as oil, contributes to inflation according to its weight
wP
  aa plus any induced increase in other prices of closely related products.

 The problem with the approach is that it ignores the small but pervasive

 downward effect on the prices of all other comodities so that the general

 equilibrium condition (4) holds. Factors which niake on particular group
                                                                             6




of prices rise more rapidly influence the average growth rate of prices only

to the extent that they increase the growth rate of the nominal money sup-

ply or reduce the growth rate of real money demanded.
                                                                                                                    7




            II. Determinants of Nominal-Money-Supply Growth


     The Federal Reserve System, a semi-independent agency within

the legislative branch of government, operates through the comercial

banking system to control the nominal quantity of money. Among the factors

which influence the Fed's behavior are recent inflation and unemployment

rates and unexpected changes in government expenditure. The first two

factors are relevant to the Fed's role in attempting to stabilize while

the third factor refers to the central bank's traditional financing of un-

expected government expenditures by resort to the printing press.

     A general behavioral function describing the nominal money supply be-

havior of the central bank is drawn from the Mark III International Trans-

mission Model' and reproduced here:2


     Mog M =     0.004     +    0.461 log M ,
                                           —'
                                                                 - 0.230     Mog M ,       + 0.00025t
                (0.003)         (0.12)                             (0.12)                       (0.00005)
                 1.59            3.98                             -1.98                          5.06

                 0.004           0.002                                                     +
            +
                (0.029)
                            +
                                 (0.021)
                                               -   1
                                                        +
                                                                 2    +   0.029
                                                                          (0.020)
                                                                                     (-3         -4)
                 0.14             0.08                                    1.46

            +    0.058 (log P -          -
                                             log       P-    )   - 0.237       (log P       -
                                                                                                log    p 5)
                (0.090)                                              (0.100)
                -0.64                                                -2.38

                —0.117 u        +    0.539     u
                                                   -2
                                                                 —0.432 u           -0.055 u
                           -l
                (0.193)             (0.363)                      (0.367)            (0.195)
                -0.60                1.49                        -1.18              -0.28                     (7)

                   =    0.56,    S.E.E. =      0.0046, D-W = 2.05

The estimation is based on quarterly data for 1957-I through 1976-IV. The

notation is t for time in quarters,                         for unexpected real government expend-

tures, P for the GNP deflator, u for the unemployment rate, and the negative
                                                                                8




subscripts indicate lags in quarters. The regression explains 56 percent of

the quarterly variation in the growth rate of money, although the policy

response to government spending, inflation, and unemployment is realtively

weak and a long time coming. A great deal is hidden in the trend term which

implies a gradual increase in the steady-state growth rate of nominal money

from 0.2% per annum at the end of 1956 to 6.0% per annum at the end of l976.

We shall return to this shortly.

     A great many countries choose to fix their exchange rate with some other

currency. This requires that they adjust nominal money growth to their

balance of payments. This is not true for a fiat reserve country such as

the United States,4 but it is worthwhile to check whether the Federal Re-

serve System in fact responded to the balance of payments. To test this, I

added three terms B, (B1 +          and (B3 +         to equation (7) where B
                             B2),               B4)
is the ratio of the balance of payments to income. The F (3/64) statistic

for testing the hypothesis of 0 coefficients on all 3 variables was only 0.25,

and the coefficients in fact all were very small and of the wrong sign. So

the evidence strongly indicates that international factors have not affected

U.S. nominal-money growth via the balance of payments.

     Absent the main channel by which international factors affect the

nominal money supply in nonreserve countries, we must consider indirect

effects. If there are temporary effects on the inflation rate or unemploy-

ment rate this would have a temporary effect on the growth rate of the nom-

inal money supply. Possibly some of the unaccounted for variance could

result from Fed responses to international factors which are uncorrelated

with the balance of payments, but these factors are apparently serially un-

correlated and so not a source of a continuing effect on the nominal quantity

of money supplied.
                                                                             9




     Sumarizing, the balance of payments has had no effect on U.S. nominal

money growth. No other channel would appear to offer any possibility for

other than temporary effects on nominal money growth from the international

sector.

     The central bank's reaction function (7) mainly labels our ignorance

as to the cause of the upward trend in nominal money growth. It has been

widely supposed that financing of the Vietnamese War by printing money be-

gan the process. However, neither the fraction of the total labor force in

the military nor the number of troops in Vietnam, when added to reaction

function (7) enter at all significantly.5 So the Vietnamese War apparently

had no more effect than would be implied by any similar series of unexpected

increases in government spending. If the upward trend reflects a gradual

increase in the acceptable level of inflation as a result of our experience,

then perhaps the Vietnamese War was indeed the beginning of the process

which has since fed on itself.
                                                                            10




             III. Determinants of Real-Money-Demand Growth


     The demand for money is one of the most thoroughly investigated topics

in economics.6 There are a number of variations, but the main theme is

that the real quantity of money demanded md is a stable function of the

interest rate r and total real income y.   In the short run, unexpected

changes in the growth rate of the nominal quantity of money supplied induce

movements in r and y which change the growth rate of real money demand by

the source amount. However, it is argued that these changes in r and y are

temporary and in the long run all the effects are on prices with the real

quantity of money demanded returning to its original growth path.7

     Chanqes in other terms of trade can affect the real quantity of money

demanded and hence the price level in two distinct ways -- one transitory

and one permanent. The temporary effect occurs because an unexpected adverse

change (an OPEC price increase, say) will shift up the supply curve of

tradeable goods immediately while it takes time for the adjustments in

domestic factor prices to occur as discussed at the end of Section 1. Fig-

ure 2 illustrates how a temporary upward shift in the aggregate supply

curve from AS to AS would cause a temporary fall in real income from y to

y and rise in the price level from to P.      But these temporary effects

 are self-reversing as factor prices adjust and unemployment falls back to-

 ward its normal level.

      Permanent effects of changes in the terms of trade on the real demand

 for money (and so the price level) would arise from permanent changes in the

 steady-state growth paths of real income or the interest rate.   Some

 economists8 have argued that the change in U.S. terms of trade associated

 with the creation of the OPEC reduced real income permanently by as much as
                                                                                 11




3 to 5 percent. This author would argue that those estimates are on the

high side because price controls, which caused an overstatement of real

income in the official data, were coincidentally taken off.9 Be that as it

may, note that this is a once-and-for-all reduction in the level of real

income and not a permanent reduction in its growth rate. Figure 3 illus-

trates such a once-and-for-all percentage reduction in log md at time t for

a aiven constant growth rate of the nominal quantity of money supplied. An

equal once-and-for-all percentage increase in the price level is implied.

Note that the average inflation rate (the slope of log P) is affected only

for observations including time t.

        Suppose that i   is   the normal growth rate in the real quantity of money

demanded due to normal growth in real income and the interest rate plus any

technological change in payments technology and institutions. A once-and-

for-all decrease in real income reduces real money demand but does not affect

..   When we look at average growth rates of the real quantity of money over

substantial periods these once-and-for-all shifts will average out and have

a negligible effect on inflation. For example if           represents the once-and-

for-all-shifts in real money demand over the previous year, the i-year-

average growth rate of real money demand is

                                   d        1 j1
                                 rm =p+— i=O
                                          Z c.                                 (8)


Assuming these shifts are uncorrelated with mean 0, the mean value of rmd

u and the variance is c2/j where          is the variance nf c.   It is an empirical

question as to whether the actual stochastic distribution of the s is such

that the variance of ]Tmd becomes trivial in a reasonably short period of

time.     If so, even though these shifts in the level of real money demand do
                                                                               12




cause once-and-for-all price level shifts, the averaqe effect of these price

level shifts is negligible in discussing inflation trends.

      To illustrate this empirically, I estimate the following regression


                                     =
                                         rM -       +                        (9)
                                rP

for   alternative observation lengths j. This s includes not only the effects

of once-and-for-all shifts in real money demand but also temporary induced

movements in money demand. Since the induced movements are negatively

correlated, they too average out for longer sample periods.        Table 1 qives

the standard errors, corrected R2s, and Durbin-Watson statistics on the

definition of money for data from 1954-IV through l978-IV.1° For quarterly

data nominal money does not help predict the inflation rate. For annual

and biennial data we get improvement but still have substantial unexplained

 variance. With quadrennial data, however, the standard error of the infla-

 tion rate drops to about 1 percent per annum and the unexplained variance

 to around 19 percent. Thus, while real-money-demand shifts play a substantial

 role in short-run inflationary developments, long-run inflation trends are

 dominated by movements in the average growth rate of the nominal quantity

 of money supplied.

        Some of these variations in the growth rate of the real quantity of

 money demanded are caused by the variations in the growth rate of the nominal

 quantity supplied as noted at the beginning of this section. We can get an

 idea of how much variation in the growth rate of real money demand is due

 to autonomous (non-supply) forces by regressing the current inflation rate

 on current and lagged nominal money growth:                   -



                                 4/j
                          r.P   = E k.    1
                                              r.M
                                               3 -13
                                                    . .-   +                  (10)
                                 i=0
                                                                            13




The four-year-distributed lag on money growth appears sufficient from the

previous work of others to allow for most of the effects of variations in

nominal money growth on the growth rate of real money demand. Table 2 re-

ports regression estimates of equation (10). We see by comparison with

Table 1 that about half of the standard error of the cjrowth rate of real

money demand is due to variations in the growth rate of nominal money supply.

Indeed about 60 percent of the variance of quarterly inflation rates, 75

percent for annual and biennial inflation rates, and over 95 percent of the

variance of quadrennial inflation rates is explained by current and lagqed

growth rates of nominal money alone. Since the total unexplained variance

due to both domestic and international sources of variation in the growth
of real money demand is so small, I conclude that as an empirical matter

the international economy has had a negligible influence via the real-money-

demand channel.
                                                                            14




                      IV. Conclusions and Sumary


    We have organized our discussion in terms of the proximate determinants

of the inflation rate: the average growth rates of nominal money supply and

real money demand.

     The balance-of-payments has a powerful effect on the money supply of

countries which maintain fixed exchange rates. This need not be the case

for a fiat reserve country such as the U.S. and no balance-of-payments effect

on U.S. monetary policy was detected empirically. Only temporary and in-

direct channels were found by which the international economy could affect

the growth rate of the nominal quantity of money supplied.

     Effects on real money demand due to changes in real income appeared

plausible. However, these effects are either temporary and self-reversing

or of the once-and-for-all variety and result in price level shifts which

only temporarily affect the inflation rate. Most of the variation in infla-

tion rates is explained by variations in the growth rate of the nominal

quantity of money supplied even for quarterly or annual observations.

Measuring inflationary trends by quadrennial averages, over 95 percent of

the variance in inflation is explained by nominal money CM1) growth rates

with less than 5 percent attributable to autonomous movements in the growth

rate of the real quantity of money demanded due to both domestic and interna-

tional factors. Thus the long-run influence of international factors on

the U.S. inflation rate is negligible although they may play a supporting

role in the short run. This negative conclusion leaves the responsibility

for U.S. inflationary trends squarely on the Federal Reserve System. The

international economy cannot be blamed for our poor performance to date nor

used to excuse future failures.
                                                                                   15




                                     REFERENCES


Carr,    Jack and Darby, Michael R., "The Role     of   Money Supply Shocks in the

        Short—Run Demand   for   Money," U.C.L.A. Department of Economics Dis-

        cussion Paper No. 98, October 1979.

Darby, Michael R., "The U.S. Economic Stabilization Program of 1971—1974,"

        in Michael Walker, ed., The Illusion of Wage and Price Control,

        Vancouver: The Fraser Institute, 1976.

_____     Intermediate   Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw—Hill Book Co., 1979.

_____     "The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments: Two Specious

        Assumptions," Economic Inquiry, January 1980, 18: in press.                -




_____ and Stockinan, Alan C., "The Mark III International Transmission Model,"
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.        ,   February 1980.
Goldfeld, Stephen N., "The Demand       for   Money Revisited," Brookings Papers on

        Economic Activity, 1973, No. 3: 577—638.

Laidler, David E. W., The Demand for Money: Theories and Evidence, 2nd ed.,

        New York: Dun—Donnelley Publishing Corp., 1977.

_____     "The Demand for Money in the United States Yet Again," University of

        Western Ontario Department of Economics Research Report No. 7918,

        June 1979.

Nork, Knut A., and Hall, Robert E., "Energy Prices, Inflation, and Recession,

        1974—1975," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 369,

        July 1979.

Rasche, Robert H. and Tatom, John A., "The Effects of the New Energy Regime

        on Economic Capacity, Production, and Prices," Federal Reserve Bank of

        St. Louis Review, May     1977, 59 (5): 2—12.
                                                                                      16




                                          FOOTNOTES



       1See Darby and Stockman (1980).

       2The standard errors appear below the coefficients in parentheses, and

t-values appear below the standard errors. The estimation was by two staqe

least squares using principal components of the predetermined variables in

the Mark III model. Durbins h cannot be computed in this case.

        3This steady-state growth assumes all variables equal their expected

values: g          = g1   =    = g3   =   g4 = 0,   log P1 - log P3 = log M1 -   og   M3 -

     , log     P3 - log P5 = log M3 - log M5 -            p, U1 = U2 = U3 = U4 =
where    TI   is   the steady-state growth rate of real money (see Section III) and

i,   the natural rate of unemployment, is 0.0475 in 1956 and 0.0575 in 1976.
The precise values of the natural unemployment rate are not important to

these calculations and the 4 3/4 and 5 3/4 percent figures are my approxima-

tions of the mean estimates in the literature.

        4See Darby (1980). A fiat reserve country is one which does not

attempt to maintain a pegged exchange rate and which issues inconvertible

paper money.

       5Distributed lags of the military variables alone or in combination

with the balance-of-payments variables also failed to enter.


       6Standard reviews of the literature are Laidler (1977, 1980) and

Goldfeld (1973). The author's own views are reported in Darby (1979) and

Carr and Darby (1979).
                                                                            17




        7This holds strictly only in the case of superneutrality; we proceed on

the assumption that this case holds sufficiently well for empirical work.

See Darby (1979, pp. 134-137, 207—213) for analysis of the non-superneutral

case.


        8Notably Rasche and Tatom (1977) and Mork and Hall (1979).


        9See Darby (1976).

    101 started in 1954 to avoid the Korean War price controls, and 1978 is

the last full year of data available at the time of writing.


    lt would if the constraint that the coefficient of rM equal 1 were

not imposed. The negative corrected 2 is telling us that the variance in

the quarterly growth rate of real money is greater than that of the quarterly

inflation rate.
                                                       18




                      FIGURE 1

  CHANNELS FOR INTERNATIONAL INFLUENCES



r..p       =        r.MS         —   F.md       (3)
 J                                    J




       Fed. Res. Sys.                real income


               /
       Balance of                           Terms of
         Payments                             Trade
                                                                     19




                              FIGURE 2

         TEMPORARY PRICE LEVEL AND REAL INCOME EFFECTS FROM AN
            UNEXPECTED ADVERSE CHANGE IN THE TERMS OF TRADE

log P




                                                          AS -



                                                          AS


log P
log j5




                                                     AD
                              I   I


                              I   I                              loci y
                        log       log y
                                                      20




                FIGURE 3


ONCE_ANDFOR
              ALL SHIFT IN md AT TIME t

                                      log MS

      I                                   p




                                      log md
                                               time
       t



Note: log P     log MS -   log   md
                                                                              21




                                    TABLE 1

Summary Statistics for Prediction of Inflation Rate rP as FM -    ii




0 bservat ion              S.E.E.                2                  D-W
    Length (j)

¼ year                     0.0291              -0.2547              0.74

1   year                   0.0229               0.1045                 1.46

2 years                    0.0189               0.3455              2.29

4 years                    0.0095               0.8073                 1.21




Notes:     P is the GNP deflator; M is the M (currency + demand deposits) money
           stock; all regressions are run on1data from 1954-IV through l978-IV.
                                                                           22




                                   TABLE 2

                 Summary Statistics for Prediction of
                                             4/j
                Inflation Rate by F.P =            k. r.M
                                                    1  3 —13
                                                               -p
                                             1=0


Observation              S.E.E.                         2           D-W
 Length (j)

1/4 year                 0.0165                       0.6264        1.00

1 year                   0.0119                       0.7802        1.48

2 years                   0.0121                      0.7586        1.74

4 years                   0.0040                      0.9699        2.83


Note: P is the GNP deflator; M is the M1 (currency + demand deposits)
       money stock; all regressions are run for 1958-IV through l978-IV
       on data from 1954-IV through 1978-IV.
