NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN CPLORATION INTO THE DETERMINANTS
OF RESEARCH INTENSITY

Ariel

Fakes

Mark Shankerman

Working Paper No. 1438

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
January 1980

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Productivity and Technical Change. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #438

Januaxy 980
An Exploration Into the Determinants of Research Intensity

ABSTRACT

This paper explores the economic factors which determine the variation of

research effort across firms. The intra—industry coefficient of variation of
research intensity is much larger than those of traditional factors. We show
that this important fact is consistent with the theoretical argument that knowledge possesses unique economic characteristics, and that the demand for research
depends both on the parameters of the production function for knowledge and on
the ability of the firm to appropriate the benefits from the knowledge it produces.
We propose and implement a framework for decomposing the observed intra—industry
variance In research intensity into three components: demand inducement, a firm—

specific structural parameter, and errors in the observed variables. The main
empirical findings are that errors in the variables (especially research) are
important, that very little of the structural variance in research intensity is
accounted for by demand inducement, and that the bulk of the variance is related

to differences in the firm—specific parameter. Both the theoretical and empirical
analysis indicate that it is not reasonable to treat the demand for research in a

manner analogous to the demand for traditional Inputs, including capital. Substantially richer models are required to provide insight into the structure of incentives driving the demand for research.

Ariel Pakes
Harvard University
National Bureau of Econon4c Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617)

868—3921

Marke Schankerman

New York University

National

Bureau of Economic Research
15—19 West 4th Street

New York, New York 10012
(212) 598—7037

AN EXPLORATION INTO THE DETERNINANTS OF

RESEARCH INTENS ITY*

Introduction
The recent interest of economists in the process of technological change derives in part from the unique economic charac-

teristics of knowledge. These characteristics, discus8ed formally
by Arrow (1962), indicate the likelihood of a divergence between the
private and social rates of return to research resources devoted to

producing new knowledge. It should not be surprising that these
same characteristics also affect the derived demand for research by

profit—oriented firms. This paper explores the economic factors
which determine the distribution of research effort across firms.
These factors are known as cross—sectional inducement mechanisms.
There are three sets of competing explanations in the literature,
each emphasizing a different aspect of the problem.
Schmookler (1966), and Griliches and Schmookler (1963),
emphasize the importance of expected market size as an inducement to

research

effort.

They recognize that the cost of reproducing the

knowledge generated by research is low relative to the original cost
of producing it, and that the private return to research therefore
varies directly with the number of units of output in which the

knowledge is embodied, or the size of the market. Differences across

1

2

Industries in the cost of producing knowledge are downplayed, on
the argument that scientific knowledge is sufficiently well
developed to make the supply for new industrial knowledge highly

elastic at the same level of costs for all industries. Rosenberg
(1963, 1969 and 1974), while granting the importance of market size,
argues that the body of scientific and engineering knowledge grows

at different rates in different areas and that the application of
such knowledge to industries is more circumscribed than Griliches

and Schmookler suggest. He concludes that these differences in the
cost of producing industrial knowledge, or technological opportunity
are a major determinant of the observed distribution of research

effort. Schumpeter (1950), on the other hand, argues that research
effort generates temporary monopoly power for the innovating firm.

Since knowledge has a low reproduction cost, any economic unit aware

of the information embodied in an innovation can exploit it. Hence
the private benefits from the production of knowledge must be a
result of quasi—rents accruing to the producer of the innovation.
The key to this process is the ability of the firm to appropriate

the monetary benefits from the knowledge it produces. Schumpeter
therefore emphasizes the determinants of the degree of appropriability,

such as entrepreneurial ability, industrial market structure, and the
general institutional framework (including patent rights) in which

the firm operates. Finally, any study which specifies empirical
measures of research effort and their relationship to economically
useful knowledge must give careful attention to the influence of

3

measurement and specification errors on the observed distribution
of research expenditures.

These different issues in cr088—sectional inducement remain

unresolved and unintegrated into a general framework. This paper
presents a unified framework for analyzing interfirm differences in
research expenditures which takes account of the unique characteris-

tics of knowledge as an economic commodity. The model postulates
Cobb—Douglas production relationships and results in equations

determining the intensity of use of all inputs. Traditional factor
intensities in such a framework depend only on production function

parameters. The optimum research intensity depends, in addition, on
expected growth rates and appropriability. The intra—industry
coefficient of variation in research intensity in the comprehensive

cross—section of American manufacturing firms examined is more than
seven times as large as the coefficient of variation in traditional

factor intensities (1.81 compared with 0.24). This in itself
supports the theoretical arguments which indicate that research

demand

is

determined by a more complex set of factors than the demand

for traditional inputs and suggests that the inducement mechanisms
described in the literature do discriminate among firms.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 specifies the
production function for knowledge which underlies the cost side of

the determinant8 of research demand. In Section 2 a model of the
private returns to new Industrial knowledge is presented. It is
shown that the cost of production and the returns from the use of new

4

industrial knowledge jointly determine the private rate of return
to research resources and, in a profit—oriented economy, the

research intensity of the firm. Section 3 specifies the structure of
the stochastic terms. Section 4 applies the model to an examination
of the intra—industry variance in research intensity. Concluding
remarks provide a brief summary of results and a discussion of
implications.

1. Production Relationships

This paper is limited to an analysis of an extended Cobb—

Douglas production function. Research resources enter the production
process by raising the productivity of traditional factors of

production in a disembodied maimer. Problems involved in the
construction of R&D variables have made this simple type of specification the most widely used framework in the empirical analysis of
the role of research resources in production, and in this respect the

data base used here is no exception.1 The general limitations of
this type of framework have been ably discussed by Griliches (1973

and 1975), and we will not repeat them here. Our specification
differs from the one chosen by Griliches (1975) in two respects.
First, we decompose "research resources" into its component inputs,

research labor and research capital. Second, we explicitly incorpor-

ate both an R&D gestation lag and a rate of obsolescence of produced

5

knowledge. Both of these parameters become determinants of the

R&D intensity of the firm.
The following discussion sets out the basic set of production
relationships. We begin with the traditional production function:

Q = y0KN H

(1).

where

=

K =

a constant, which may be both firm and time specific

stock

of accumulated and still productive, ownproduced knowledge

traditional labor services
H = traditional capital services
N

=

Q

= output (value added)

and all firm and
Since

time

subscripts have been omitted for convenience.

the stock of knowledge K is an unobservable variable, its units

are arbitrary. Hence, without loss of generality it has been
normalized such that

a

one percent increase in K raises output by

one percent.

The generation of knowledge is summarized by its production
function:

t - ALa
i (t—e)cb(t—e)

kG

where

—

(2

6

=

the gross-increment in own-produced knowledge at t

A1 = a

constant, which may be both firm and time

specific

Lte = research

C0 =
U =

labor services at t - 8

research capital services at t -

the

me

8

betweOn the time research is
undertaken and its embodiment in the traditional
production processes of the firm

lag

Equation (2) states that knowledge is produced by research
labor and research capital and that the form of the production function

is Cobb-Douglas.2 Since the development of either a new technique or
new product requires the use of research resources over an extended

period of time, one would expect a distributed lag relationship to
connect the deployment of research resources and the resultant

increases in the firm's productivity.3 Since our data cannot sustain
an investigation of this distributed lag, we use the simplification of
a mean lag which applies to all units of research resources equally.

It should also be noted that we assi.ne the parameters a and b to
be the same for all firms in a given industry. These, plus the

firm-specific constant A1, are indices of what Scherer (1965) calls
the "technological opport'unity" of the industry. Variation in A1,

a and b reflects differences in the cost of producing new industrial
knowledge, or in Rosenberg's terms (1969), differences in the "supply
side" determinants of the rate of technical progress.

7

Assuming geometric decay of knowledge at the rate of

and

taking the growth rates of research capital and research labor to be

constant both during and prior to the period of analysis (as required
by our data), the net increment to

Ae)t

=

where A =

A1L0C0eaL+)e,

-

knowledge k

is:4

lKt

(3)

and a hat denotes a rate of growth.

Solving this differential equation and noting that urn Kt =

stock

0,

the

t+-cD

of productive knowledge becomes:

ALa Cl

lt-et-e

=

K

t

(4)

1+aL+bC
This concludes the specification of the production

relationships. However, the next section will require expressions for
the reduction in unit costs attributable to an increase in research

labor and

research

capital. Assuming that the firm is a cost minimizer

facing fixed input prices, the unit cost function associated with (1)
can be expressed as

=

h(w,pH)
K

where Z represents unit costs, and w and
wage and rental rates for traditional labor and

(5)

denote the (fixed)
capita] services,

respectively. Substituting (4) into (5) and differentiating the cost

8

function

at time t +

0 with

respect to research labor and research

capital services at time t, we obtain

3Z

t+e =
- _____

t

aZ

t+e

(6a)

L

t

and
3Z
-

t+8 ——
t

bZ

t+0

C

b

t

2. Private Rates of Return to Research Resources
and Optimal Research Input Intensities

In the American economy the bulk of industrial research is

performed by firms. If these firms are motivated by potential
profits, the level of their research effort will be determined by the
expected net income generated by investment in research resources.

As a result, the large observed intra—industry variance in research
intensity should be attributable to the variance in the expected

private returns to research. The objective factors which could cause
differences in the expected net income generated by the use of

research resources are: 1) variation in the costs of research inputs;
2) differences in the productivity of research resources in generat-

ing usable industrial knowledge; and 3) differences in the ability to
derive monetary benefits from a given unit of produced knowledge.

Variation in costs of research inputs will be incorporated

into the model and discussed in the next section. In connection with

9

the productivity of research resources, the basic model assumes that

all firms in a given "industrytt produce a single homogeneous output

to the same production

subject

section),

conditions (as specified in the previous

and the model is tested separately on each "industry" in

our data set. Consequently, differences in the expected returns from
research beyond those caused by differences in the cost of research
inputs

will be associated with differences in the ability to derive

monetary benefits from a given unit of produced knowledge. However,
the industries in the data set are defined quite broadly, so there
could be some intraindustry differences in the output elasticity of

research resources. At this stage, we do not separate these supply
side differences from those in the ability to capture the monetary

benefits from knowledge. We return to this problem in the concluding
remarks.

The difficulty in specifying a mechanism which determines
the stream of private benefits that accrue to new industrial knowledge
is a result of the fact (stressed by Arrow, 1962) that knowledge has

no, or a very small, cost of reproduction. Hence, the realized social
rate of return to an innovation will vary directly with the number of

units of output in which is it embodied. However, the fact that
knowledge has no cost of reproduction also has implications for the
characteristics of the private returns accruing to the producers

of an innovation. Since any economic unit aware of the information
embodied in the innovation can exploit it, the private benefits from
the production of industrial knowledge must be a result of quasirents, or temporary monopolies, accruing to the producer of the

10

innovation.5

The strength of these monopolies, that is, the abilities

of firms to appropriate the benefits from the knowledge which they
have developed, will determine the private return to research resources

and therefore the research intensity of finns. In short, the private
return to the development of a new cost-reducing technique will depend
on the number of units of output embodying this new knowledge and the
fraction of the cost reduction attributable to the innovation which
is appropriated
We

by

begin

the innovating firm.

by reviewing the maximum appropriability environment,"

first described by Arrow (1962) and subsequently adapted to determine

the rate of return to research resources by Nordhaus (1969b). Consider
a constant cost industry in competitive equilibrium and an innovation
which reduces the cost of production for the f inns in the industry

and only for such finns. The maximum appropriabi]ity environment is

based

on the assumption

that the innovator patents the innovation

costlessly and leases the cost-reducing technique to all firms in the
industry (including itself), subject to the condition that the final

product

must sell at a uniform price

to consuming units. The lease

can be defined in terms of a royalty per unit of output produced with

the innovation, p0. The lessor acts as a monopolist and sets the
initial royalty so as to maximize profits subject to the constraint

that the royalty plus the new cost of production (p0 + Z1)
than or

In

equal

is less

to the pre— innovation cost of production (Z0 =P0).

virtually all cases the profit—maximizing royalty at the date

of introduction will be p0 =

Z0

—

Z1

=

Z. 6

11

Since the maximum appropriability environment assumes that
the lessor will capture the direct potential benefits from all firms
in the industry, the revenue collected in the first year of the

innovation in that appropriability environment is the shaded region

in Figure 1, or p0Q

= ZQ where

Q

denotes the industry output

in the year the innovation is introduced. Arrow does not consider
the entire stream of revenues accruing to an innovation, nor does he

allow for the possibility of less than full appropriability. We-now
extend Arrow's discussion to allow for non-maximal, firm specific
appropriability environments and for the calculation of the entire
revenue stream accruing to the innovation.
Let
1

receives

be the fraction of industry output from which firm

royalties on its innovation of age r,

p be the royalty

per unit of output, and Bit be total revenues accruing to the

innovation in year r. Then

B.0 =

p.0k.Q

=

Zk.QQ

(7)

and the discounted value of the stream of revenues generated by the
is

innovation (II)

It

=

f

Bite_ttdr =

where r is the discount rate.

f

pitkjtQe_rtdt

(8)

12

Figvre 1

$

7_ / /

p0 = Z

D

Q

QI

13

The specification of non-maximal, firm-specific appropriability
environments is based on the following two assumptions:

1. It is easier, or less costly, for a firm to capture the
benefits of the knowledge it produces through embodiment in its own
output (internal appropriation) than through embodiment in the output
of other firms.

2. The revenues accruing to an innovation decline with the age
of the innovation.
Internal appropriation is less costly because of the

difficulties involved in establishing a market for information.
First, prospective purchasers do not know the value of the information
before it is purchased, and the information cannot be secured in

divisible quantities. Second, the purchaser of the information may
resell it, or "reshape" and sell it, thereby undermining the original

seller's monopoly position. As a result, the information is not
likely to be sold to all potential users and the innovator will not
be able to capture the full benefits of the information from those
firms which do purchase it.7 By contrast, internal appropriati.on of

14

the information is not subject to these marketing constraints, at
least not to the same degree.

There are three factors which may cause revenues accruing to

the innovation to decline over time. First, new techniques will be
developed which either displace or partly substitute for the original
innovation.

Second, the use of the information in any

productive way

will reveal and spread it, in part by inspection of the resultant

output and the mobility of personnel among firms. This will tend to
erode the monopoly power of the innovator, thereby reducing either the
unit royalty which can be charged or the part of industry output. from

which royalties accrue, or both. Third, the accumulation (by a single
firm or group of collusive firms) of small innovations over time is

equivalent (in terms of cost reduction) to a large innovation. This
will eventually violate the Arrow royalty condition, which in turn
reduces the unit royalty that accrues to at least one of the
innovations.

In order to maintain a specification which is both as general
as possible and consistent with the preceding two assumptions, we let

p. k.

1T1T

=

(p.

—St

e

)ei it—
÷k. Q.

+k.—6t
i

= Ze

ir
—
Q.

(9)

15

n
k. = 0

where

by construction (n is the number

i=11

of

firms in the

i

denotes the expected output of firm

industry) and

at time r.

Revenues in period r become

B.

it

=

T

k. Q =
p.1tiTt

k+k.

(Ze

JT)e

(10)

1Q.it

We will interpret the parameters in the following manner:

k+k.
6 is the rate of decay in the unit royalty, e

is the proportion

of firm i's share of industry output from which the firm receives
this royalty, and ek is the (geometric) mean of this proportion over
all firms in the industry. However, it is impossible to distinguish
k+k.

empirically between a rate of decay in the proportion e

and 6,

or between a firm specific component in the rate of decay and eki.
Since appropriable revenues alone suffice to determine the private
benefits from an innovation, it is immaterial whether the firm specific
component applies to the royalty (the price side of revenues) or to
the number of units from which the firm receives these royalties (the

quantity side of revenues). Hence, these relationships may be
interpreted as saying that the revenues generated by a given innovation

of age t depend upon: 1) the importance of the innovation .Z; 2) the
age of the innovation t (through the rate of obsolescence of the
przvate returns from knowledge 6); 3) a firm-specific structural
parameter

eki which determines the extent to which the firm can

monopolize the information produced by its research resources; and

16

4)

the expected output of the innovating firm

because

of the

relative ease of internal appropriation.8
To obtain the present value of revenues generated by the

employment of the marginal unit

of

research labor at time t

substitute (6a), (7), and (9) into (8). Setting the price of output
equal to one (as it implicitly is in our data) and recalling from

(6a) that the cost reduction does not occur until 0 years after the
employment

of the unit of research
=

a

+k. -(5+r)T

.80
t—
r

labor, we have

i.

gr

%.eldT

where g is the expected rate of growth of output of firm i.
Equating ItL to the wage rate for research labor (wy), taking a

first order Taylor's expansion of log(5+r-g) around log(6+r) and
rearranging terms, we can, express the optimal research labor intensity
as:

9

wL
log(——) = log

8c

+ cg*

where

=

(a/+r)e_'0'

and

a

=

—+0

+

k.

(ha)

17

An analogous procedure for determining the optimal research
capital intensity yields:

PC
=

log

81

+ ag*

+

k

(llb)

where

=

and P is the price of research capital services.
Several features of equations. (ha) and (llb) are worth noting.
First, since the returns from both research labor and research capital
are derived from the returns to industrial knowledge, any factor which
affects the returns to knowledge will influence the optimal intensities
of both the research variables. It is this important fact which
permits econometric identification of the relative importance of the
unobserved structural parameter (kr) in determining the research
intensities of firms.

Second, equations (ila) and (llb) indicate that the firm's
employment of research resources will vary directly with its
expected market size and its "appropriability base," and inversely

with the rate of obsolescence and the rate of discount. The
importance of expected market size in determining the optimal level
of research resources follows directly from the fact that knowledge

18

has no cost of reproduction.

10

Schmookler (1966) demonstrated the

empirical importance of this point at an inter-industry level, while
Griliches (1958) has shown the dominant influence of expected
market size in determining the relative social rates of return to
hybrid seed innovations.

The structural parameter k1) reflects the extent to which
a firm can capture the benefits from the cost-reducing innovations it

develops. This will be determined jointly by the market structure of
the industry (e.g., similarity of firms in terms of market power,
production processes employed, research orientation, ease of imitation),
the abilities of the entrepreneur or manager of the firm, and the
general institutional setting in which the firm operates--factors
associated with the Schumpeterian tradition.

Third, for a given value of initial revenues accruing to an

innovation, the higher is the rate of obsolescence (5), the smaller

the

total value of private benefits from the innovation and therefore

the

less intense will be the research effort. Moreover, since research

produces a stock (knowledge) whose benefits accrue over the future,
the optimal research intensity will vary inversely with the rate of

discount. Finally, the longer the gestation lag (0), the larger
is

the influence of the future in determining the returns to RD, and

hence the more important the effect of expected growth on the optimal
R.PD intensity.12
The model presented here posits a set of firms which produce
knowledge from research resources, and produce output by combining

19

this knowledge with traditional factors of production. The price of
output is determined by the cost of traditional factors plus quasirents generated by temporary monopoly power over the information

produced by the research resources. It is important to realize that
there will be no private benefits from the employment of research

resources without some degree of monopoly power. The
characteristics

unique

of knowledge as a corvnodity imply that the private

rate of return to research resources must be determined jointly by
the parcvneters of the production function for knowledge and the ability

of the firm to internalie the benefits from the knowledge it produces.
This

point seems to be incompletely understood in the literature.

3. Structure and Identification of the

Three Equation Model

The basic structural form of the model consists of factor demand
equations for research labor, research capital and traditional labor.

By adding the relevant stochastic terms, this section converts the

model into an estimable form. Actually, two stochastic specifications

are investigated. The first specification, which imposesa fairly
stringent set of assumptions on the properties of the errors, produces
a simple three equation model and a transparent identification scheme.

The second specification relaxes the more stringent assumptions on the
errors, and enables both a more complete set of tests of the model and
an investigation of the intertemporal stability of the appropriability

parameter. The cost of this generality, however, is a more complicated

20

six equation

model. In this section we describe the three equation

model. The empirical results for this model and a summary of the
additional information in the six-equation model are presented in the
next section.

Letting asterisks denote the optimal levels of each variable

and adding the factor demand equation for traditional labor to (ha)
and (llb), the structural form of the model is written as:

+ log

log W

L* -

log Q* = log

log P + log C* - log Q* =
log w +

log

It is assumed

N* -

that

log

log Q* = log

+

3g*

+

cg*

+

-'

k1

(12a)

k.

(12b)

5

(l2c)

a firm's expected growth rate equals its

averge past growth rate plus a component which reflects common
expectational changes in the trend of industry demand.13 That is:

g =

g+

for

i = 1

.

.

.n

(13)

where j. is the average past growth rate of firm i, and tg is
the commonly held, expected difference between the average past and
future growth rates.

The variable in (12) denoted by Q* is expected output, i.e.,
the value of output upon which input decisions are made. We follow
Mundlak and Hoch (1965) in assuming "partial transmission" of the error
in output to the input decision-making process. Letting the

21

°

denote the observed value of a variable, we have:

superscript

Y112h1
H e q q

=

and

1111
2e q

Q° = E[QOIflq] = y0KN 1N
where

=
E(Vq)

In

=
E(Tlq)

0

and

E[v] =

(14)

the context of the "simultaneity" literature, the partial

transmission

assumption is quite general, encompassing both the full

transmission assumption of Marschak and Andrews (1944) and the zero
transmission assumption of Zellner et al. (1966) as special cases. 14

should be interpreted as resulting from firm

The disturbance
TIq

specific

differences in management and

technology, and

the effect of

transitory factors which are known before input decisions are made.

The term

VqI on the other hand, results from
known before input decisions ate made,

transitory factors which

are not

such as machine

breakdowns, and from measurement error.

The observed level of each factor of production differs from
its optimal level by an error which has two components, a decision
component resulting from an inoptimal choice of factor levels and a

pure measurement component. Letting c. be the sum of the two errors

for factor j

we have:

22

c°

= C*eC
=

L*e

(15)

N° = N*efl
where E(e.) = 0

and V(c.) =

for

j =

c,L,n.

What remains is to specify the covariance structure of the
various error components, and it is in this specification that the
three and six equation models differ.
It is quite conmon to assume that

is independent of the
Vq

errors in the various factors)5 That is,

E(VqCj) =

0

for

j =

c,,n

(16)'

The reasoning is twofold. First, since there are independent measures
of each variable, there is no reason to expect any correlation between

their respective measurement errors. Second, the non-measurement
component

of vq is due to acts of nature such as weather conditions

and machine performance (see Zeilner et al. [1966]), whereas the
decision component of the factor errors occurs before the realization
of

and is due to human (management) error. Assumption (16) is
Vq

accepted a priori in the three equation model but is subjected to a
test in the six equation model described below.

The three equation model also assumes a zero covariance among

the errors in the various factors. That is:

E(cc.) = 0

for p j

and

p,j =

c,Z,n

(17)

23

Since the underlying assumptions of behavioral models which result in
the error structure in (17) are not very persuasive, the six equation

model will allow for free correlation among the factor errors. The
advantage of the three equation model based on (17) is its simplicity
and, as the six equation results will demonstrate, the bias due to the
16

simplification in (17) is minimal.

For the remainder of the analysis it will prove convenient
to redefine all variables as deviations from their sample means, but

for simplicity we leave the notation unchanged. With this under-

standing, substitution of

(13), (14) and (15) into (12) yields the

following system of equations in observed or manifest dependent
variables:

(18a)

ci+kj+cc_Vq
= cli + + -

1ogw+logL°_lOgQ° =
log

log PC +

log w +

System (18a) -

C° -

log

log N° - log

(18c) forms

a set

Q°

Q°

=

(l8b)
(18c)

- vs

of factor share equations for research

labor and capital, and traditional labor with the structure of the
stochastic terms incorporated.

Assuming

uncorrelated

that

the appropriability parameter, k, is

— 17
with the various error components and with g ,

a

24

maximum likelihood estimation technique provides consistent and

asymptotically

efficient estimates of a and of the variance-

covariance matrix of disturbance 1*, where

+ +q

2

2
c

k

2

2

2

°kq
2

q

2

2

2

°k90q
a

2
q

(19)

2
q

a

2
n

-

The identification of the various components from (19) is
straightforward.

of knowledge

Any factor

which affects the returns to the

production

will affect the optimal intensities of both research

resources. Consequently, the covariance between the disturbances in

the two research intensity equations will capture a. However, this
covariance also picks up any measurement or expectational error in

output (Vq) Since the traditional labor intensity equation will also
contain the error in output, a can be identified by the covariance
between the research intensity and the traditional labor demand

equations. Finally, the variances of the errors in the research
resource variables are calculated as the residual portion of the

research intensity equations. It is also clear from (19) that if

25

0, then the estimate of

unaffected by any correlation
Let

will be biased upwards or downwards

0. However, the

according as
is

2

consistency

of the estimated

among the factor errors.

us return to the variance in research intensity. The

research expenditures of a firm are calculated as the sum of the firm's

expenditures on research labor and research capital. That is:
=

wL°+PC°
r
c

Since we define research capital to
than

(20)
include all RD expenditures other

payments to scientists and engineers, (20) is an identity.

Analogously, we define the optimal level of research expenditures as

the sum of the optimal levels of expenditures on research capital and
research labor:

+PC
c

R* = wL*
r
Substituting

error

(12a) and

(21)

(l2b) into (21), and using (20), (21) and the

components in (15), the observed research intensity can be

expressed

in terms of the structural parameters of the model as:
log R° - log

Q°

t

(l-)c

=

where
=

+

and
=

a/(a+b)

+

+

-

(22)

26

Equation (22) is definitionally equal to a linear combination

of (18a) and (l8b). Hence, any two linearly independent combination
of these three equations contain all the information available in the

data. The form of the data made it easier to estimate an equation
for research expenditures than for research capital. Therefore, the
system of factor share equations which will be estimated is:

log R° -

W

log

log

=

Q°

+ log L° - log

log w + log N° - log

+

+

Q°

Q°

+ (1- 1I))c

= k1
=

+

+

vq

LCc)

-

(23a)

(23b)
(23c)

which has the following variance-covariance matrix of disturbances:
22

2

Ok+

22 2

a+(l) ac+aq

(19)a- (19)22
2
q
where

2

(+o)
0

(24)

22

qn

may be consistently estimated by the antilog of the constant

term in (23b). Of course, all the comments that applied to (18) and
(19) apply equally to (23) and (24).

The parameters from (23) and (24) [or from (18) and (19)1

permit a decomposition of the variance in research intensity into
three components: 1) variance due to differences in the expected growth

rate of the internal appropriability base of the firm (a2a)
2) variance caused by differences in the appropriability parameter

27

(at) which determines the private benefits accruing to a cost—reducing

innovation,.given the internal appropriability base of the firm; and
3) variance

resources

caused by measurement and decision errors in research

and in expected output.

In addition (24) allows for one formal and one informal test

of the underlying model. The system can

be

estimated with and without

the imposition of a zero covariance term between the disturbances from

equations

(23b) and

(23c). Under the null hypothesis that the

-

of the model are true against the alternative that
0, the ratio of the constrained to the
0 and/or

assumptions

unconstrained log likelihood ratio will distribute asymptotically as
2 18
X1.

.

Also, of course, there are non-negativity restrictions on

all the estimated variances. Since these restrictions are equivalent
to a ranking of the elements of the covariance matrix, and as such
are not guaranteed by our estimating procedure, the non-negativity
conditions

constitute an informal

test of the model.

4. Empirical Results

This

section begins with a brief description of the scope and

the sources of the data, and then presents and interprets the empirical

results.

19

The data were gathered jointly by the National Science

28

Foundation and the Bureau of the Census. They contain individual
company information on REED expenditures, the number of scientists and

engineers, total employment and sales--all based on the 1957-1965 annual
NSF-Census REED Surveys--and a variety of other company economic indica-

tors based on a match with the 1958 and 1968 Census of Manufacturers

and Enterprise Statistics. The data include observations on one level
year value and a corresponding growth rate for most variables.
The sample used here consists of 433 large (1000+ employees)
firms which account for 48 percent of all RFD performed in American
industry in 1963, and 78 percent of all RED excluding Aircraft and

Missiles.20 The firms are broken down into four broad industry groups
-—Chemicals and Petroleum, Electrical and Communications Equipment,

Fabricated Metal Products and Machinery, and Motor Vehicles and other

Equipment--and the analysis is

Transport
industries

performed on each of these

separately.

The data contain two measures of j, the average past growth
rate in value added. The first is a nine-year (logarithmic) average of
the past growth rate in sales (11).

while

the second is calculated as

the difference between the logarithms of value added in 1963 and 1957
divided by 6
measurement

Both

error, but

and

differ from j by pure

contains an additional error due to the

29

discrepancy between the true past growth rates in value added and

sales.

The information in both these measures can be incorporated

in the analysis by letting:
=

,i+')1

(25)

g2 =
where

E(v)

= E(v.g) = E(v12) = 0

and

2

V(v) =

for

That is, the observed measures of

j =

1,2
and g2 are both subject to

classical measurement error and the two measurement errors are assumed
to be uncorrelated.21

Equations (23), (24) and (25) fully specify the form of the

model to be estimated. Before presenting the empirical results,
however, exogenous information is used to derive a plausible range

for a. There are two reasons for our special interest in c. Recall

that a = (l/(r+cS] +

e

where r, S and 0 are the discount rate,

the decay rate in appropriable revenues accruing to the innovation,
and the mean lag between the outlay of research resOurces and the

beginning of the associated revenue stream. The parameters cS and 8

30

are key parameters in calculating the private rate of return to

knowledge producing activities. Second, a comparison of exogenous
information on the value of c' with the direct estimates here will

provide an informal test of the assumptions of the model (see fn.
17). The estimates of cS and 0 are taken from Pakes and Schankerman

(1978). The approximate ranges for t5 and 0 are 0.18 -

0.36

and 1.2

2.5 (years), respectively. Based on a discount factor of 0.10,

these estimates provide a fairly narrow a priori range for the
coefficient 0.

of

between 3.3 and 6.1, which in turn will be compared

to the actual estimates obtained here.

All models were estimated using a full information maximum
22

likelihood technique developed by Jireskog (l973b).

The empirical

results for the three equation model are presented in Table 1.1. The
2

.
value in line 8 tests the zero covariance constraint described
.

.

earlier. None of the four industries had a test statistic with a

surprising value. Treating the x
as drawings from independent x2

deviate

for the various industries

distributions,

industries, results in the more powerful ()/4

and summing over

test

statistic. The

observed value of ()/4 was .744, while, the one and five percent

critical values of a ()/4 deviate are 3.33 and 2.37, respectively.
Also

note that twenty-four free parameters with a pror non-negativity

31

TABLE 1

ESTIMATES OF ThE THREE EQUATION MODEL/

Chemicals
and
petroleum
1. a

Metal
products
and

machinery

Electrical
and
communi-

cations
equipment

Motor
vehicles
and
transport
equipment

3.94

2.16

5.64

5. s•8

2.26

1.30

2.40

3.40

2.

0.98

0.74

1.60

0.89

3.

+0.00

0.24

0.07

0.04

0.59

1.12

0.63

2.41

5.

+0.00

0.06

0.03

_O.04*

6.

0.06

0.02

0.04

0.11

7. aag/alogR/Q

0.03

0.02

0.03

0.04

1.83

0.06

0.79

0.31

110

187

102

34

s.e.

4. c7:

8.

x

9. n

!fAsterisks denote error variances which violate a priori
negativity constraints.
=

cov(12).

non-

32

constraints were estimated. Of these, only one was negative and

this one (

in

the fourth industry) was less than one standard

deviation from zero.

All of the estimated a coefficients are of the right sign and

statistically significant. Moreover, three of the four point
estimates of a lie in the interval predicted by the prior information
summarized earlier, and the single exception is less than one

standard deviation from that interval. To derive a summary measure
of a we tested the null hypothesis that the differences between the
various estimates of a are simply a result of random differences in

the estimators. The hypothesis is strongly accepted. The value of
23

a for the combined sample is 3.85 with a standard error of 0.76.
On the whole, then, the data and the exogenous information provide
mutually consistent information on the magnitude of the parameters
which determine a.

The most notable result of Table 1 concerns the effect of the

firmts past growth rate. Though this variable is neither statistically

nor economically insignificant in determining the firmts RD inten24

sity,

differences in growth rates account for only a relatively

minor portion of the intra-industry variance in RD intensity. In
fact, line 7

of

Table 1 indicates that differences in growth rates

account for only two to four percent of this variance.

As noted, the intra-industry coefficient of variation in RD
intensity is about seven times as large as that of traditional factors

of production. There are two possible explanations. First, the fact

33

that knowledge has no cost of reproduction implies that, unlike other
factors of production, research intensity will differ both because of
variance in expected growth rates and because of differences in the
extent to which firms can appropriate the benefits of the knowledge

they produce. Second, the variance in the available measures of RD
intensity may reflect a larger "error in variabl&' than the variance
of other factors of production.

The assumption that differences in expected growth rates could
be approximated by differences in average past growth results in

reasonable values of• a, but the variance in growth rates is too
small to account for a major portion of the observed intraindustry

variance in RD intensity. Hence, it is evident that a pure demand
inducement mechanism does not do well in explaining the intraindustrj

variance in RD intensity. The next obvious question is what portion

of that variance is due to error () and what part is explained by
the variance in the ability to appropriate the benefits from knowledge

34

(at).

Since the estimates of both

model are biased if there is any

we

correlation

now briefly describe and present

in the three equation

and

among the factor errors,

a summary

of

the

results of

estimating the six equation model which allows for free correlation
among these errors.25

The six equation model is constructed by adding the factor
demand equations for research capital, research labor, and traditional
labor in year t - 1

to those same equations for year t. Each error

component is assumed to be generated by a separate stationary stochastic

process. The model allows for a x0I2O test of the stationarity

assumptions (T1), a x8/8

test

of the assumption of no correlation

between the transitory portion of the output error and the factor

errors (T2), and a

test of the intertemporal stability of

the coefficients of the observed independent variables (T3). T1, T2,
and T3 test for consistency between the data and the assumptions used
tá identify the model. In addition, the six equation model investigates
two aspects of the intertemporal stability of the appropriability

paremeter. Let

kt

where

--

EtkiIL] = E[P]

=

35

0

and
2

=

E[31]
Then

2
1.tt

the model permits a test of the assumption that the variance in

the appropriability parameter is constant over time (a =

t

and produces a measure of

values

),
t-l

the correlation coefficient between the

of the appropriability parameter for a given firm in two

22

2

different years (A akl/ak or, if

t

2

=
t

2

,

2

A ).

t-i

The observed values of the test statistics for

T1, T2 and

T3 were 1.49, 0.04, and 0.33, respectively. None of these values is
surprising. It should be noted that the observed value of
indicates strong acceptance of the assumption of a zero covariance
between the transitory error in output and the factor errors in this

sample. The difference between the sum of squared residuals in the
model using all three test constraints and in the totally unconstrained

model can be used to produce a x6/36 test of the validity of the

model as a whole. The observed value of the x6/36 deviate was 0.91
which is less than its expected value under the null hypothesis that

all the constraints are satisfied. The
=

the hypothesis
t

statistic which tested

on the combined sample of four industries
t-1

had a value of 1.61. While this indicates acceptance of the hypothesis
at the five percent level, a sample with more than two time periods

would be required to determine more conclusively whether the variance
in the appropriability parameter is in fact constant over time.

36

Table 2 summarizes the basic decomposition of the variance

in RD intensity from the six equation model. Note first that the
estimates of the growth coefficient

(ct)

are only slightly different

from the estimates from the three equation model. Since both models

estimate a consistently, this result was expected. Line 2 provides
the estimates of the total error variance in research expenditures

from the three equation model (a2TEM)

while lines 3 and 4 present

the estimates of a and the error variance in research expenditures
Recall that the estimates of a2TEM

from the six equation model
are biased upward or downward as

0. Accordingly, the large

negative values of a in the second and fourth industries account
for the fact that a2TEM
r

2

.

is about twice as large as ar

in these

two industries.
Line

5 provides estimates of the fraction of the variance in

research expenditures that is attributable to errors in research
resources

ar/alogR. The average and the coefficient of variation

of this fraction across the four industries are 0.09 and 0.24,

respectively. While these estimates of a/aogR provide only an
upper bound to the ratio of measurement error variance to total
variance in research expenditures, they do suggest the possibility
of a rather large "errors in variable" bias in micro analyses using

research expenditures as an independent variable. Auxiliary
26

calculations reinforce this interpretation.

37

TABLE 2

SUMMARY OF RESULTS OF ThE SIX EQUATION MODEL

Motor
vehicles
and
transport
equipment

Chemicals

Metal
products

and
petroleum

and
machinery

Electrical
and
communications
equipment

1. a

4.10

2.62

5.13

3.49

2. a2T

0.23

0.47

0.31

1.18

3.

0.06

-0.23

0.02

-0.47

4.

0.33

0.20

0.37

0.58

5. aJO

0.12

0.07

0.08

0.09

6. rq'1ogR/Q 0.23

0.28

0.21

0.40

7. a klogR*/Q*!/

0.04

0.04

0.06

0.03

8. ak/a]ogR*/Q*W

0.96

0.96

0.94

0.97

1.00

0.99

0.99

0.99

110

187

102

34

10. n

a! 2 =

2
_alogR*/Q*
b/2

cov(g1g2).
2

2

alogR/Q araq.

38

We now consider the basic decomposition of the variance in

research intensity. Lines 6 to 8 present the relevant information.
Line 6 lists the portion of the variance in research intensity

attributable to errors. One minus this value is the fraction of the
variance

of

the

in research

intensity accounted for by the structural form

model. The average and the coefficient of variation of this

fraction over the four industries in the sample are 0.72 and 0.12,

respectively. That is, 72 percent of the intraindustry variance in
research intensity is accounted for by the structural form of the
model and, as line 8 indicates, over 95 percent of this is accounted

for by differences in k.
One further point is worth noting. Not only do differences
in the appropriability parameter account for a large majority of the

intra-industry variance in RD intensity, but the relative value
of k associated with any given firm seems to be stable over time.

That is, the autoregressive parameter (A) connecting the values of

k and k_1 is essentially unity in all four industries.

Concluding Remarks

This paper explores the factors which underlie the demand

for research by profit-oriented firms. The intra-industry coefficient
of variation of research. intensity is much larger than those of

traditional factors. This important empirical fact is consistent with

39

the theoretical argument that knowledge possesses unique economic
characteristics, and that the demand for research depends both on
the parameters of the production function for knowledge and on the
ability of the finn to appropriate the benefits from the knowledge

it generates. We propose a systematic framework for decomposing
the observed intra-industry variance in research intensity into
three components:

1) demand inducement, measured by growth rates

of output; 2) a firm-specific structural parameter; and 3) errors in
the observed variables.

There are three principal empirical findings from this

decomposition. First, about 25 percent of the variance in research
intensity is due to errors in the variables and most of it is

concentrated in the measure of research capital. The noise to total

variance ratio in research expenditures Ca.JaOgR) is about ten
percent and should be considered in inicroeconomic studies using

research resources as an independent variable. Estimated coefficients of observed research expenditures are likely to be substantially
biased downward since the bias depends on the error-variance relative
to that part of the variance in the research variables which is not
correlated with the rest of the regressors.
Second, about 75 percent of the intra-industry variance is

related to the structural parameters of the model, but very little of
this structural variance is accounted for by differences in growth

rates. This result is somewhat surprising. Schmookler (1966) and
others demonstrated the role of demand inducement in determining the

40

inter-industry pattern of the level of research, and Pakes (1979)

confirms its influence on the inter-industry distribution of

research intensity. We are left with a striking contrast between
the role of demand inducement at the intra-industry and interindustry levels of aggregation, but to explore it is beyond the
scope of this paper.

By far the greatest part of the intra-industry variance is

related to differences in the firm-specific parameter k. This
parameter is structural in the sense that it is consistent between
the research labor and capital demand equations and does not appear

in the traditional factor demand equations. Moreover, the value of
k associated with any given firm seems to be quite stable over time.
If there are no intra-industry differences in the elasticities of
the knowledge production function (technological opportunity), the
variance in k is due entirely to interfirin differences in appropri-

ability. The industry groups used here are quite broadly defined
and there is probably some variance in research elasticities, part

of which will be captured in

A definitive breakdown of o into

appropriability and technological opportunity components remains for
future research.

The more general, and we believe more important, implication
of this inquiry is one which does not depend on the specific inter-

pretation given to c1. Both the theoretical and empirical analysis
indicate that it is not reasonable to treat the demand for research

41

in a manner analogous to the demand for traditional factors of

production, including capital. This conclusion is reinforced by
evidence in Nadiri (1978), in which a generalized set of factor

demand equations is estimated on micro panel data. The F(113,904)
test statistic for the presence of firm-specific effects in the
research demand equation is 121.3, which should be compared both to
the five percent critical level of 1.08 and to the value in the

traditional capital demand equation of 18.6. These results also
hold when the sample is stratified by size of the firm. The general
conclusion we draw from all this evidence is that substantially
richer models are required to provide insight into the structure of
incentives driving the demand for research and thereby to explain
the distribution of research-related growth across firms.

42

Notes

*We would like to thank Zvi Griliches for many constructive
discussions of the issues in this paper, and Gary Chamberlain and

Bronwyn Hall for econometric and computing suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the National Science
Foundation, Grant GS-2726X.

'The problems alluded to are of two types. First, errors in
R D variables make more complicated input relationships difficult
to estimate (Griliches and Ringstaad, 1971). Second, a lack of good
price and quantity indices on the separate outputs that a firm
produces precludes the use of multiproduct production functions.

points are in order. First, ttresearch capital" refers
to an aggregate of all research resources other than research labor.

Second, in this paper the firm-specific constant captures the
effects of "learning by doing" and of other firms' research as inputs

in tk production process of the firm in question.

3Griliches (1973, 1975) has discussed the various lags

connecting research resources and productivity. One of the few
attempts to analyze the lag structure empirically is Evenson's study
(1968) of aggregate data for American agriculture.

43
4Since knowledge is a produced capital input, we must make
some approximation with respect to the employment of research

resources in the pre-sample period. The data we use are for 1963
and contain 1957-1963 average growth rates. Using the fact that
research resources in American industry grew at a fairly constant
rate between the end of World War II and the mid-l960s, a specification analysis indicated that the constant growth rate assumption was
the best approximation for our sample.

5This is a well known result which has been discussed by

Arrow (1962), Machlup (1962), and Nordhaus (1969a, 1969b). Patent
laws are in fact a device for strengthening these monopolies by
bestowing institutionally created property rights on the producers

of information. See Bowman (1973).

61f P1 is the profit maximizing price for a monopolist with
constant unit cost Z1, the "Arrow royalty" described in the text will
yield maximum profits if and only if P1 >

P0.

If the industry demand

is price inelastic over the relevant range, the Arrow royalty will be
optimal regardless of the magnitude of the cost reduction due to the

innovation. If the industry demand is price elastic, the condition
P1 > P0 can be written

<

I(P1)J,

where t denotes the price

elasticity of industry demand. It is apparent from this inequality
that the Arrow royalty will be optimal for all but the most major

44

innovations and will certainly be optimal for the cost reduction
resulting from the employment of the marginal research resource.

7As Arrow (1962, P. 615) remarks: "In the absence of
special legal protection, the owner cannot simply sell information

on the open market. Any one purchaser can destroy the monopoly,
since he can reproduce the information at little or no cost. Thus,
the only effective monopoly would be the use of information by the
original possessor. . .

.

With

suitable legal measures, information

may become an appropriable commodity. Then the monopoly power can
indeed be exerted. However, no amount of legal protection can make
a thoroughly appropriable commodity of something so intangible as
information."

8Since the appropriability base is allowed to vary among
firns, the specific decomposition used here is immaterial. However,
any assumption on the statistical properties of the appropriability

parameter will be restrictive. The decomposition chosen here has
two advantages. First, it permits an indirect test of the only
econometrically relevant assumption on the properties of k (see fn.

17.) Second, since royalty payments, which are about three percent
of research expenditures (Wilson, 1975, Chapter 3), are included in
our measure of output, one would want to make the firm's output a
direct determinant of the returns to its research.

45

9Since only the moment matrix of the variables was available,
we were limited to linear combinations of the original variables

and forced to use Taylor approximations. The ratio of the
approximation error to the true value is just over two percent, and
if g is distributed symmetrically, this will not affect the estimate
of a.

"°This should be distinguished from the role of market size

in models of the demand for traditional capital. The level of
investment in traditional capital is related to the expected growth
of output (accelerator models), whereas in our model the level of

investment in the stock of R D depends on the expected level of
output.

11Lucas (1967) tested this point on aggregate data for

American industry and obtained coefficients of the expected sign and
magnitude.

12This does not mean, however, that an increase in e raises

the optimal RD intensity since 0 affects both

and

13This formulation is not too unreasonable and has the
advantage of producing a simple econometric model which is directly

estimable with the available data. The data did allow us to
experiment with more sophisticated expectations formulae which

46

permit the firm to take into account both its own and the industryts
past growth performance in formulating expectations on its own future

growth rate. The results are similar to those reported here.

Pakes

(1978) uses a general rational expectations formulation on a different data set and obtains similar results.

14The special cases are vq = 0 and riq =

0

respectively. We

have investigated a more general model which assumes differential

transmission to different factor demand equations, but again the

results did not differ significantly from those presented here. Note
also that K picks up the effect of all research expenditures that

have already gestated and are still productive. Also, we have

the difference between E (e")

ignored

and 1.

15See Mundlak (1963), Mundlak and Hoch (1965),

et

and Zeilner

al. (1966).

16

any

Two

error

.

points

.

should be noted in connection with (17). First,

in the assessment of revenues (e.g., differential monopoly

or a difference between the expected and the actual price of
and will not bias the three equation
output) will be captured in

power

results.
than

Second, the assumption E[c) = 0

the assumptions E(c2,c) = E(EcCn)

is more troublesome

= 0 for two reasons. First,

there is a test of the latter two assumptions embodied in the three

equation results. In addition, since research resources affect

47

output only after a gestation lag, if there is a production function
constraint which connects the values of different contemporaneous

factor decision errors, it will cause a non zero correlation between
and

c

,

but

not between either

or c and e
2..

n

c

17Since k. is a structural parameter, the assumption that k
is orthogonal to the error components is roughly analogous to the
classic regression assumption of independence of the errors and the

regressors. The assumption E(k) = 0, however, requires additional
comment. There is no reason to expect k to be correlated with ,

but

we can do better than rely on our intuition. If E(k)

0, the

estimates of a derived from the models which rely on zero correlation

should differ from estimates based on other techniques. An assortment of exogenous information on the components of a (described in
the next section) yields estimates of a which are very similar to
those obtained from our models, and this may be interpreted as an

indirect test of the assumption E(k) = 0.

that if E(k)

of

We might add, however,

0, we can reinterpret a and k such that the estimate

becomes that portion of the underlying variance in appropriabil-

ity that is orthogonal to the variance in .

18Actually,

= 0.

the null hypothesis of the

However, under the alternative that

=

will

test is
-

acn

-

0, the event

occur only on a set of measure zero. Accordingly, we

neglect this possibility.

48

19Griliches (forthcoming) provides a more complete description of this data base.

20The original sample consists of 883 firms. We discarded
the data for the "aircraft

missiles" and the "all others" indus-

tries. The first was dropped because it is dominated by government

financed RD (74 percent versus 20 percent in the other industries).
Our market-inducement model has limited applicability, unless it
were known that privately and government financed R F D are close

substitutes and the supply of the latter is very elastic. Moreover,
there were only 31 firms and there were inconsistencies in the data.

The "all others" category was discarded on the grounds that it

contains both intra-industry and inter-industry variance in RD
intensity.

21Actually, since value added is a component of sales, part

of

is likely to be transferred to V2 and there will be some

correlation between these errors. We show below, however, that the
maximum possible bias caused by this correlation is minimal and
certainly does not warrant discarding the information in one of the
growth rate measures.

22The models presented here are a special case of a more

general class of structural equation models described by Jreskog
(1973a) and Wiley (1973).

49

can be shown that if any of the measurement error in
value-added is transferred to sales, the estimates of cx reported

above are biased downwards. However, even under the polar
assumption that all the measurement error in value-added is transferred to sales, the estimate of cx becomes only 4.15 with a standard

error of 1.01. Therefore, the unbiased point estimate lies between
3.85 and 4.15.

24The elasticity of RED intensity with respect to past
growth rates, evaluated at the sample mean of the growth rate, is
about 0.25.

25For the details of the six-equation model and its empirical
results, see Pakes (1978) or Schankerman (1979).

26Unfortunately, we cannot decompose the estimate of

into

a decision and a measurement component, but two pieces of evidence

suggest that the bulk of o consists of measurement error. First,
almost all of the errors in research expenditures are due to errors

in research capital. Since reported research includes all (rather
than only the capitalized portion) of research capital expenditures,
we (and all other investigators in this area) have a measure of gross
investment in research capital rather than the desired measure of

research capital services. On this account we would expect a large
measurement error component in research capital. Second, preliminary

50

application of the three equation model to industry averages of
all variables indicates that the error variance in research expen-

ditures in these aggregate variables approaches zero. The averaging
procedure would tend to cancel out the part of the error variance
caused by measurement error and by random, inoptinial choice of

factor levels, but it would not eliminate that part caused by a
misspecification in the structural form of the model.

51

References

Arrow, K. "Economic Welfare and

the

Allocation of Resources for

Invention." In NBER, The Rate and Direction of Inventive

Activity. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962.

Bowman, W. Patent and Antitrust Law: A Legal and Economic
Appraisal. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1973.

Evenson, R. "The Contribution of Agricultural Research and
Extension to Agricultural Production." Unpublished Ph.D.
thesis, University of Chicago, 1968.

Griliches, Zvi. "Research Costs and Social Returns: Hybrid Corn
and Related Innovations." Journal of Political Economy LXVI
(October 1958), 419—31.

.

"Research Expenditures and Growth Accounting." In

B.R. Williams (ed.), Science and Technology in Economic

Growth. London: Macmillan, 1973.

.

"Returns to Research and Development in the Private Sec-

tor." In J. Kendrick and B. Vaccaro (eds.), New Developments
in the Measurement of Productivity. NBER, Studies in Income
and Wealth (in press).

and V. Ringstaad. conomies of ScaJe and the Form of The
Production Function: An Econometric Study of Norwegian
Manufacturing Establishment Data. Amsterdam: Ncrth Holland, 1971.

and J. Schmookler. "Inventing and Maximizing." American
Economic Review (September 1963).

52

Joreskog, Karl G. "A General Method for Estimating a Linear
Structural Equation System." In A.S. Goldberger and 0. Duncan
(eds.), Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences.

New York: Seminar Press, l973a. Pp. 85-112.

.

"A General Computer Program for Estimating a Linear

Structural Equation System Involving Multiple Indicators of

Unmeasurable Variables (LISREL)." Princeton: 1973b.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Tests of a Capital-Theoretic Model of

Technological Change." Review of Economic Studies, XXXIV
(April 1967), 175—89.

Machiup, Fritz. The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the

United States. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962.

Marschak, Jacob and W.H. Andrews, Jr. "Random Simultaneous Equations
and the Theory of Production." Econometrica, XII (JulyOctober 1944), 143-205.

Minasian, Jora R. "The Economics of Research and Development."

In

R.R. Nelson (ed.), The Rate and Direction of Inventive

Activity: Economic and Social Factors. Universities-National
Bureau Conference Series No. 13. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1962. Pp. 93—142.
Mundlak, Y. "Estimation of Production and Behavioral Functions from
a Combination of Cross-Section and Time—Series Data." In Carl
Christ et al., Measurement in Economics: Studies in
cal Economics and Econometrics in Memory of Yehuda Grunfeld.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1963, Pp. 138-66.

53

and I. Hoch. "Consequences of Alternative Specifications
in Estimation of Cobb-Doublas Production Functions."
metrica, XXXIII (October 1965), 814-28.

Nadiri, M.I. "A Report on the Determinants of Research and
Development Expenditures and their Effects on Labor Produc-

tivity of the Firm." Report for the National Science
Foundation, NSF Grant Number DA—43877 (1978).

Nordhaus, William D. Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical
Treatment of Technological Change. Cambridge: MIT Press,
1969a.

"An Economic Theory of Technological Change." American

.

Economic Review (May 1969b), 18—28.

Pakes, A. "Economic Incentives in the Production and Transmission

of Knowledge: An Empirical Analysis." Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Harvard University, 1978.

and Mark Schankerman. "The Rate of Obsolescence of Knowledge,
Research Gestation Lags, and the Private Rate of Return to

Research Resources." Harvard Institute of Economic Research
Paper 659 (October 1978).

Rosenberg, Nathan. "Technological Change in the Machine Tool Industry,
1840-1910." Journal of Economic History, XXIII (December 1963),
414—43.

.

"The Direction of Technological Change: Inducement

Mechanisms and Focusing Devices." Economic Development and
Cultural

Change,

XVIII (October 1969), Part I, 1—24.

54

-.

"Science, Invention and Economic Growth." Economic

Journal, LXXXIV (March 1974), 90-108.

Schankerinan, M.A. "Essays on the Economics of Technical Change."
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1979.

Scherer, F.M. "Firm Size, Market Structure, Opportunity, and the
Output of Patented Inventions." American Economic Review,
LV (December 1965), 1097—1125.

Schmookler, J. Invention and Economic Growth. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University. Press, 1966.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy. 3rd

edition. New York: Harper, 1950.

Wiley, David E. "The Identification Problem for Structural Equation
Models with Unmeasured Variables." In A.S. Goldberger and
0. Duncan (eds.), Structural Equation Models in the Social

Sciences. New York: Seminar Press, 1973. Pp. 69-84.

Wilson, Robert Woodrow. "The Sale of Technology Through Licensing."
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University, 1975.

Zeliner, A., J. Kmenta and J. Dr'eze. "Specification and Estimation
of Cobb—Douglas Production Function Models." Econonietrica,
XXXIV (October 1966), 784—95.

