                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         MORTGAGE REVENUE BONDS: TAX EXEMPTION
                   WITH A VENGEANCE


                  Patric H. Hendershott




                  Working Paper No. 17




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138
                      February 1980




This research is funded by the Office of Policy
Development and Research of the Department of HUD through
contract H—2893 extended to the Urban Institute. Numerous
helpful suggestions were offered by Harvey Galper and
others in the Office of Tax Analysis, Department of the
Treasury, at a seminar presented there. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Taxation and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper 447
                                                                 February, 1980




                      Mortgage Revenue Bonds: Tax
                       Exemption With a Vengeance



                               ABSTRACT



     This paper presents calculations of the impacts of two levels of

mortgage revenue bonds (MRBs) on: (1) yields on home mortgages, tax—exempt

bonds and taxable bonds, (2) the allocation of the American fixed capital

stock among residential (by three tax brackets), business, and state and

local capital, (3) the productivity of this aggregate stock, and (4) the

federal deficit. The levels of MRBs analyzed are $40 billion and the maxi-

mum permitted by the realities of the market place. The latter is estimated

to be $440 billion or over half of regular home mortgages outstanding.

     Limited levels of MRBs directed solely at "lower" income housing would

not have any clear impact on productivity. An unlimited volume would generate

an estimated annual productivity loss of $3 billion. Assuming a 4 percent

discount rate, the present value of this stream is $75 billion.




                                                    Patric H. Hendershott
                                                    Krannert School of Management
                                                    Purdue University
                                                    West Lafayette, Indiana 47907

                                                    (317) 493—1884
                                                                January 1980
                                                                Revised


         Mortgage Revenue Bonds: Tax Exemption with a Vengeance*

                           Patric H. Hendershott
                        Purdue University and IlBER


     Many issues have been raised in the current debate regarding the merits

of tax-exempt mortgage revenue bonds. There has been some worry about the

Impacts of these bonds on profits of investment bankers (positive) and

mortgage lenders (negative) and much concern over the impacts on the federal

deficit and the state and local borrowing rate (both rise))J However, the

most important economic issue --   the   effect on the allocation and produc-

tivity of the American nonfinancial capital stock -- has yet to be addressed.

This is the most important issue because a productivity loss (or gain) is a

net loss (or gain) to society, and unlimited issues of mortgage revenue bonds

could generate a significant loss. In contrast, changes in profits, interest

rates, and tax receipts are a wash; some economic units/sectors gain while

others lose. Moreover, the net redistributions are likely to be small. For

example, higher income households would likely gain the most from a rise in

yields on municipal securities, but they would also bear the heaviest burden

of Increases In tax rates needed to offset potential shortfalls in Treasury

tax receipts.




*This research is funded by the Office of Policy Development and Research of
 the Department of HUD through contract H-2893 extended to the Urban Institute.
 Numerous helpful suggestions were offered by Harvey Galper and others in the
 Office of Tax Analysis, Department of Treasury, at a seminar presented there.

iGeneral discussions are contained in the Congressional Budget Office (1979),
  Thygerson, Melton and Parliment (1978), and Tuccillo and Weicher (1979).
  Kormendi and Nagle (1979) restrict themselves to estimates of lost Treasury
  tax revenues.
                                       -2-




       Under current American tax law, overinvestment in owner-occupied housing

relative to business, especially corporate, capital would exist even in the

absence of inflation. This follows from the failure to tax imputed rental

Income from owner-occupied housing and the double taxation of income from

corporate capital. As a result, the investment hurdle rate or user cost of

capital is lower for housing than for other private capital goods; resources

are invested in housing earning a lower rate of return than is available on

potential investments In business capital. Inflation aggravates this dis-

tortion because real after-tax debt rates decline and housing is much more

heavily debt-financed than is business capital.?! A recent estimate of the

annual productivity or efficiency loss from this distortion is $12 billion

[Hendershott and Hu (1980)]. Substantial usage of tax-exempt mortgage revenue

bond financing would increase this loss by causing a further substitution of

less productive housing for more productive business (and state and local)

capital. The substitution follows from the subsidization of the cost of

home mortgage financing and an increase in the borrowing rates of businesses

and state and local governments.

      This   brief discussion also suggests that the channels through which mort-
gage revenue bonds affect the federal deficit need to be widened. The sub-
stitution of   housing, the income from which is not taxed and the financing

costs of which are tax deductible, for either business capital, the income

from which is taxed, or     state and local capital, the financing of which is
not   deductible, will clearly reduce tax revenues. Also, an increase in taxable

bond rates will raise the cost of financing the federal debt. Neither of these

effects have been considered in earlier analysis.



2JThe primary cause of the decline in real after-tax debt yields is another
  distortion in the tax law: the use of historical cost accounting in the
  valuation of depreciatioii and inventory expenses tHendershott (1979)].
                                            -3-


      The present paper will provide estimates of the productivity loss and

 increase in federal deficit caused by the growth in tax-exempt mortgage revenue

 bonds (MiBs). Two alternative levels of MRBs are considered:         a legislatively

 constrained (to provide only lower income housing) volume of $1O billion and

 an unconstrained (except for the realities of the market place) volume. The

 former is five percent of the roughly $800 billion late-1979 stock of home

mortgages outstanding and is one of the limitations being considered by Congress.

The latter is the volume of MRBs which raises the tax-exempt yield to the point

that it is no longer possible to offer MRB-financed home mortgages at yields

below those generally available in the market place.

     The analysis of these two volumes of' MRBs encompasses three tasks:

     (1) Determination of the impact on the financial markets. Of' particular

interest are the effects on the yields on tax-exempt
                                                            securities, home mortgages,

and other taxable securities, but the changes in sectoral balance sheets are

also needed to obtain a full picture of the workings of MRBs and to compute

the impact on the federal deficit.

     (2) An assessment of the impact of changes in capital market rates on

the user costs of capital or investment hurdle rates for
                                                                owner-occupied housing
and other components of nonfinancial capital and thus on the composition of

the nonfinancial capital stock. The impact of the latter change on the pro-

ductivity of the American economy can then be calculated.

     (3)    A measure of'   the   impact of financial market changes and the reallo-
cation of the   nonfinancial capital stock on the federal budget. Treasury tax
receipts   will be lowered by the substitution of tax-exempt for taxable financing, by
the simultaneous issue of mortgages and purchase of tax-exempts, and by
                                                                                      If




increases in owner-occupied housing at the expense of business and         state
and local capital. Treasury interest payments will vary with changes in

Treasury borrowing rates.

     The   impacts of MRBs on the financial markets and real capital allocation
are obviously simultaneously determined, and this determination is developed
in the appendix. The body    of the text Is devoted to explaining and       summarizing
the nature of the impacts. Those on interest rates and the allocation and

productivity of the capital stock are considered in Sections I and II, respec-

tively. The impact on the federal budget is deduced in Section III where

changes in the full sectoral balance sheets are also presented. A concluding

section summarizes the findings.




                         I. Impact on Interest Rates


     Table 1 presents hypothetical yields on long-term tax-exempt, corporate

and home mortgage securities under various assumptions regarding the level

of mortgage revenue bonds (MRB8). Relationships (ratios or spreads) between

the yields are also shown. The yields listed in the first row approximate

1979 (pre October) values. The second row contains likely        yields   under the

assumption of a significant, but legislatively constrained, volume of IvIRBs.

The last row illustrates a pattern of yields that might exist when the only

constraints on ?.flBs are the realities of the market place.

     The   relationships among   yields in 1979 are abnormal relative to historical

experience.   The 1979 ratio of'   tax-exempt   yields to taxable yields (column 5)
                                                                    Table 1
                                                     Yields for Alternative Volumes of
                                               Mortgage Revenue Bonds (Percentage Points)
                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)        (11)     (5)         (6)
                                               Long-Terra       Conventional      Subsidized     Corporate
                                             Tax-Exempts       Home Mortgages   TTome              Bonds      Rex
                                                                                        tgages               Rcor
    Quantity of MRBs                               (Rex)          (Rmor)            (Rnlor)       (Rcor)              Rmor-Rcor
    (1)   Few ($7 billion)                         5.88            10.18            7.88           9.110     0.626      0.78
    (2)   Many ($137 billion)                      6.52            10.18                8.27       9.130     0.6913     0.78
u
    (3)   Maximum ($285 billion?)                  7.97            9.72             9.72           9.59      0.835      0.18
    Sources:    Observed Data rrow (1)]: Rex and Rcor are from averages for 20 year Aa (or Good Grade)
                securities from Salomon and Hutzler. The corporate yield is for new issue industrials with
                deferred call protection. The home mortgage yield is the FHLBB Journal effective yield for
                all lenders. All data are averages of figures for the nine months January to September 1979.
                RI    equals Rex   +   ,   where      = 2.0 for few   Bs and 1.75 for many and maximum.
                Hypothetical Data      Crows   (2) and (3)]:     see text.
                                        -6-




is low (the "normal" ratio during the past decade was about 0.7), and the

spread between conventional mortgage rates and yields on corporate bonds

(column 6) is high (the spread during the past decade has averaged about a

quarter percentage point). The low ratio of exempt to taxable yields can            be

attributed to the extraordinary purchases of tax exempts by commercial banks

and property insurance companies in recent years. The annual rate of net

purchases by banks in the 1977-mid 79 period is greater than all but the

1970-71   years,   and purchases by property insurers In 1977-mid   79   are more

than double the     rate of accumulation in any prior year. These demands      can

be attributed to the high and rising profits of these institutions see

Hendershott and Koch (1980)]. The large spread between mortgage and bond

rates is likely due to the extraordinary inflation-induced boom in the demand

for single-family housing rVillani (1978) and Hend.ershott and Hu (1979)],

which is largely financed by mortgage credit, and the absence of a plant and

equipment boom, which would be financed by issues of corporate bonds and

commercial mortgages. Put another way, mortgages currently contain a premium

necessary to cover the costs of issuing mortgage-backed bonds. Finally, note

that the subsidized mortgage rate (column 3) is 2 percentage points above the

yield on tax-exempt securities in the case of few MRBs, and 1 3/1,. percentage points

above this yield In the case of constrained and unconstrained MRBs. This spread

covers servicing fees, default insurance costs, administrative expenses, and

profits. As the volume of MRBs increases, the profit margin, and thus the spread,

Is likely to decline, but at some point a premium for these bonds might be required.

     Other things being equal, MRB issues would certainly raise the tax-exempt

yield and the ratio of exempt to taxable yields. The increases in the tax-exempt

rate and the rate ratio are necessary to induce Investors to purchase the MRBs.
                                            -7-



As !4RB outstandings increase initially, households in lower tax brackets are

enticed to switch from taxables to exempts. At some point the rise in exempt

rates will be sufficient to induce (1) fully-taxed institutions (commercial

banks and property insurers) to purchase additional tax-exempts, (2) partially-

taxed institutions (thrifts and life insurance companies) to purchase exempts

for the first time, and (3) middle income households to increase significantly

the average loan-to-value ratio on their existing housing in order to finance

greater holdings of exempts.

       The   Impact of increases in MRBs on the exempt rate, holding the taxable
bond rate constant at Rco, is illustrated in Figure 1.              All   sections of the
 demand curve, except II, reflect the interest rate sensitivity of households.

 Section II represents the normal demand by fully-taxed institutions, and.

 section IV encompasses the additional demand of fully-taxed institutions and

 the new demand by partially-taxed institutions in response to the rate ratio

 rising above its historically observed level. Section VI is the demand by

 tax-exempt institutions and households. The negatively-sloped supply schedules

 reflect the response of state and        local   government capital outlays to increases

 in   their borrowing rate. Before the increase in MRBs, the exempt rate is Re
 and the stock of exempts is EX°. An increase in MRBs raises the exempt rate
 and outstandings, although the        latter increases     less than the rise in MRBs
 owing to a reduction in       regular tax     exempts   outstanding. An increase in the
 taxable     bond rate would   shift   the demand curve upward in Figure 1 and reinforce

 both the rise in the exempt yield and the reduction in regular tax             exempts.

       A small increase in MRBs        would   likeLy not affect the conventional (unsub-
 sidized) home     mortgage rate, again holding the taxable bond rate constant.
 The volume     of conventional financing would decline, but this could be accom-
 plished by a reduction in issues of mortgage-backed bonds and a slight

 reallocation of portfolios of discretionary investors away from mortgages
                           Figure   1:   The Market for Tax Exempt Securities and the Volume of MRBs
 Rco                —           aa———                                 ——        —   S                              D
    U
  Rex
    C
  Rex
       0
  Rex
                                                                                                     I    \
                                                                                                          su
                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                     I
                                                              EX°      EXC                          EXU        $
 Portions of Demand Curve
  I.    Very high income households             (i   > 0.5)
 II.    Fully      taxed   institutions   (.r
                                                =    0.5)
III.       High income households (0.5 > i > 0.3)
 rr.       Partially-taxed institutions and middle                  income households   (0.3>   i> 0.2)
 V.        Low income households (0.2>  1 > 0.0)
 vi.       Tax   exempt institutions and households             (i    = 0.0)
                                         -9-




and toward taxable   bonds. A large increase in MRBs, in contrast, would greatly
reduce conventional    financing and eliminate both issues of mortgage-backed

bonds and mortgage    investments of discretionary investors,   leaving only thrifts

holding mortgages. Owing to tax-preferences, thrifts would be willing to

compete for this reduced demand for mortgage funds by lowering yields [Hendershott

(1978)]. As a result, the home mortgage rate would be expected to decline

relative   to the yields on taxable bonds. If the increase in MRB5 were    sufficient,

even thrifts would abandon    the conventional mortgage market   and only MRB financing

would   exist.

     Figure 2 illustrates the determination of the conventional home mortgage

rate. This rate is on the vertical axis and the volume of conventional (unsub-

sidized) home mortgage funds is on the horizontal. The demand for funds slopes

downward, reflecting a greater demand to finance purchases of houses and other

goods at lower mortgage rates. Segment I of the supply curve is the supply
by thrifts who will accept a net (of differential servicing costs) yield on

mortgages    below that on bonds due to the preferential tax treatment   afforded
mortgages;    segment II is the normal demand where net yields are equal. These

solid schedules, which are drawn for a given taxable rate (Rco) and volume

of zs (MRB°), depict the market prior to the increase in MRBS; the con-

ventional rate is Rmor°, and the volume of nonsubsidized funds is NMOR°. The

initial yield on subsidized mortgages, Re + 2, is also noted. The third

solid schedule indicates how the subsidized rate will rise, owing to both a

decline in the profit margin ()     of   investment bankers and an increase in the

tax-exempt    yield, as I4RBS expand and conventional financing is reduced.
     With constrained issues of MRBs equal to )3C the demand for conventional
financing shifts    to the left (shift not shown) to a point such   as A, conven-
tional financing declines to Nr4ORC, and the subsidized mortgage rate rises
                         Figure   2:   Determination of the Conventional (Unsubsidized) Home Mortgage Rate
Percent
               sub
              Rmor   = Rex(Rcor')+
          0                                                      •••••••••   . . • • • • • . • . • • • Supply of Funds (Rcor')
     Rmor                                                                                              Supply of Funds (Rco)
Re + 1.75                                                                                Demand   for Funds      (MRB°)
  Re + 2
                                                                                                                  1978$
                                                                                                     NMOR   =   MOR -   . 65.tRB
                                                -11-



to Re +      1.75.    Given that   the   taxable bond rate has     not   changed, neither
does   the   conventiona1 mortgage rate.
       Next consider unlimited MBBs. The             demand   for funds shifts to the left
(not   shown) until either the subsidized mortgage rate equals the conventional

rate or conventional financing disappears (which would be true if the R#II

and supply of funds schedules did not intersect). If the taxable rate rises,

as seems likely, both the supply of funds and R schedules would shift

upward. The result might        then be     a point like B, where conventional financing

is MORU, the mortgage      rate    has fallen relative to the taxable bond rate (only

thrifts     are   financing conventional       mortgages), and   the subsidized and con-

ventional mortgage      rates   are   equal.

       The hypothetical interest rates presented in Table 1 and derived in the

appendix are consistent in all respects with this analysis. The tax-exempt

rate rises by a small amount          (61   basis points) with limited MRBs and a large

amount (209 basis points) with unlimited MRBs. The                taxable   bond

rate   is   constant with limited !'flBs,      but   rises by114 basis points with unlimited

MRBs. In the latter case, the subsidized mortgage rate, the exempt rate plus

1 3/b percentage points, equals the conventional mortgage rate, and the spread

between the latter and the taxable bond rate falls from 78 to 1.8 basis points.


        II. The Allocation and Productivity of the Fixed Capital Stock


       The observed net (of depreciation) investment hurdle rates or user costs

of capital in late 1978 for owner-occupied housing, business fixed capital

and state and local structures are listed in the first column of Table 2.

These are the net marginal physical products that Incremental investments
                                                        Table 2
                        The Impact of MRBs on the Allocation and        Productivity of     Capital
                                           1978    Dollars
                   Net User
                                                                                   Average Net Productivity
                   Cost of    Observed   Change with          Change with            on Change in Capital
                                         Constrained         Unconstrained                                  ______
                   Capital    end-1978
                   end-1978    Stocks      MBs                    MRBs        Constrained MRBs        Unconstrained MRBs
                     (1)        (2)         (3)                   (14)               (5)                      (6)
Housing
       =   0.15      0.05       2142        +114                   13             0.01412                  0.02
       =   0.3       0.02       966                                19                                      0.0295
       = 0.145       0.00       2142         -8                     3             0.00014                 -0.0002
Business Capital     0.16      2120                               -16                                      0.1610
State and            o.o8      10145         -6                   -19             0.08140                  0.0930
  Local Capital
                                              0                     0
Sources:    see text and appendix.
                                        -13-




must promise to   earn to be worth undertaking.    The   hurdle   rates   are lower for
both owner-occupied   housing, especially that of households in higher tax

brackets, and state and local structures than for business capital. The

hurdle rate for the former is low because of (1) the failure to tax the

imputed rental income from housing (while allowing the deduction of property

taxes and mortgage interest in the computation of the personal income tax

base) and (2) the decline in expected real after-tax mortgage rates in response

to increases in inflation. The deductibility of expenses also explains why

the hurdle rates decline as the tax bracket increases. Tax treatment also

explains the relatively low hurdle rate for state and local capital. Neither

the income (explicit or implicit) from this capital nor the property itself

is taxed, while the interest expense is low (is effectively "deductiblet')

owing to the exemption of interest earned on municipal securities from the

federal income tax.

     The structure of current (1978) net investment hurdle rates is such

that business investment projects promising an expected return of 15 percent

are not being undertaken while housing and state and local structures expected

to earn less than 10 percent arebeing constructed. These data make it clear

that the efficiency of the fixed capital stock would be increased by lowering

the hurdle rate for business capital and raising it for owner-occupied housing,

especially for that of households in high tax brackets, and state and local

structures. While consumption of housing and local government services would

decline, productivity and thus real wages would increase sufficiently to

allow an even greater increase in the consumption of other goods and services.

The unlimited issuance of MRBs would lower the hurdle rate for housing of

households   in all tax   brackets and raise the rate for state and local and
                                      - i-

business   capital. Thus the efficiency of the fixed capital stock would

almost certainly be reduced. Note, however, that limited issuance of MRBs

to finance low income housing only would not generate efficiency losses if

the housing came solely at the expense of state and local capital because

the   net user cost of the latter is lower than that of the former.
       The stock of owner-occupied housing at the end of 1978 was roughly $114.50
billion.'     Given that costs of capital vary by tax bracket,   this stock must
be   distributed among households in different tax brackets. For purposes of

the calculations, two-thirds of the stock is assigned to those in the 30

percent bracket and one-sixth each to those in the 15 and 14.5 percent brackets.

These stocks and those of businesses and state and local governments are

listed in row (2) of Table 2.

      Rows (3) and (1.4.) of Table 2 are estimates of the impact of constrained

and unconstrained increases in MRBs on the component capital stocks, and

rows (5) and (6) contain estimates of the average productivities or rates

of return earned (on capital increases) or foregone (on capital decreases).

The general procedure employed in these calculations is:     (1) to deduce the

impact of the interest rate changes listed in Table 1 on the net and gross

user costs of' capital, (2) to compute the impact of changes in gross user

costs on the demands for capital, and (3) to average the initial and new

net user costs to obtain the average productivities. The details of the

calculations are provided in an appendix, but two of the key assumptions are




'The housing and business capital stock data are current dollar net stocks
  from Survey of Current Business, August 1979, pp. 62-63. The stock and
  local capital data is the product of the real stock and price series from
  the Federal Reserve Board's model data bank.
                                              -15-




worth emphasizing here. First, as is obvious from Table 2, there is no

 change in the aggregate fixed capital stock, only a reallocation. Second,

the assumed elasticities of the demands for owner-occupied housing and busi-

ness capital with respect to their costs of capital is minus unity, while

that of state and local capital is -0.1. The former are roughly conslstentwith

 empirical estimates; the latter is consistent with the widely held, view that state

and local capital is insensitive to financing costs (there are no reliable estimates).

       In the case of a $11.0 increase in MRBs directed solely at lower income

households, housing of these households rises by $114 billion at the expense of state

 and local   capital and      housing of   high income                   the latter
                                                         households. The decline in

follows from the significant rise in yields on tax-exempt securities which
raises   the opportunity cost of own-financing of high-income housing. These
offsetting    capital stock changes occur without any change              in either the
taxable   bond or conventional mortgage rates (these rate changes were con-

strained to be equal and happened to be zero).

       With no constraints on MRBe, the volume increases by $432 billion which

constitutes an approximate 150 percent increase in outstanding tax exempt debt.

This volume of 14RBs is market-determined; the tax-exempt                rate has   risen su±'-

ficiently,    given   the decline in the conventional       mortgage     rate, so that

municipalities       can   no longer   offer subsidized mortgage    funds   at a rate below
that   on nonsubsidized    private funds. This increase in tax-exempt mortgage
financing    leads   to a sharp reduction in the demand for conventional mortgage
financing which lowers the unsUbsidized mortgage            rate   and   raises   the demand
for   housing by all households. The increase is less, proportionately, for

middle and high income households whose opportunity cost of own financing

rises sharply. The $35         billion   increase in housing (2+ percent of the stock)
                                              -16-



is at   the expense of both state and local and business capital (the taxable

bond rate rises by 111 basis points).

      The change in the productivity or efficiency of the fixed capital stock

is simply     the   sum   of   the products of average rates of return and capital.

stock changes:


         PR0D =
                    EX1,                                                              (1)



where bars denote the average of net user costs before and after the Increases

in MRBs and i varies over state and local structures, business capital, and

the three tax-bracket classes of owner-occupied housing. Multiplying rows

(3) and (5) in Table 2 and summing, a slight $0.07 billion dollar annual

productivity gain Is computed for limited MRBs directed solely at low-Income

households. Higher yielding low-income housing replaces lower yielding high-

income housing and state and local capital. The sum of the products of

rows (lij)   and (6) indicates a $3.03 billion annual productivity loss from

unlimited MRBs. In this case, low yielding housing replaces higher yielding

business and state and local capital. A smaller productivity loss would occur

if the demand for state and local capital were more sensitive to its cost of

capital than was assumed, if the demand for housing were less sensitive, or

if the conventional mortgage rate did not fall as much relative to the taxable

bond rate.   V
             III. The Impact on Balance Sheets and the Federal Budget

     An increase in the stock of MRBs effects the federal budget in three

ways. First, and most obviously, investors will now be holding larger

quantities    of tax-exempt securities and smaller quantities of taxable

'To illustrate, if the elasticity of housing were 0.7 instead of 1.0 and the
 conventional mortgage rate fell by 50 basis points rather than 60 (relative
 to the corporate bond rate), then the taxable bond rate would rise by only
 1 basis points and the productivity loss would be only $1.66 billion.
                                       -17-




securities.' This will result in reduced Treasury tax revenues. Second,

there will be more housing and less business and state and local capital.

Because the income from housing (imputed rent) is not taxed, but the financing

costs are deductible, this substitution would, at least In the case of unlim-

ited MRBs, lower tax revenues. Third, Treasury borrowing rates will rise

hand in hand with increases in corporate borrowing rates in the unlimited

MRB case.J This will Increase the interest expense of the Treasury. Thus

the federal deficit will tend to rise in response to all three of these effects.

The   purpose of this section is to calculate the amount by which taxes would
have to   be raised to maintain an unchanged    budgetary position in the   cases

of legislatively   constrained and unconstrained MRBs.
      The impact of expanding   MRBs on interest rates and the allocation of

the nonfinancial capital stock has been deduced above. In       order to calculate
the   impact on the federal deficit, we need to specify the full effect of

Increases in MRBs on sectoral balance sheets for four sectors: state and

local governments, nonfinancial businesses, households, and financial busi-

nesses. The top half of Table 3 presents the changes in balance sheets for

the case of constrained MRBS. State and local real capital is down by $6

billion [Table 2, row (3)1 in response to the rise In the exempt rate, and

regular tax-exempts are assumed to fall      equally. Of the $1O billion    Increase

in MRBs, 85 percent is channelled    into   mortgages and 15 percent into taxable

securities   (a reserve account). Owner-occupied housing     increases   to offset




'There are also changes in the taxable yields, but the impact  of these on
  tax receipts are likely to be quite small because the changes are small
  and the interest is deductible as well as subject to tax.

6—/For evidence to this effect, see Cook and Hendershott (1978).
                                                     -18-




                                                 Table 3

                   The Impact       of   MRBs    on   Sectoral Balance           Sheets

       A. Legislatively Constrained Issues


             State and Local Governments                                  Nonfinancial Businesses (b)

Taxables (ATAX)                 6 Regular Exempts -6                     Real Capital 0 Taxables 0
Mortgages (AMOR)              314        (AEX)                             (AP&E)                (ATAX)
Real Capital (ASTR)           -6 ABs                           140                             Equities 0
                                                                                                 (tEQu)


                     HouseholdsJ                                                            Finance   (f)
Exempts (Ex)         314            Mortgages (AMOR)             14      Exempts (.Ex)           0
Taxables (TAX)      -35                                                  Taxables (TAX)         28
Equities (EQ)          0                                                 Mortgages (MOR)        -28
Real Capital (HOUS)   6



        B. Unconstrained Issues


       State and Local Governments                               Nonfinancial Businesses (b)

ATAX
AMOR
              6
             367
                       AEX
                      AIvIRBS
                                          -19
                                          1432
                                                                          -16        ATAX
                                                                                     AEQU
                                                                                                -
                                                                                               -12
ASTR         -19


            Households (h)                                                       Finance (f)
AEX         262        AMOR              1714                 AEX         151
ATAX       -11].                                              ATAX         142

AEQU         -32                                              AMOR       -193
AHOUS        35

Constraints: TAX5 + ATAXh + ATAXf                    —
                                                         ATAXb
                   NOR3 + MORf             MORh
                   EX.n +   1EX     = MRBs       -   £EX
                               f                          S
                          =
                   EQUh       AEQUb
                   STR + P&E        +    AHOUS   = 0
                   Sources equal uses for             all     sectors.
                                       -19-




the decline in state and local capital. Roughly three-quarters of housing

is financed by mortgage issues ($1i billion) and one-fourth by liquidating

taxable securities. Given that holdings of exempts rise by the $34 billion

increase in net state and local supply ($liO -      $6),   the sectoral sources

equal-uses constraint dictates a $34 billion decline in holdings of taxable

bonds. Similarly,    the   changes in the balance sheets of state and local

governments and households dictate the finance sectors' $28 billion increase

in holdings of taxable securities and decrease in mortgages.

       The balance sheet changes induced by unconstrained issues of MRBs are

given in the lower half of Table 3. The increase in MRBs equals the increased

demands by households and financial institutions plus the reduced supply of

regular tax exempts. The institutional demand was assumed to be unchanged

above because the ratio of exempt to taxable bond yields (0.69) stayed within

the   normal historically observed range. With unconstrained MRB issues however,
the ratio rises to 0.835. This    increase    should cause fully-taxed investors in
exempts,   commercial bank and property insurers, to shield a larger portion of

their income with investment in tax-exempts and partially-taxed financial

institutions, thrifts and life insurance companies, to invest in tax-exempts

for the first time IHendershott and Koch (1980)]. Fully-taxed institutions

are   assumed to raise the portion of net income so shielded by 25 percent;

thus commercial banks will shield 75 percent of their income, up from 60

percent. This would raise the demand for tax-exempts by these institutions

by 25 percent or $115 billion at end-1978 values. Partially-taxed institutions

would be expected to invest 10 percent of their assets or $106 billion in

tax-exempts [Hendershott and Koch (1980)]. This gives a total increase in

institutional demand of $151 billion. Household demand Is assumed to rise
                                                       -20-


by 1250(Rex/Rcor) or $262 billion. The 1250 coefficIent                       Is sharply   higher
than we    have estimated in order               to reflect a hitherto unobserved demand by

middle income households          Implicitly financed by sharply higher             mortgage debt.7
Given  a reduced supply of regular tax-exempts of $19 billion [the decline in
state and local capital from Table 3, row (1k)], the estimate of the increase
in MRBs Is   $1132 billion.
        The remaining      balance sheet changes in the lower half of Table 3              are

calculated roughly as above. A major difference is a sharp increase in house-

hold mortgage debt as middle income households are assumed to raise their

existing mortgage debt        by 15 percent of their           housing stock     to profitably
arbitrage between mortgage debt and                 tax-exempts.   The decrease     in business
capital   Is reflected in both debt and equity outstanding, and the reduction

in equity also appears on the asset side of the household balance sheet.

        The change in Treasury net Income can be derived by applying tax rates

and yields to the balance sheet changes                   in Table 3   and incorporating some

other    factors.     The change in income is


          INC =                          +
                    r(Rcor0)TAXh             .r(Requ0)EQU                                           (2)


                                                   I    sub1 -
                  -
                        m10rM                -
                                                               Rmor°)(M0R    -
                                                                                 AMORh)1


                       b
                  +          o.
                      ¶ Rcap -'P&E   -   rbRcor oATAX.0

                    Rmor0AMORf + f1 Rcor0 TAX
                  +rf

                  -
                      (1-'r)DEBTRcor.


The      1250 coefficient      Is still much lower than the 11800 (1978 wealth/0.7)
  estimated by Kormendi and Nagle (1979, Table II, p. 8). The latter seemn
  implausibly large because of the implied effect of the recent decline in
  the rate ratio from 0.70 to 0.63 on household demand. The 14800 coefficient
  suggests that this demand would have fallen by $336 billion, ceteris paribus,
  or over Z4 times household holdings at the end of 1978. While ceteris aribus
  Is   obviously a strong assumption, other things seem unlikely to have shifted
  the   demand function by over $300 billion. It would be interesting to see how
 well the Kormendi-Nagle equation traces out household demand through 1979.
                                       -21-




The first line refers to changes in household tax payments owing         to   changes

in financial asset holdings, while the second line reflects changes in

payments caused by changes in mortgage interest tax deductions owing to both

increased mortgage debt and the refinancing of existing mortgage debt at the

lower subsidized mortgage rate. Lines 3 and 14 refer to changes in tax payments

of nonfinancial and financial businesses, and line 5 is the decline in income

caused by greater Treasury credit market costs. All quantity items in the

equation refer to the balance sheet changes listed in Table 14, except DEBT

which is the level of outstanding federal debt not held by trust funds or the

Federal Reserve ($500 billion at the end of 1978). The initial corporate and
                                                          8
mortgage interest rate data are available in Table 1; other assumed values

are Requ° =   0.12 and Rcap° = 0.11. The tax rate assumptions applicable to
both constrained and unconstrained MRBs are         = 0.214, ¶b =   0.14 and i    = 0.2.
For constrained MRBS,     = 0.35 and          0.3; for unconstrained,         =   0.25
and     = 0.25.

      The estimated changes In Treasury net income are listed in Table 1+.

Five sources of the changes are delineated: the substitution of exempt

securities for taxable securities In investors portfolios, the refinancing

of existing mortgages at the lower subsidized mortgage rate (which is an

offset to the increase in exempt securities), the increase in owner-occupied

housing (the Income from which is not taxed but the associated financing

charges, including foregone income on own-equity, are deductible), the decline




•WIn the constrained MRB case where a]J the subsidized mortgages go to low
  income households, both Rinor and Ra for these households are calculated
  as averages of the initial and end subsidized mortgage rates (0.0788 and
  0.0827 from Table 1). Further, all refinancing (M0RS-MoRh)             is
                                                                    assumed
  to be by these households. In the unconstrained case, refinancing is assumed
  to be proportional to the mortgage debt of the different income classes.
                                         -22-




                                       Table

                Annual Change in Treasury Income to be Recovered
                       by Tax Rate Changes (billions of $)



  Source                              Constrained MRBs ($l10 bil) Unconstrained NRBs($L32 bil)

Substitution of Tax                             -1.25                       -6.88
  Exempts for Taxables-a]

Increase in Mortgage Debt'                      ÷0.11

Refinancing of E4sting                          +0.09                       +0.27
   Mortgage DebtJ



Decline   in   Business                                                     -0.55
  Capital (and interest
  deductions )]

Increased Interest                                                          -0.56
  Expense on Debt!!


Total                                           -1.05                      -12.60

Cost per $     of   MRBs                        0.026                        0.029



Notes [all refer to equation (2)]:

!!Rows (1) and       (1).

'The    first summation in row (2).


1The second summation in row (2).




'Row (3).

'Row (5).
                                        -23-



In   business capital (the income from which is taxed but   the   associated financing

charges are only partially deductible), and the increase in the interest expense

on the federal debt. As can be seen, the impact on Treasury annual net income

would be significant, one billion per year, in the case of constrained MRBs

and enormous, $12.6 billion per year, with unconstrained MRBs. The only

surprising aspect of Table b is the positive impact on Treasury tax receipts

of the increase in housing in the case of limited MRBs. This follows from

(1) the assumption that all subsidized mortgages were channelled to low tax

bracket households and (2) the reduction in housing of higher tax bracket

households induced be the increase in the tax-exempt rate, their opportunity

cost of own financing. Owing to their higher tax brackets and mortgage rates,

the decrease in the tax value of their interest deductions outweighs the

increased tax saving of low Income households. The lost revenue per billion

dollars of MRBs is quite similar in the two cases, between $25 and $30 million.

This is slightly above the $22- million estimate of the CBO (1979, pp. 117-51).


                                  IV.   Summary

      Increases   in MRBs raise the tax-exempt yield which, ceteris paribus,

reduces the demands for state and local capital and housing of high income

households. The latter occurs because the tax-exempt yield is the opportunity

cost of own financing for these households. When only limited Increases in

MRBs are allowed and the funds raised are directed to low income households

only, the demand for housing by these households rises by as much as the sum

of the demands for housing by high income households and state and local

capital falls. There is no tendency for the unsubsidized home mortgage and

taxable bond rates   to change.   There is also virtually no impact   on aggregate
                                       -21 -




productivity;   the net productivity gain owing to the increased housing roughly

equals the productivity loss from reduced state and    local   capital. Finally,

the Impact on Treasury revenue is not complicated. There are the large,

well-understood lost tax receipts caused by the substitution of exempt debt

for   taxable debt in asset portfolios and a small gain owing to the refinancing
of existing mortgage debt at the lower subsidized rates. The annual cost is
$26 million per billion dollars of MRBs, and this cost is simply a transfer
of' funds from some economic units to others.
      With no legislativeconstraints,MRBs would expand until the tax-exempt
yield rose so high that it would not be    economically feasible to issue addi-

tional MRBs and relend the funds at a yield below what households could obtain

from conventional sources. This volume of MRBs is estimated to be about $4O

billion. MRBs of this volume would increase outstanding tax-exempt debt by l

times and replace half of regular home mortgage financing. Because all housing

is subsidized, the increase in housing demand exceeds the decline in the

demand for state and local capital. As a result the taxable bond rate rises

to choke of I plant and equipment demand. Thus, housing replaces business

and state and local capital, both of' which would have earned greater returns

than the housing. The estimated annual productivity loss is $3

billion. Assuming a real after-tax discount rate of 1 percent, the present

value of this loss is $75   billion.   This is, of course, a net loss to society.

The rise in the taxable bond rate results in two additional losses to the

Treasury; the cost of servicing the federal debt increases and tax receipts

on income from the foregone business capital are lost. However, these addi-

tional costs are only about $3 million per billion of MRBs. The $12.6 billion

total cost to the Treasury simpiy reflects the large volume of MRBs.

      The large productivity loss constitutes a strong case for limiting MRB
                                        -25-




issues. However, it seems rather odd for the federal government to be making

such a case. After all, it is federal statutes that are largely responsible

for the enormous current differences in     investment hurdle rates    shown in

Table 2. If the federal government is really concerned with productivity

losses, as well it should be, there are ample options available to it. For

example, cessation of the double taxation of corporate dividends and allowance

of replacement-cost depreciation would sharply lower the investment hurdle

rate for business capital, while limitations on the interest and property tax

deductions of households would raise housing hurdle rates for households in

higher tax brackets [Hendershott and Hu (1980)]. There is something unseemly

about the federal government restricting other governments from playing the

same   "be good   to housing" game that it has perfected over the years and seems

so reluctant to give up, in spite of the mounting evidence of the long-run

damage being inflicted on the econcmy.

       It is particularly paradoxical for Congress to be simultaneously con-

sidering a complete prohibition on mortgage revenue bonds and reactivation
of the below-market Tandem interest rate subsidies. Our        calculations suggest
that   no   lost productivity would occur with limited MRBs because   the additional

housing     promises to earn as great a return as the state and local capital
being lost. In contrast, the Tandem mortgage purchase program, which finances
mortgage credit by issuing    taxable bonds, would   raise   taxable rates and crowd
out business capital that is more productive than housing. Clearly tax-exempt

MRB financing is preferable to taxable bond financing.
                                                -26-




                                            Appendix

     This appendix presents the explicit model and assumptions underlying

the calculated changes in Interest rates and capital stocks reported In

Tables 1 and         2.

                                     A.   Constrained MRBs

     If the      relevant production functions for the economy are of the CES

form, then the demands for capital after increases in MRB8 can be related

to the initial demands and the ratios of the initial to new gross costs of

capital:


                          0     e

       4 = K1( A + ),                                                   (l)-(5)
              c d1
where K1 refers to HOUS15, HOUS3, H0US5 (the subscript denoting the tax

bracket of the households holding the housing), P&E, and STR; the A and o

superscripts refer to after and before the Increase in MRBs, respectively;

the c's are net user costs of capital; and the d's are depreciation rates.

The exponent e Is assumed to be 1.0 for all K1 except STR; for STR, e =     0.1.
This assumption is discussed briefly in the text.

    The post lncrease-in-MRB net user costs are related to pre-increase

net user costs and changes in the interest rates:


  c15 = C015 + 1.[O.75(O.85)Rmor + 0.25(0.85)Rcor]                                 (6)


      =
           c03
                 +   l.i[o.75(o.7)mor      +   O.25(0.7)ARcor)                     (7)


       =             + l.14.[O.9(0.55)ARmor +    O.lex]                            (8)



       =             +    1.2Rcor                                                  (9)


      =              +    l.25Rex.                                                (10)
                                          -27-


The initial costs of capital reflect the ratio of the capital good price to

the general price level in late 1978 based upon a ratio of unity in 1961;..

Thus the change in interest rate terms are scaled by the same ratios (1.14

for    housing, 1.2 for business capital, and 1.25 for state and local structures).

For housing, weighted averages of changes in yields on debt and the opportunity

cost of own financing are employed. The debt rate is the after-tax mortgage

rate (0.85, 0.7 and 0.55 equal 1 minus the relevant marginal tax rate) and

the weight applied to the debt rate is 0.75 for low and medium income house-

holds and 0.9 for high income households. The own financing rate is the

corporate     bond rate for low and medium   income households, and the tax-exempt

rate   for   high income households. The    form   of   the housing   cost   of capital
expressions and    the   initial values of the c0'a are given in Hendershott         and

Hu (1979a). The depreciation rate for housing is set at 0.025 which is

roughly 1.14(0.0175).

        The changes in the costs of capital for business and state and local

capital are related entirely to changes in the relevant debt rate (the

equity rates are assumed to move with the relevant bond rates). The initial

business     costs of capital are   averages of the net costs of capital for corporate

structures and equipment     reported in Hendershott and      Hu   (1979b) less 0.015. The
constant is subtracted to account for the lower costs of capital for unincorporated
businesses caused by the fact that their equity returns are not taxed at both
the firm and personal levels. The depreciation rate is an average of the
depreciation rates for equipment and       structures adjusted for the price ratio
factor: 0.102 = 1.2[(0.l3       +   0.01;)]. The initial net user cost of capital for
                                              -28-




state and local Structures is taken to be l.25(Rex +                  0.005).   A nominal,

rather than real, rate of interest is employed because state and local

investment projects financed with revenue bonds must generate initial

revenues sufficient to meet nominal debt payments. The depreciation rate

is 0.05     1.25(0.014).

     The $140 billion dollar increase in MRBs is assumed to be directed to

financing low income housing only. A maximum                of   $50 billion of the $2142

billion of low income housing is assumed to be eligible for this subsidized

financing. Thus H0U315 is divided into two components, HOUS                            the initial
                                                                                15s'
value of which is $50 billion, and HOUS1SU, the initial value of which is

$192 billion, with associated costs of capital               c155 andc15. The latter
are both still defined by equation (6),             but   tRmor for   c15 is R# -        Rmo?, where



            =   .f(Re   +   0.0175) +   (Re   +   0.02)].                                       (11)


     The three equations which can be thought of as determining the three

interest rates are


       TI4 =
                                                                                                (12)


       Re    =   Re   + 0.002[ANRB      -   STR -
       Rcor Rcor                                     EX]                                        (13)




      Bmor = Rcor.
                                                                                                (114)


The first says that the new and old aggregate fixed capital stocks are equal;

the second, an inverted household demand equation, specifies how the rate-ratio

must rise to induce households to absorb increases in tax-exempt securities

(EXf is zero, by assumption, in the limited MRS case), and the third ties the

change in the conventional mortgage rate to the change in the corporate bond rate.
                                             -29-




                                 B. Unconstrained MRBs

     Equations (i) through (10) continue to hold with the exception or (7).

When tax-exempt      rates rise sharply,    tax-exempts become more profitable than

taxables    for investors in the 30 percent         tax bracket and 90 percent financing

becomes    preferable to 75     percent   financing. Thus equation (7)     becomes


      =
           c3   + l.14[0.9(O.7)Rmo +      0.lRe -   O.75(0.7)Rmo?   - 0.25(0.7)Rco?].   (7a)

This same phenomenon suggests         that the coefficient in the invested household

demand equation be lowered. The 0.002          coefficient in   equation   (13) is reduced
to 0.0008 (see the discussion in note 6 on page 20). Further, EX in this

equation is now $151 billion (see page 19 in the text) and LMRB is endogenous.

MRBs will expand until the conventional and subsidized mortgage rates are

equal. Thus equation (ii) is replaced by


          Rmo =   Re   +   0.0175.                                                      (ha)
Owing to the sharp decline in the demand for conventional mortgage financing,

the conventional mortgage rate should decline vis-a-vis the taxable bond rate.

Thrifts   are   assumed    to compete for the limited demand by passing the value
of their   tax preferences along to borrowers. This has been estimated to be

worth 60 basIs points tHendershott (1978)]. Thus


       Rmo      =   Rco -    0.006.                                                     (1Iia)
                                      -30-




                                 References


Congressional Budget Office, "Tax-exempt Bonds for Single-Family Housing,"
     A Study Prepared for the Subcommittee on the City of the Committee on
     Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, House of Representatives, 96th
     Congress, First Session, U.S. Government Printing Office, April 1979.

Cook and Hendershott, "The Impact of Taxes, Risk and Relative Security Supplies
     on Interest Rate Differentials," Journal of Finance, August 1978.

Hendershott, "Tax Preferences for Thrift Institutions and the Yields on
     Residential Mortgages and Other Securities," paper prepared for the
     Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Department of the Treasury, December 1978.

__________ "The Decline in Aggregate Share Values: Inflation, Taxation
     Risk and Profitability" (revision of NBER Working Paper No. 370,
     July 1979).
Hendershott and Hu, "Government-Induced Biases in the Allocation of the Stock
     of Fixed Capital in the United States," Chapter )4 in von Furstenberg (ed.)
     Capital, Efficiency and Growth, Ballinger Publishing Co., 1980.

_________________, "Inflation and Extraordinary Returns on Owner-Occupied
     Housing: Some Implications for Economic Stabilization and Efficiency,"
     (revision   of NBER Working Paper No. 383, August 1979).

_______________ "A Model of Optimal Feasible Replacement Investment:
     Application to Orders for Producers Durables," presented at a Conference
     on the Economic Effects of Federal Taxes, Brookings Institutions,
     October 18, 1979 (to be published in a forthcoming Brookings volume).

Hendershott and Koch, "The Demand for Tax-Exempt Securities by Financial
     Institutions," Journal of Finance, March 1980.

Kormendi and Nagle, "The Interest Rate and Tax Revenue Effects of Mortgage
     Revenue Bonds," unpublished, July 1979.

Thygerson, Melton and Parliment, "Considerations Relative to the Issuance
     of Industrial Development Revenue Bonds for Mortgage Lendings," U.S.
     League of Savings Associations, Economic Working Paper #21, 1978.

Tuccillo and Weicher, "Local Mortgage Revenue Bonds," The Urban Institute,
     May 1979.

Vil].ani,"The Impact of Anticipated and Unanticipated Inflation on House
     Prices and the Return on Home Ownership," May 1978.
