NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE U.S. CAPITAL STOCK
BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USES

Martin Feldstein

Working Paper No.

448

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge ~~ 02138
February 1980

Harvard University and the National Bureau of EConomic
Research. This paper is part of the NBER's program of
research on Capital Formation. I am grateful to Doug
Bernheim and Claire Christopherson for help with this
research. The views expressed here are the authors' and
should not be attributed to any organization.

NBER Working Paper 448
February 1 1980

The Distribution of the U.S •. Capital Stock
Between Residential and ~ndustr~al Uses
ABSTRACT

Residential real estate currently accounts for nearly one-half of
all private fixed capital in the United States.
study is to

measu~e

The purpose of the present

the extent to which an increase in the total capital

stock induces an increase in the stock of residential capital, i.e., to
measure the marginal propensity of additional capital to be absorbed in
residential capital.

The paper begins with a simple theoretical model of the

division of capital between housing and other industries.

For plausible

values of the key parameters, the model implies that the marginal share of
housing is less than its average share.

The paper then uses the historical

exper{ence of the United States since 1929 to estimate the relation between
the size of the total capital stock and the amount of capital used for
residential real estate; this statistical analysis supports the conclusion
of the theoretical model that the marginal share of housing in total capital
is less than its average share.

Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 868-3905

The Distribution of the U.S. Capital Stock
Between Residential and Industrial Uses
Martin Feldstein*
I.

Introduction
Residential real estate currently accounts for nearly one half of all pri-

vate fixed capital in the United States. l

This high ratio of residential capi-

tal to total capital has been a feature of the American economy for many decades. 2

The demand for residential capital has grown at the same rate as the

supply of total capital because of the concurrent changes in other factors like
per capita income, population, and the relative price of housing services.

A

key determinant of the relative price of housing services is of course the cost
of capital and therefore the size of the total capital stock.

Because housing

is relatively capital intensive, an exogenous increase in the size of the capital stock will cause a fall in the relative price of housing services and therefore an increase in the stock of residential capital.

Without further analysis,

it is not clear whether such an increase in the total stock of capital will,
ceteris paribus, cause a greater than proportional or less than proportional
increase in the stock of residential capital.
*Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is
part of the NBER Program of Research on Capital Formation. I am grateful to
Doug Bernheim and Claire Christopherson for help with this research. Th1 views
expressed here are the author1s and should not be attributed to any org~~ization.
lIn 1978, the replacement value of private residential real estate was 1961.6
billion while the corresponding value of all private reproducible fixed capital
was 3778.3 billion; see Musgrave, 1979.
2The Department of Commerce estimates by John Musgrave indicate that residential
capital has accounted for between fifty and sixty percent of the U.S. capital
stock in each of the past fifty years. The residential share peaked at the end
of the second World War, when it was 59.8 percent. Today, the share is 51.9 percent.

-2The purpose of the present study is to measure the extent to which an
increase in the total capital stock induces an increase in the stock of residential capital, i.e., to measure the marginal propensity of additional capital to
be absorbed in residential capital.

A knowledge of this propensity is important

for evaluating the national return on additional saving and for understanding
the impact that an increased capital stock would have on labor productivity and
on the composition of national output. 1 The present paper provides both a
theoretical and an empirical examination of this question.
The paper begins with a simple theoretical model of the division of capital
between housing and other industries.

For plausible values of the key parame-

ters, the model implies that the marginal share of housing in the capital stock
is less than its average share:

increases in the capital stock add dispropor-

tionately more to industrial capital.
The model that yields this conclusion describes the capital allocation process as equalizing the rates of return on residential and nonresidential capital.

It thus ignores the issue of risk aversion and portfolio preferences that

may be particularly important for owner-occupied housing.

The model also

ignores institutional factors that reduce capital mobility between the housing
sector and the rest of the economy.

-

The relevance of the model might therefore

be questioned by arguing that a large share of the investment in housing is
financed by thrift institutions that are required by law to put all or most of
their assets into home mortgages.

In response to this, it might be noted that

the flow of savings into such thrift institutions responds to differences in

lThe implications of the findings of this paper are discussed in section 4
below.

-~
(

rates of return and that the marginal sources of funds for residential real
estate come from institutions like commercial banks and insurance companies that
invest in mortgages, corporate bonds, and, more recently, bonds issued by
mortgage institutions and backed by portfolios of residential mortgages.

To the

extent that these features circumvent institutional restrictions, the model's
assumption of a perfect capital market is more plausible.

Thus while the model

is undoubtedly oversimplified, its ability to approximate reality adequately is
an open question.
The third section of the paper therefore uses the historical experience of
the United States since 1929 to estimate the relation between the size of the
total capital stock and the amount of capital used for residential real estate.
The analysis incorporates population and real income but treats the relative
price of housing services as endogenous.

This statistical analysis supports the

conclusion of the theoretical analysis that the marginal share of housing in
total capital is less than its average share.
There is a brief concluding section discussing some implications of these
findings and some possible extensions of the analysis.

-42.

A Two-Sector Model of Housing and Industrial Production
This section uses a simple two-sector general equilibrium model of produc-

tion and demand to analyze the effect of an exogenous increase in the total
capital stock.

The economy is divided into a sector that produces residential

housing services and a remaining sector that produces "industrial output".

The

extreme capital intensity of the production of housing services is captured in
this model by the condition that the production of housing services uses only
capital not labor. 1 This in turn implies that all of the labor in the economy is
employed in the industrial sector.
The economy can be represented by five equations.

First, the production

function for industrial output relates the flow of industrial output (X) to the
industrial capital stock (K x) and the total labor supply (I):

X = F (K x' I),

(2.1)
For

nO~1

I assume only that there are constant

ret~rns

to scale; a Cobb-Douglas

example of the industrial production function is examined below.
The assumption that the production of housing service uses capital but no
labor and that this production satisfies constant returns to scale implies that
the flow of housing services (H) is proportional to the stock of housing

ca~ital

(Kh):2

lThe current model is thus a special case of the general two-sector model analyzed by Harberger (1962), Johnson (1956), Jones (1965) and others.
2The current analysis also simplifies by ignoring'the role of land. Introducing
land would complicate the analysis without changing anything essential about the
conclusions.

-5(

These two uses of capital exhaust an exogenously given capital stock (K):

Capital is allocated between the two sectors until the yield is equal in
the two uses,

If p is the price of housing services, the return per unit of

housing capital is PA'

If the industrial output is selected as numeraire, the

return on industrial capital is Fk'

(2.4)

pA

Equal rates of return implies:

= Fk'

Finally, the quantity of housing services demanded relative to the demand
for industrial output will be written as a function of their relative price: 1
(2.5)

H = D(p) • X,

D'{p)

< 0,

These five equations determine the five endogenous variables X, Kx ' H, Kh and
p.

The effect of a small exogenous increase in the total capital stock, can

be calculated by totally differentiating these equations.
(2.6)

dX

= FkdKx'

(2.7)

dH

= AdKh'

This yields:

~

lThis implicitly assumes an income elasticity of one for housing, The empirical
evidence indicates that this is likely to be an upper bound; see deLeeuw (1971),
Muth (1960), Polinsky (1977) and Reid (1962). A lower income elasticity would
imply a smaller value of dKh/dK than the one derived in this section,

-6t

dK x + dKh = dK ,

(2.8)
(2.9)

Ad P

= FkkdKX '

and
(2.10)

dH

+ Ddx.

= XD'd P

These equations can be solved by substitution into 2.10 of 2.7, 2.9 and 2.6 to
obtain:
(2.11)

A d Kh

= XD ' Fkk + 0 Fk dK X
A

Note from equation 2.4 that A = p-1 Fk'
(2.12)

FK dKh

=

Thus 2.11 implies:
dK x'

X01p Fkk + DFk
Fk

P

The demand equation 2.5 implies that XO' = 0 HI 0 p.
oelOasticity of demand as

Writing the price
n = - (pI/-I) (0 HI 0 p) implies p X 0 1 = H n •

Substituting this into 2.12 and noting that 0 = H/X yields:
(2.13)

FK dKh

=

- Hn

FKK + H FK
X

FK

P

dX K •

Constant returns to scale implies that FKK

=

-F K2 I

(J

X v/here

~
(J

is the local

elasticity of substitution of the production function for industrial output.
With this substitution, equation 2.13 simplifies to:
(2.14)

dKh =

pH

n

X

(J

+ pH
X

-7-

Using 2.8 to rewrite dK x
(2.15)

(1+

h

=

dK

= dK

- dKh' yields:

n/a)

1 + h (1+ n / a )

where h = pH/X, the ratio of expenditure of housing to other spending.

During

the past decade, expenditure on housing services (including the imputed value of
the services of owner-occupied houses) has varied between 11.2 and 12.4 percent
of national income (Economic Report of the President, 1978).
value of h between 12.6 and 14.2.
value of dKh/dK.

Using h

= 0.14

This implies a

will tend to overstate the

Consider first the value implied by a Cobb-Douglas technology

in the industrial sector (a=l) "and a unitary price elasticity of demand
( n =1); with h=0.14, these imply dKh/dK = 0.22, i.e., only 22 percent of additional capital goes into the residential sector.

A lower elasticity of substi-

tution in production in the industrial sector increases the value of dKh/dK but
even an elasticity as low as

a =0.5 implies only dKh/dK = 0.30.

Statistical

evidence on the price elasticity of demand 1 suggests that a value of n =1 is
likely to be too high and therefore to cause an overestimate of dKh/dK.

Again

however the calculation is not very sensitive to reasonable changes in the parameter values; with

n = 0.75 and

a

= 1, for example, dKh/dK = 0.20.

In

short, for a wide range of reasonable parameter estimates, the model implies a
value of the marginal dKH / dK that is substantially less than the observed
average value of KH /

K.

lS ee the studies by deLeeuw (1971), Laidler (1969), Polinsky (1977), Rosen (1979a,
,197gb).

-8-

Equation 2.15 does not, however, establish that dKH / dK
value of Kh /

K

that is implied Qy the model itself.

restrictions are required to derive Kh / K explicitly.

is less than the

Additional parameter
The following analysis

shows that, with the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas technology in the industrial
sector, the model implies a distribution of the total capital stock that agrees
quite well with the observed capital stock.

With this assumption, equation 2.1

becomes

(2.16)

x = AKaX

I I-a

where A is a constant scale factor.
(2.17)

Equation 2.4 is therefore

a-I - 1
PA = aAK x L -a

Using 2.2 to rewrite

A

as

A

= HKh-1 and dividing 2.16 by 2.17 yields

(2.18)

The value of a may be approximated by the pretax share of capital in the
industrial sector.

For the decade 1968-77, employee compensation accounted for

85.9 percent of national income exclusive of housing sources; if one-third of
unincorporated proprietors· income is reported as IIl abor income in this sector,
ll

an additional 2.9 percent is added.

Thus the capital share corresponding to the

industrial sector is between 0.112 and 0.141.
ween 1 and 1.15 or a ratio of KH /

K between

This imples a ratio of Kh/Kx bet0.50 and 0.53, very close to the

-9-

c

average ratio of 0.48 during the decade 1964 to 1974. 1 The Cobb-Douglas case
thus provides a reasonable approximation of the observed experience and clearly
implies that the marginal share going to residential capital is significantly
less than the average. share.
Douglas case (in which
(2.19)

a

=

Note that combining 2.18 with 2.15 for the Cobb-

= I) implies that an elasticity may be written:
(h + a) (1 + n) •
1 + h (1+

n)

It is immediately clear that this elasticity is less than unity if

a

(1 + n ) < 1,

a condition that is consistent with all plausible parameter estimates.
Although the simple theoretical model of this section could be extended in
a number of ways to increase its realism, this will not be pursued here.
Instead, the next section turns to an analysis of some basic time-series evidence on this question.

lThe value of 0.48 refers to the gross capital stocks.
stocks, the ratio is 0.51.

With the net capital

-10-

3.

(

I

Statistical Estimates of The Distribution of Incremental Capital
The fundamental determinants of the total demand for residential capital

are population, income, wealth and the relative price of housing services.

An

increase in the total stock of capital increases the quantity of housing capital
demanded by raising personal wealth and income and by lowering the relative cost
of capital and therefore the relative price of housing services.
This section treats the relative price of housing services as endogenous
and estimates a simple reduced form specification that relates the stock of
housing capital directly to the total stock of capital and the level of real
income:

N

N

N

where KH is the real stock of residential capital, K is the total real capital
stock, YO is disposable personal income, and N is the population.

The coef-

ficient of the capital stock variable (81) thus represents both the wealth and
price effects.

An increase in the capital stock also raises disposable income;

more specifically, the derivative of YO with
of return on capital.

respec~

to K is the net-of-tax rate

The total effect of an increase in the capital stock is

therefore equal to 81 Plus the product of 82 and the net-of-tax rate of return.
The demand for housing capital is of course also affected by many other
things, inclusing the demographic composition of the population, the tax laws,
the banking rules, government mortgage subsidies, etc.

Although a complete

-11structural model of the mechanism by which an increase in the total capital
stock is transmitted into an increase in the stock of residential capital should
in principle incorporate all of these variables, they cannot simply be added
linearly to the reduced form equation.

The current reduced form specification

must therefore be regarded as an oversimplication that can provide only aninitial estimate of the distribution of incremental capital.
Equation 3.1 has been estimated with time series data for the United States
for the years 1930 through 1974, with the years 1941 through 1946 excluded.

The

analysis is based on recent estimates of the stocks of residential and nonresidential fixed capital prepared by the Department of Commerce. 1 These capital
stock figures are estimates of replacement values in constant 19

dollars.

Separate estimates are available for the gross capital stock (i.e., the accumulation of gross investment minus scrapping) and for the net capital stock (i.e.,
accumulation of gross investment minus depreciation).

Data on disposable income

and on the civilian resident population come from the Economic Report of the
President (1978).
Equation 3.2 presents the parameter estimates corresponding to equation 3.1
G
based on the gross capital stock (K h and KG):
(3.4)

G
Kh
N

=
t

0.32

KG

(0.02)

N

+
t

0.28

YO

(0.04)

N·

+

1052,

t

R2
N

= 0.99

= 39
1930 - 40,
1946 - 74

1S ee Musgrave (1976). The total capital stock used in the study excludes the
values of land, inventories and government debt.

-12-

e '
The total effect of an increase in the capital stock is thus 0.32 plus the product of 0.28 and the net-of-tax real return on capital.

Since this net of tax

return is at most 0.08,1 the total effect of a one dollar increase in the capital stock is to increase the residential capital stock by no more than 34 cents.
This is substantially less than the ratio of housing capital to total capital, a
ratio that has averaged 0.48 for the most recent decade in the sample.
The estimated value of 61 in equation 3.2 will be biased if there is
measurement error in the capital stock variables.

Since housing capital is part

G

of total capital, any error of measurement in Kh will cause a corresponding
error of measurement of the total KG.

This common error in the two variables

would cause an upward bias in the estimate of 61·

This source of bias can be

eliminated by estimating 61 in a slightly less direct way.

Rewrite equation 3.1

as:

=

(3.3)

YO

+

+

N

where Knh is non-housing capital, i •e. , Knh = K - Kh'
(3.4)

Kh
N

=

~~ Knh
1-61

N

+

62

-1-132

YO
N

+

This implies:

63

-1-133

Although Knh and Kh may have measurement errors that are either positively or
negative correlated, the specification of 3.4 avoids the automatic source of
IThe pretax return on the capital of nonfinancial corporations is approximately
11 percent (Feldstein and Summers, 1977), while the effective total tax rate on
that income exceeds 60 percent. The net-of-tax return on this large part of the
capital stock is thus less than 5 percent.

-13positive correlation that affected equation 3.1.
The resulting parameter estimates,

=

(3.5)

0.44

.44

+

(0.03)

YO

1628 ,

+

N

(0.04)

R2 = 0.99
N = 39
1930 - 40,
1946 - 74
imply a value of 61 = 0.31, almost exactly the same as in equation 3.1.

The

problem of measurement error does not seem to be serious.
The corresponding estimate of 62
obtained in equation 2.2.

= 0.25

is also very similar to the value

While I know of no previous estimates of an aggregate

propensity to own housing capital, the estimated value of S2 might, on the basis
of the implied elasticity, be regarded as low.

G

The implied elasticity of KH

with respect to YO, calculated at the values for 1974, is only 0.14.
Estimates including lagged values of disposable income and instrumental variable
estimates produced very similar results.

The equations were also reestimated

with a correction for the autocorrelated disturbance; this raised the estimates
of Sl (to 0.37 in the equation analogous to 2.2 and to 0.35 in the equation analogous to 3.5) but actually lowered the estimated values of S2·
Equation 3.6 presents the parameter estimates based on the

n~t

capital

Q

stocks:
(3.6)

N
Kh
N

=

t

0.44

KN

(0.02)

N

+
t

0.02

YO

(0.03)

N

+
t

456.
R2

N

1930
1946

0.99
39
- 40,
- 74

=
=

-14-

N

The estimated value of Bl is about 15 percent below the aggregate rational of Kh to
KN which averaged 0.51 for the last decade of the sample.

The difference, although

smaller than with the gross capital stocks, is obviously statistically significant.

Note that the coefficient of the income variable is very small and sta-

tistically insignificant.

Using the alternative specification of equation 3.4

leaves these conclusions essentially unchanged:

=

(3.7)

N

0.72

Knh

(0.10)

N

+

t

0.10
(0.05)

+

YO

N

870

t

R2
N
1930
1946

imples B1

=

0.42 and B2

=

.028.

= 0.99
= 39

-

40,
74

Reestimating these equations with an

autoregressive transformation, with lagged values of the income variables, or by
an instrumental variable method did not change either the general estimate of B1
or the low value of the income coefficient.
In short, the estimates provide at least weak support for the conclusion of
the theoretical model of section 2 that the marginal share of additional capital
is less than the historically constant aggregate share of approximately 50 percent.

This difference can persist because other factors like rising income,

special credit programs, and the development of transportation systems have
contributed to the growth of housing demand.

Since the equations include only

income among these variables, the parameter estimates are likely to give too
much importance to the capital stock as a determinant of housing capital.

It

-15seems likely that a more
of 81.

compl~te

specification would result in a lower estimate

Indeed, the higher estimate of 81 with the net capital stock than with

the gross capital stock reflects the lower estimated income effect.

Explicitly

constraining the coefficient of the income variable to a higher value reduces
the estimated value of 81 With either the net or gross capital stocks.
There is a second reason for believing that the estimated value of 81 may
be too low.

Both the theoretical analysis of section 2 and the estimated

equations of this section have taken the total capital stock to be exogenous.

A

more general model would recognize that the aggregate amount of capital is endogenous and that some of the factors that simulate the demand for residental
capital (e.g., the favorable tax treatment of owner occupied housing) are likely
to stimulate aggregate capital accumulation as well.

This introduces a spurious

positive correlation between total capital and housing capital which, unlike the
measurement error problem, cannot be eliminated by the respecification of
equation 3.4.

Some preliminary analysis suggests that this form of simultaneity

may be important and that the current estimates of 81 may therefore be too low.

-164.

Some Implications and Caveats
Although the theoretical and empirical findings of this study should be

regarded as preliminary and tentative, some potential implications are worth
noting.

In particular the divisions of incremental capital between residential

and nonresidential uses is important for assessing how a higher rate of saving
would affect national income and labor productivity.

This in turn has implica-

tions for national policy toward savings in general and toward residential
investment in particular.
In assessing the desirability of increasing the rate of saving in the
United States, the key consideration should be the national rate of return on
additional capital. 1 This rate of return can be measured for the corporate sector by the ratio of company pretax profits plus interest payments to the capital
stock at replacement cost; Feldstein and Summers (1977) report that the
cyclically-adjusted average rate of return on nonfinancial corporations was 11.2
percent in the period from 1948 through 1976. 2 Measuring the corresponding pretax rate of return on residential real estate is clearly much more difficult and

lBecause of the distorting effects of tax rules, social security annuities,
deficits, and direct government capital formation, the o~tcome of the
"market" cannot be presumed to be the correct overall divison betwe@n consumption and saving. An increase in the rate of saving is desirable if the pretax
national rate of return is high enough to compensate for the postponement in
consumption. See Feldstein (1977).
govern~ent

2profits are corrected to eliminate the distorting effects of inflation on
inventory profits and depreciation. The capital stock includes land and inventories. Since profits are defined net of state and local taxes, this rate of
return understates the true total national return by at least one percentage
point.

-17c
probably impossible.

Nearly 75 percent of residential real estate is owner

occupied; there is no adequate way to measure the imputed rental income on this
property without assuming in advance the relevant rate of return.

Although the

favorable income tax treatment of owner-occupied housing suggests a lower pretax
rate of return on such investment, this may be more than offset by the capital
market imperfections that prevent many individuals from becoming homeowners or
from investing as much as they want in this type of asset.

Since much of the

residential real-estate that is not owner-occupied is held by noncorporate
investors, it is difficult to identify their rental income and to correct the
reported depreciation for difference between the rules and economic depreciation.
Uncertainty about the rate of return on residential property implies that
the rate of return on any increase in the total capital stock is also uncertain.
The importance of this uncertainty about the return on residential property
depends on the share of additons to the capital stock that are devoted to this
use.

If only a third or less of incremental capital goes into:housing, the

uncertainty of the total marginal return to capital is limited and that total
return is not likely to be very far from the return on nonfinancial corporate
capital.
~

U

Much of the popular and government concern with capital formation reflects
the link between industrial capital, labor productivity and wage income.

In

contrast, increases in the stock of housing capital may have little or no impact
on wage rates or labor productivity, especially in the case of owner-occupied
housing where essentially no market labor is used in the production of housing
services.

The evidence in this paper on the share of incremental capital used

-18-

c
for residential real estate implies that additional saving has a greater positive impact on labor productivity and wages than would be true if savings were
divided in the same proportions as the current capital stock.
There

i~

of course no reason to accept as appropriate either the existing

mix of residential and nonresidential capital or the current division of additions to the capital stock.

It can be argued with some justice that the tax

laws, the rules governing financial institutions, and the character of monetary
policy have all encouraged a relatively greater investment in housing at the
expense of investment in plant and equipment.

Alternative policies can raise

the cost of housing or increase the return on industrial capital in order to
reduce the share of capital that is obsorbed in housing.
The theoretical and empirical analyses of this paper can be extended in
several ways.

At the level of abstraction of the current theoretical model ,

the most useful extension would probably be to recognize the portfolio investment character of the demand for owner occupied housing.

The next step in the

empirical research is to replace the simple reduced form equations of section 3
with a structural model within which it would be possible to examine the other
factors that maintain the relative demand for housing capital, to trace the
mechanism by which additions to the total

stoc~

of capital induce an increase in

residential investment, and to evaluate the role of financial institutions in
achieving the current allocation of capital.

-19BibliographY
de Leeuw, Frank, liThe Demand for Housing: A Review of Cross-Section Evidence,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 53 (1971), 1-10.
Feldstein, Martin, "Does the u.S. Save Too Little~" American Economic Review,
Vol. 67, No.1, February 1977, 116-21.
Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Summers, "ls the Rate of Profit Falling~1I
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1977, 211-27.
Harberger, Arnold, liThe Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax," Journal of
Political Economy, LXX (June 1962), 215-40.
-Johnson, Harry G., "A Comment of the General Equilibrium Analysis of Excise
Taxes," American Economic Review, XLVI (March 1956), 151-56.
Jones, R.W., liThe Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models," Journal of
Political Economy, LXXIII, December 1965.
-Laidler, David, "Income Tax Incentives for Owner-Occupied Housing," The Taxation
of Income from Capial (Arnold C. Harberger and Martin J. Bailey, eds.),
The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1969.
Musgrave, John C., "Fixed Nonresidential Business and Residential Capital in the
United States, 1925-75," Survey of Current Business, U.S. Department
of Commerce, April 1976, 46-52.
Musgrave, John C., "Fixed Nonresidential Business and Residential Capital in the
United States, 1975-78," Surve.x of Current Business, U.S. Department
of Commerce, April 1976, 46-52.
Muth, Richard F., liThe Demand for Non-Farm Housing,1I in The Demand for Durable Goods,
ed. by Arnold C. Harberger. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell, liThe Demand for Housing: A Study in Specification and
Grouping, Econometrica, Vol. 45, No.2, t'1arch 1977, 447-61.
II

Reid, Margaret G., Housing and Income.

Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1962.

Rosen, Harvey S., "0vmer Occupied Housing and the Federal Income Tax: Estimates
and Simulations," Journal of Urban Economics, 6, 247-66 (1979a).
Rosen, Harvey S., "Housing Decisions and the U.S. Income Tax," Journal of Public
Economics, 11 (1979b) 1-23.
U.S. Government, Economic Report to the President.
Government Printing Office, 1978.

Washington, D.C.:

U.S.

