                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      TAX NEUTRALITY MD THE SOCIAL DISCOUNT RATE:
                 A SUGGESTED FRAMEWORK



                    Alan J.   Auerbach



                  Working Paper No. 457




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                      February 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper 457
                                                                February 1980




                     Tax Neutrality and the Social
                 Discount Rate: A Suggested Framework



                              ABSTRACT



     There is probably no specific problem in tax analysis which has generated

as much study and discussion among economists as the question of how to

formulate "neutral" tax incentives for investment. Yet no consensus has

been reached concerning the proper approach to take when adjusting taxes.

     Comparing the two fundamental notions of neutrality found in the

literature, referred to here as "present value" rules and "internal rate

of return" rules, we argue that there is both a single appropriate neutrality

criterion (the latter) and a framework which can be used to evaluate the per-

formance of a tax system with respect to this criterion.




                                               Alan J. Auerbach
                                               Department of Economics
                                               Harvard University
                                                Cambridge, MA 02138

                                                (617) 495—3934
I. Introduction


     There is probably no specific problem in tax analysis which has generated

as much study and discussion among economists as the question of how to formu-

late "neutral" tax incentives for investment. This concentration of research

effort may be traced to the importance and direct relevance to policy design of

the issues under investigation. In this light, it is especially distressing to

the economist and government planner alike that no consensus has been reached

concerning the proper approach to take when adjusting taxes. On the contrary,

authors continue to analyze the problem of investment incentives using distinct

criteria, each calling markedly different tax schemes "neutral."

     Our own view, stated previously,1 is that this difficulty is due in part

to the fact that the very concept of tax neutrality is a fairly limited one

when viewed in the broader context of optimal tax theory. However, given this

concept's demonstrated institutional relevance, it is important that we have a

clear idea of what we are talking about in its regard. This paper represents

an attempt to serve this purpose. We first present and compare the two fünda—

mental notions of neutrality found in the literature, and then argue that, given

the inherent limitations of this type of analysis, there is both a single

sensible neutrality criterion and a framework which can be used to intelligently

evaluate the performance of a tax system with respect to this criterion.




II. Tax Neutrality


    The problem normally posed is that the government planner confronts an

existing and, perhaps, woefully ill—designed tax system and must, within some
                                     —2—

bounds, decide how to change the tax treatment of a specified group of assets

to accomplish the objective of greater capital investment. The bounds imposed

on the designer usually involve short—run and possibly long—run revenue—loss

limits, and the reason for the proposed stimulus is a perceived societal need

for more capital (because the existing tax law has heretofore unduly discouraged

accumulation).2 The analysis compares the effect of proposed tax changes on

assets of different durability to ascertain whether the resulting tax system

will "favor" long—lived or short—lived assets, the reference point being either

the initial tax system or else the hypothetical no—tax        The final tax

scheme is deemed "neutral" if it favors neither more durable nor less durable

assets, and it is in the way in which the tax system's effects are measured

that the two approaches differ. In each case, satisfaction of the neutrality

criterion is argued to lead to an efficient allocation of capital, although

this can't, in fact, be simultaneously true.



     To facilitate the development and comparison of these approaches, we intro-

duce the familiar "user cost of capital" (Jorgenson 1963) which describes the

implicit rental price of a unit of capital which depreciates exponentially.

While we later relax this restrictive assumption of geometric decay, it is

perfectly acceptable for the present illustrative purpose. Without loss of

generality in the current context, we ignore personal taxes and inflation, and

assume all equity finance at the margin (or, equivalently, no deductibility of

interest). Letting 5 be the decay rate of capital, p(cS) the price of such

capital in units of the output good, T the corporate tax rate, k(S) the tax

credit on gross investment (with no corresponding basis adjustment, following

current U.S. practice), r the required return on equity (taken to be the
                                       —3—

interest rate) and z(5) the present value of depreciation allowance arising from

a dollar of new investment, the user cost of capital is described by the fami-

liar expression:


           c(S) = p(6)(r+S)(1—k(cS)—Tz(S)) / (l—T)                         (1)



      As stated above, the approaches found in the literature may be placed in

one of two categories, although this is less than apparent from a first reading

because of differences in assumptions and exposition. Our purpose in the

present section will be to describe and compare these two approaches, deferring

any evaluation of their merits until this has been accomplished.                 V




A.   Present Value Rules


      This approach to neutrality has been formulated in two equivalent ways in

the literature. Some authors (Sunley 1973, Sandmo 1974) have formulated the

criterion in terms of the tax system's impact on user cost, others (Black 1959,

Boadway 1978) have made reference to the present value of taxes (net of incen-

tives) associated with each asset.

      The first approach defines as neutral a tax system which exerts the same

proportional influence on user costs associated with different assets, implying

that the ratio


          p(c5) (r+cS) (1k(ó)Tz())/(1—T) —
                                         —   1k(5)Tz(6)
                     p(cS)(r+a)                1T                          (2)



is constant.3'4 The other approach says a tax system is neutral if, at the

margin, all investments of equal initial cost have the same present value when

their gross—of—tax flows are discounted at r. Since, by construction, their
                                      —4—

net—of—tax flows all have the same present value when discounted at r, this is

the same as requiring the present value of taxes to be equal. Since the return

to the marginal investment equals its cost of capital, this implies that



          pv(6) =   f   e_rt [P()(r+6)(l-k(ó)-rz()]. e     dt                  (3)




is constant, which is equivalent to condition (2).

     The clearest justification for this general approach has been offered by

Boadway (1978):

          Capital at any instant will be allocated efficiently if the
          value of its marginal product is the same in all uses where
          the value of its marginal product is the present value of
          the contribution of an increment of capital investment now
          to output in the future.5



B. Internal Rate of Return Rules


     Perhaps the more common view of neutrality is based on the internal rates

of return on different assets. A tax system is viewed as neutral here if the

internal rates of return calculated from the pre—tax flows of each marginal

project are equal (Musgrave 1959, Chase 1962, Auerbach l979a, Harberger 1980).

As in the previous case, this criterion may also be phrased in terms of tax

liability. Since the internal rate of return of each such project's net flows

is r, the requirement is that the effective tax rate should be equal for all

assets, where such a rate is defined as the gross rate of return minus the net

rate of return r, divided by the gross rate. Whereas bias against an asset

was represented above by a relatively high present value of taxes per dollar of

investment, it is here related to a high effective tax   rate.
                                              — 5—



       In terms of the model we have been using, this criterion dictates that



             (5) =   (r+S)(l—k(5)—tz(5) —     5
                             l—t                                                (4)



should be independent of 5.

       Though the motivation behind this criterion is undoubtedly related to the

idea that uniform taxes prevent distortions in the allocation of capital6 this

is a static concept and its applicability to the current problem is not appar-

ent and has not, to our knowledge, been demonstrated.



C. A Comparison of Approaches


       It should be evident that these two views of what constitutes a neutral

tax incentive are not the same, but an example will help demonstrate how

different they are. For simplicity, we assume the initial tax system consists

of a corporate tax with no investment tax credit, and that depreciation allow-

ances correspond to economic depreciation. It is relatively easy to show, in

this case, that the value of a unit of capital of type 6 initially purchased at

time zero for one dollar equals e6t at time t, so that economic depreciation

at time t is 6e6t, and


            z(6) = r°J0 e—rt 6e—6t dt= r+cS
                                        6
                                         —                                       (5)


(The reader should keep in mind that the pattern of economic depreciation is not

independent of the actual depreciation allowances permitted.)

       The values for the user cost, c(6), and the two measures pv(6) and p(6)

are:
                                              —6—

          c(c5) =
                    p(S)(j+           5)                                    (6a)


         pv(5) =    (-- + ó)      /    (r+)                                 (6b)


          p(6) =                                                            (6c)


Thus, this system is neutral by the rate of return criterion hut favors short—

lived assets according -to the other view, since dpv()/dS < 0.

     To fully appreciate the difficulty faced by the planner uncertain about

which approach to take, suppose he is now asked to introduce a neutral invest-

ment tax credit to the tax system. The shape of such a credit would be


          k(6) =    k(0)   —                                                (7a)


by the present value criterion, but



          k(s) =    k(0)       (l——--)                                      (7b)



by the-rate of return criterion, where k(0) is the credit which applies if ó0.

Table 1 presents sample values for these two functions for T.5, k(0).l0 and

r=.05. Though the results seem extreme, this is no special case——it is based

on parameters similar to those characterizing theU.S. economy. It is apparent

that these criteria differ radically in their implications for tax policy.7




III. Limitations of the Neutrality Concept


    As would be suggested by the two approaches described in the previous

section, tax neutrality is by its nature a tool of what has been referred to as

piecemeal tax policy, where only a specific sector of the economy is considered
                        —7—




                   Table 1



A Neutral Investment Tax Credit: Two Views
            (r=.5, k(O)=.lO, r=.05)

                        criterion
                                    IRR


       o          .10               .10

      .05       —.15                .05

      .10       —.23                .03

      .20       —.30                .02

                —.40                .00
                                        —8—

and the appropriate tax   policy   toward this sector is determined without any

consideration of its eUects on the broader economy or of the existence of any

distortions in other sectors. Specifically, the tax treatment of different

capital assets is decided upon without reference to the labor income tax or

excise taxes on output. Recent research (Boadway and Harris 1977, Hatta 1977)

has discussed the restrictions on the structure of production and demand which

must be placed for such a piecemeal approach to be correct. From this research,

it is hard to conclude that piecemeal policy design will normally arrive at the

socially optimal use of the available instruments.

     This limitation is unrelated to the special intertemporal nature of capital

which gives rise to the disagreement about which neutrality approach to use.

Even if all capital lasted for only one "period,t' in which case both criteria

would agree in calling for the equalization of tax rates on capital income in all uses,

this outcome would not generally be the best. Though equal taxes would, in this

example, be necessary for production efficiency, such efficient capital alloca-

tion will be dictated by the solution to the broader optimal tax problem only

if all flows between the production and household sector are taxable and these

taxes can be freely adjusted (Diamond and Mirrlees l97l).8

     One may be prepared to argue for the use of piecemeal policy on more prac-

tical grounds, citing both political realities and the informational requirements

of a full optimization. However, even if one is willing to accept the general

notion of neutrality as valid and ignore all distortions save those directly

affected by the instruments to be chosen, it is not a straightforward matter to

decide which, if either, of the two basic approaches to take. Here the diff i—

culty does lie in the fact that different capital assets have different service

lives and different return streams over these lives.
                                      —9—

     Consider first the problem with using the internal rate of return criterion

in designing the tax system, and suppose there is some social discount rate with

which the flows from eacft asset are to be discounted in arriving at their social

value. In general, this value may be the social rate of time preference, which

in this example with no personal taxes is the interest rate, or some other rate

not generally equal to the gross internal rate of return on any project. This

leads to the following criticism:


          It is well known that only when the internal rate of return
          equals the discount rate will the present value of two pro-
          jects with the same internal rate of return be the same (i.e.,
          zero). Therefore, this criterion of neutrality has no basis
          in welfare economics. (Boadway 1978)

A simple example verifies this fact. Discounted at r, the social present value

of a one dollar investment in capital of type S with internal rate of return p

is (p+S)/(r+c), which is different for each 3 unless r=p.

     At first, this argument may seem convincing, but one must examine carefully

the assumption upon which it is based——that it is appropriate to discount all

flows with a single discount rate, making no further adjustments to the flows

according to the source of investment funds or the eventual destination and use

of investment proceeds.9 The justification for this procedure has been explored

in the social discount rate literature (Arrow 1966, Kay 1972), with the finding

that it is valid only if one assumes that the rate of savings out of project

flows is independent of when or in what form these flows occur. We have some

question as to whether this is ever a defensible assumption. There may be

cases where it applies; for example, the decision between two public projects

with the same initial costs, and benefits which, are entirely non—pecuniary and

have little impact on private decisions (e.g., painting the town hall).    However,

it seems entirely inappropriate for the analysis of private investment projects,
                                      — 10 —



since   it implies that the intertemporal consumption decisions of a firms

owners depend on the durability of its capital stock, If the firm invests in

a very short—lived asset which yields a large return almost immediately, the

stockholders are presumed to consume the same fraction of this return as they

would of a much smaller flow coming at the same time from a more durable asset

of equal value. It is more reasonable to assume that the rate of saving would

be inversely related to the durability of the asset, in which case the simple

present value criterion is insufficient.

     This criticism of the present value approach to neutrality does not consti-

tute a defense of the rate of return approach, so that we are confronted with

the possibility that these are both mileading as guides to policy formulation,

and that no useful approach to tax neutrality need exist. The technique of

analysis we have used thus far, comparing the tax system's impact on individual

assets of different types, is incapable of resolving this uncertainty, but a

slightly different method will prove more successful.




IV. A Suggested Framework


     One thing we shall not attempt to remedy is the piecemeal nature of the

analysis, continuing to focus on the direct effect of taxes on investment.

This appears to be something which must be accepted if one is to use the neu-

trality concept at all. We continue to focus on the firm's decision among

different types of asset, and maintain the simplifying assumptions of all

equity finance and no personal taxes or inflation, although each of these may
                                                            10
be relaxed without influencing the nature of our results.

    The problem we encountered above in attempting a comparison of the effects

of taxes on assets of different productive lives was in evaluating their return
                                     — 11 —



streams, which have different patterns over time. However, as we have empha-
sized, it is illogical to assume that individual consumption decisions should

depend on the durability of the assets they own. We shall therefore introduce

a construct which eases this difficulty, comparing what we shall call "value—

equivalent" investment programs corresponding to the different assets. Such a

program will be defined as one in which a dollar is initially invested in a

particular type of capital, and after—tax proceeds retained and reinvested in

the same type of asset, or distributed to stockholders, in such a way as to

keep the total value of the investment at each instant consistent with some

predetermined schedule. Throughout our discussion, we shall concentrate on the

particular value—equivalent schedule which keeps the value of invested capital

constant at one dollar, though this is done for the sake of simplicity and is

not a restrictive assumption. We emphasize that the equivalence across differ-

ent assets is measured by their market value, taking account of tax rules, not

any other measure, such as a physical stock.

     Since our comparisons are between the marginal investments of each type,

where the flow marginal product of capital equals the user cost of the parti-

cular asset, the constant value assumption implies a distribution of r dollars

at each point in time to the stockholders, regardless of which kind of capital

is utilized. Thus, we can disregard the question of individual savings deci-

sions over which we stumbled above. Moreover, since all returns from capital

not reinvested go either to the stockholders as distributions or to the govern-

ment as taxes, the differences among these value—equivalent projects are fully

characterized by the alternative streams of tax receipts which they generate.

     While there will still remain the question of how to compare these streams,

this may prove an easier task. Moreover, there is one important and instructive
                                               — 12 —




special   case in which this decision is simple. This is when, as in our above

example, all capital assets decline in productivity at some geometric rate,

and the tax system is characterized by a corporate tax with economic deprecia-

tion allowances and no investment tax credit. In this case, the cost of capital

for an asset of type 6 is c(6) as described in (6a), and the rate of economic

depreciation is just the decay rate, 6 .          Thus, keeping the value of the total

investment constant at a dollar will require a constant reinvestment rate of

5. To verify that this is correct we note that the distribution equals gross

income, less taxes, plus tax deductions for depreciation, less reinvestment, or:



                  (l-T) + T6 - 6 =    (—+ 6)(l-T)       + T6 -   6   =   r          (8)



as is required.

     Next, consider the corresponding stream of tax receipts coming from this

asset. The government gets a constant flow of

                                       T
           R(6) = T( c(6) — 6) =                                                    (9)
                                     (i--—)r


Since the flows are equal for different assets and constant over time, it is

clear that which investment the firm undertakes should be a matter of indiffer-

ence to the government. A fortiori, if the tax rate T differed across assets,

the government's receipts would be permanently higher for an asset with a higher

tax rate and it would clearly prefer more investment in such an asset. Since

investors are indifferent, it would be socially preferable to remove such

differences by equalizing tax rates. This would then constitute the optimal

and, presumably, "neutral" tax policy for the government to use.

    At least in this case, it is clearly optimal to equalize effective tax

rates on different types of capital, since the effective and statutory rates are
                                              — 13 —



the same. Thus, the internal rate of return criterion is valid, regardless of

the size of the tax. On the other hand, the present value criterion is always

incorrect unless two assets have the same value of 5, in which case the problem

becomes trivial.

       Though this result supports the validity of measuring the neutrality of the

tax system with effective tax rates, it is nevertheless a special case. However,

with only a little more difficulty, we can show that the result holds for a value—

equivalent program composed of any type of capital investment, geometric or not.

       Let A be the gross return at time t for an arbitrary such program. Note

that At is not the flow from the initial one dollar investment, but that amount

plus the flows from all subsequent investments undertaken to keep the total

value of capital in the program equal to one dollar. Let D and DTt be the

corresponding values of economic depreciation and depreciation permitted under

law. If T        is   the applicable tax rate, it must be true that


                      (l_T)A +
              r =                TD' —
                                         Dt                                 (lOa)



That   is,   the after tax distribution equals r. It follows that tax receipts are


             R =
                      T(At_D')                                              (lob)

If the depreciation deductions correspond to economic depreciation for each

investment and, hence, for each program as well, equations (lOa) and (lob)

become


             r
                      (l_T)(A_D)                                           (lla)

             R = r(A—D)
                                                                           (llb)
                                         —14—


so that Rt =            a constant. As is evident from comparing the constants At
               (1—)r,
and      the statutory tax rate is the effective tax rate whenever economic

depreciation is permitted. It is again clear by the same argument as above that

the government should seek to set such rates equal on all types of investment.

      Lest it appear that this desirability of equal effective tax rates holds

only when such rates are also equal to the statutory tax rate, consider the case

of immediate expensing, where investment is written off upon purchase and there

are no further depreciation deductions. For a typical value—equivalent invest-

ment program, the private investor puts up one dollar. Because assets are

immediately expensed, this permits a purchase of          dollars worth of capital,

with the government contributing a fraction T of this amount through the deduc-

tion. Thereafter, since in the program economic depreciation and expenditures

on new capital are at all times the same, the private distribution and govern-

ment tax revenue at time t are still described by (ila) and (llb), respectively.11

Thus, the government's revenue stream consists of an initial cost, (i_)     followed
by a constant revenue flow of (-f1-—)r regardless of the type of asset. Once

again, it is clear that T should be set equal on all assets. However, here, the

effective tax rates, though equal, do not equal T, but zero, since from an

initial total investment of -j--— each program yields a gross annual flow of

r(1+—)= r(j-—-).
      A simple extension of the above results is that any effective tax rate

between T and zero can be obtained through a combination of economic deprecia-

tion and expensing, and it will still be optimal to set statutory and effective

tax rates equal across asset types. To see this, note that permitting expensing

of a fraction a of gross investment leads to a constant tax revenue stream of

(f—)r after an initial cost of           to the government. This is still indepen-
                                  1-CT

dent of asset type, and the effective tax rate is easily calculated to be
                                     — 15 —




T(1) / (l-t)   12


     We have thus far shown that for an important class of tax regimes, and

regardless of asset type, it makes sense to equalize the gross—of—tax internal

rates of return, or, equivalently, effective tax rates, applicable to different

types of capital investment. However, the typical real—world tax code is more

formidable in that it is rife with investment tax credits, accelerated depre-

ciation allowances and, in an inflationary environment, the use of nominal

rather than real bases to calculate tax liabilities. The upshot of this is

that Dt and D', as we have referred to them above, need bear little systematic

relationship over time or across assets, bringing us to the problem we have

thus far avoided——how to aggregate over time and compare streams of government

receipts with different patterns.




V. Neutrality and the Government Discount Rate


     To restate the general problem more formally, suppose two value—equivalent

investment programs yield, under a particular tax system, streams of returns

{R} and {R} to the government in the form of tax revenue. Ruling out the

cases where one stream is uniformly bigger than the other, can we still deter-

mine which stream the government will prefer? If so, is there any simple

criterion concerning the tax system which will lead to an outcome in which neither

stream is preferred to the other, so that no reallocation of investment would

be desirable? We shall argue in this section that the answer to each of these

questions is yes, and that the criterion is the same as that which has proved

appropriate in the case of economic depreciation allowances considered above.

     Suppose the government can issue debt which is a perfect substitute for

real capital, yielding a constant net rate of return equal to r. The government
                                       — 16 —



uses sales and repurchases of debt to spread tax receipts over time to match

public expenditures. Each time the government issues a dollar of debt, this

displaces a dollar of private investment in new capital.13 We assume that the

private capital so displaced is always a representative mixture of the invest—

inents in society, and take this "composite capital't to be the same over time.

By the same argument, repurchase of a dollar of debt by the government will

lead to a one dollar purchase of this composite capital by the private sector.

It should be clear that the outcome of this process will be identical to one in

which, rather than issuing debt, the government purchases this composite capital

directly; rather than sell or repurchase debt, it buys less or more capital

than it would otherwise. In either regime, the return to the private sector is

the same, as is the total return from capital to society, and hence government

revenues. Thus, we may safely ignore debt and assume instead that the govern-

ment invests in this composite capital directly, earning whatever gross returns

such an asset generates for private investors before tax. Letting u be the

effective tax rate on this asset, its gross internal rate of return is       in

equilibrium.

     We will compare tax revenue streams coming from different types of asset

by comparing the levels of public expenditures they can support. In order to

outline our method, we consider first the special case in which the value—

equivalent program associated with the composite capital good yields a constant

flow over time)4 This program must have a constant gross rate of return

If {x} is a particular stream of expenditures, it follows that it can be

financed from a certain stream of tax revenues {R} if and only if

                   r
           o
          f0   e
                        t   t
                       (R —x )dt   0                                       (12)
                                                     — 17 -



 that   is, the present value of tax receipts discounted at                 defines the maximum

level (in present value terms) of public expenditures which can be supported

by such a stream. Hence, {R} is preferable to {R*}, in terms of public goods

and services provided, if and only if


              00
                                          —--—t                                          (13)
                       1—u                    1—u
             fo    e         Rdt>f
                              t   o e               R*.dt
                                                      t


Since    the total return to each value—equivalent program consists of a constant

distriubtion r plus the tax revenues generated, we may rewrite (13) as


                       r                    r
                   —-——t
                    1—u                   ——t
                                           1—u
                   e         Btdt >   f   e
                                                    B*tdt                                (14)


where B} and {B*} are the total flows generated by the projects net of

reinvestment (see (10)).

        Now, suppose the gross internal rate of return on every asset, and hence

every value—equivalent program, is the same. Then, since the composite capital

good is simply a combination of such assets, it must also have this same internal

rate of return. It follows that this rate of return is ——, and that all assets
                                                      1—u
have an effective tax rate of u. Furthermore, the present value of the streams

         discounted at ----,     must equal unity, and (14) is satisfied for any two

pairs of assets. Thus, no reallocation of investment is warranted, and the

tax ystem     may be deemed ttneutraltt             Without making any reference to the way in

which the tax system imposes these effective tax rates, we have shown                 that they
should   be equal. It is completely irrelevant whether the rate u results for a

particular asset from a statutory tax rate higher than u coupled with accelerated

depreciation or an investment tax credit, or a lower tax rate with allowances

which   fall short of economic depreciation. The reason is that, though firms
                                                      — 18 —



discount     after—tax flows at rate r, they behaye as if they were discounting

total flows at                which is for this problem the applicable social discount

rate.                                                                -




         While it is reasonable to assume that investment displaced (encouraged)
by public borrowing (lending) is drawn in some fixed proportion form the types

of investment found in the private sector, it may appear restrictive to require

that the value—equivalent program associated with this composite capital yield

a constant return over time. However, we will now show that, regardless of the

pattern of the stream, {                      which comes from the composite capital stock,
                                    B}    ,



equations (13) and (14) are still completely valid.

         Consider the value of capital which results from starting with a one

dollar value—equivalent program of composite capital and reinvesting all

proceeds from this program, and the resulting proceeds, etc., until time '.

Wë   call this value S. (Note that for the preceding example, S = el_U

For any horizon T, a program of expenditures {X} can be supported by a stream

of revenue flows {R} if and only if


               T              >
                                0                                                             (15)
              1o STt(RtXt)dt -'


That is, the value of capital left on hand at time T from increments to and

subtractions from the composite capital stock over time must exceed zero,

Expressing this in initial dollars, we divide by ST, the value of an initial

investment at time zero compounded by continual reinvestment until time T:


                   S
                       T—t          X )dt
              JT             (R —                0                                            (16)
              o ST            t      t




Heret is the discount                    factor applied to time t   expenditures,   and equals


     U
e           for   the previous example.
                                                                — 19 —



          Given an infinite horizon, we must take the limit of the expression in

 (15), obtaining:

                          S
                              T—t
                 urn 1T                (R —X )dt            0                      (17)
                 T-   0       S
                                  T
                                            t t


which, assuming each limit is finite, implies that


                      T STt Rdt                >            T    Tt Xdt
                                                                                   (18)




Thus, {R}is preferable to {R'} if and only if

                          ST_t                              T STt
                 urn 1T               R dt          lim               R*dt         (19)
                 T- o         ST
                                        t
                                                    T-° ST               t



which, by the same argument as before, is equivalent to the condition that



                 Urn 1T               B dt         lim 1T       T-t B* dt
                                                                                   (20)
                      °
                              T                T- °              T



where {B } and {B* }
             t            t
                                  are       the total streams from each program.

          To show that (19) is equivalent to (13), we must demonstrate that 5T—t

approaches e
                  --t
                   —u
                      as      T approaches infinity.
   .*..

          The term S describes the value of the composite capital stock which

results from an initial investment of one dollar and the reinvestment of all

proceeds until time v in more composite capital. This process of capital

accumulation has the same characteristics as the growth of a population, where

the stream {B} represents the stream of "offspring" each initial investment

produces, with the "offspring" themselves having tKe same "fertility" pattern.

What happens to the age structure of the population, or capital stock, over
                                         — 20 —



time?   Under the assumptions we have made thus far, the age structure approaches

a constant as V approaches infinity, by the "Strong Ergodic Theorem" of stable

population theory.15 A direct corollary is that the capital stock, and hence

S, grows exponentially at a constant rate once       is sufficiently large. Since

this growing capital stock is composed solely of assets with a gross internal

rate of return —p--, it too has an internal rate of —s---.
                1—u
                                                             Since all proceeds
                                                       1-u
are being reinvested, the exponential rate of growth must therefore be
                           ST_t
It follows directly that          approaches e    as T becomes large, as we set
                             T
out to prove.

     To summarize the results of this section, we have shown that, regardless

of the particular tax structure and the particular types of capital assets

which are purchased by investors, the value placed by the government and,

a fortiori, the social value of different marginal value—equivalent investment

projects between which investors are indifferent will be the same if the gross

internal rates of return on all such assets are the same. This in turn requires

that the effective tax rates on all such investments be equal.




VI. Conclusions and Extensions


     This paper has attempted to demonstrate that while it is limited by the

narrowness of its scope, tax neutrality is not a meaningless concept. Moreover,

we have argued that while there are two distinct criteria for neutrality with

radically different implications for tax design, only one of these makes any

sense at all, and that this one, that effective tax rates should not differ

across assets, applies to a very general class of situations.

     There are two additional points we wish to make in closing, concerning the

generality of our results. We have assumed throughout that each possible
                                     — 21 —




value—equivalent program is composed of homogeneous assets, but this was merely
for expositional purposes. The argument does not depend on this homogeneity,

and could be applied to heterogeneous programs as well. In such a case, the

effective tax rate of a program would depend in a complex way on those of its

component assets, but uniformity of such rates across programs would again

normally require that each type of asset face the same rate. Similarly, the

assumption that the value of a firm's investment program is independent of the

type of assets purchased is unnecessary. Our argument really depends on behavior

at the household level. Whether a firm actually reinvests a dollar itself, or

whether it distributes it to its shareholders, who then reinvest it, is of no

importance. That is, just as the value—equivalent programs can include more

than one type of asset, they can include investments by more than one firm.
                                       — 22 —




Footnotes


1Auerbach. (1978)


2At least in the past, a second reason for initiating investment incentives has
 been to stimulate aggregate demand during a recession. See Gordon and Jorgenson
 (1976). However, as argued by Lucas (1976), if such is the avowed purpose of
 the incentives, the analysis must take into account the likelihood that inves-
 tors will anticipate tax changes. Furthermore, the impact of such expectations
 differs across investments of different durability. See Auerbach (1978).

3An alternative way of stating the criterion would be that, starting from a
 no—tax equilibrium, changes in the tax law exert an equiproportional influence
 on the different user costs. However, this would require the tax changes to
 depend on general equilibrium changes in the interest rate. Phrasing the
 criterion as we have is consistent with the normal approach which does not
 consider changes in r.


4Feldstein (1979) has phrased this criterion in terms of the proportional effect
 of the tax system on [l—k(S)—Tz(CS)}, which he refers to as the "net cost of
 investment ."


5One might   also justify this approach by observing that if the production tech-
 nology is   separable into capital and other factors and homogeneous in capital,
 the ratio   of different types of capital in use depends only on the relative
 values of   the different user costs.


6As argued in Harberger (1966), for example.

7A recent example in the   U.S. is the evaluation of the Conable—Jones proposal,
 which would shorten tax   lifetimes to five and ten years for equipment and plant,
 respectively. Feldstein   (1979) finds such a proposal reasonable under the
 present value criterion   (see footnote 4) while Auerbach and Jorgenson find it
 to be even less neutral   than current practice, using the effective tax rate as
 their metric.


8For a treatment of this issue as it relates to the differential taxation of
 capital, see Auerbach (l979b).

9There are other problems with the present value approach, or at least its
 implementation, discussed in Auerbach (l979c).


    that will really be necessary for these complications to not matter is that
there be no systematic relationship between the type of asset and the method
with which it is financed or the personal tax rates of its owners.
                                        — 23—




11Note that the specific values of At and Dt need not be the same as before for
  this result to apply.


12See Auerbach (l979a) or Harberger (1980) for further discussion of this approach
  to incentives.


          assumption does not imply any "bond illusion" on the part of households,
     and is perfectly consistent with the results in Barro (1974), where new issues
     of government debt had no impact on private decisions. The difference lies in
     the purpose of the debt. In Barro's model, there is no real transaction asso-
     ciated with the debt——it is given to households, and its interest is paid by
     taxing them. Thus, if households hold the bonds and don't change their beha-
     vior, the bonds and taxes cancel and there is no real effect. In our model,
     the bond is sold to the household to finance real projects.




14Thjs would be true if the tax law specified economic depreciation or expensing,
  or any combination of the two, as just shown.

15
     See Golubitsky et al (1975)
                                     — 24 —



References


Arrow, K., 1966, "Discounting and Public Investment Criteria." In Water
    Research (eds. Kneese and Smith), pp. 13—32. Resources for the Future,
    Baltimore.

Auerbach, A., 1978, "Neutrality and the Corporate Tax," Harvard Institute of
    Economic Research Discussion Paper #657, October.

__________  1979a, "Inflation and the Choice of Asset Life," Journal of
    Political Economy, June, pp. 621—638.

__________ 1979b, "The Optimal Taxation of Heterogeneous Capital," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, November, pp. 589—612.

__________ 1979c,, "A Note on the Efficient Design of Investment Incentives,
    Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper #724, October.

Auerbach, A. and D. Jorgenson, 1980, "The First Year Capital Recovery System,"
    Harvard Business Review, May/June, in press.

Barro, R., 1974, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political Economy,
    December, pp. 1095—1117.

Black, J., 1959, "Investment Allowances, Initial Allowances and Cheap Loans as
    Means of Encouraging Investment, Review of Economic Studies, October,
    pp. 44—49.

Boadway, R., 1978, "Investment Incentives, Corporate Taxation, and Efficiency
    in the Allocation of Capital," Economic Journal, September, pp. 470—481.

Boadway, R. and R. Harris, 1977, "A Characterization of Piecemeal Second—Best
    Policy," Journal of Public Economics, October, pp. 169—190.

Chase, S., 1962, "Tax Credits for Investment Spending," National Tax Journal,
    March, pp. 32—52.

Diamond, P. and J. Mirrlees, 1971, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production: I,"
    American Economic Review, March, pp. 8—27.

Feldstein, M., 1979, "Adjusting Depreciation in an Inflationary Economy:
    Indexing Versus Acceleration," National Bureau of Economic Research
    Working Paper #395, October.

Golubitsky, M., E. Keeler and M. Rothschild, 1975, "Convergence of the Age
    Structure; Applications of a Projective Metric," Theoretical Population
    Biology, pp. 84—93.

Gordon, R. and D. Jorgenson, 1976, "The Investment Tax Credit and Countercy—
    clical Policy." In Parameters arid Policies in the U.S. Economy (ed.
    Eckstein), North—Holland, Amsterdam.
                                    — 25   —




Harberger, A., 1966, "Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from Capital." In
    Effects of the Corporation Tax (ed. Krzvzaniak). Wayne State University
    Press, Detroit.

__________ 1980, "Tax Neutrality in Investment Incentives." In The Economics
    of Taxation (eds. Aaron and Boskin), in press. The Brookings Institution,
    Washington.

Hatta, T., 1977, "A Theory of Piecemeal Policy Recommendations," Review of
    Economic Studies, February, pp. 1—21.

Jorgenson, D., 1963, "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," Merican
    Economic Review, May, pp. 247—259.

Kay, J., 1972, "Social Discount Rates," Journal of Public Economics, November,
    pp. 359—378.

Lucas, R., 1976, "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." In The Phillips
    Curve and Labor Markets, (eds. Brunner and Meltzer). North—Holland,
    Amsterdam.

Musgrave, R., 1959, The Theory of Public Finance. McGraw—Hill, New York.

Sandmo, A., 1974, "Investment Incentives and the Corporate Income Tax,"
    Journal of Political Economy, March, pp. 287—302.

Sunley, E., 1973, "Towards a More Neutral Investment Tax Credit," National
    Tax Journal, June, pp. 209—220.
