                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          POSTWAR MACROECONOMICS: THE EVOLUTION
                    OF EVENTS AND IDEAS



                      Robrt J. Gordon


                  Working Paper No. 59




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                       February 1980




Revised version of a paper discussed at the NBER
Conference on Postwar Changes in the American Economy,
January 3—4, 1980, Key Biscayne, Florida. I am grateful
to Jon Frye for research assistance, and to Martin N.
Baily, Alan Blinder, Robert Eisner, Edmund S. Phelps, Joan
Robinson, and Robert M. Solow for their helpful
suggestions. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's program in Economic Fluctuations.
                                                           NBER Working Paper 459
                                                                      March, 1980




                          Postwar Macroeconomics:
                     The Evolution of Events and Ideas


                                 ABSTRACT



      This paper traces the evolution of macroeconomic events and ideas from
 the late 1940s to the present day. After a brief introduction that highlights
 the unique features of the main macroeconomic variables as compared to their
behavior before 1947, the paper turns to an analysis of four main postwar sub—
periods. The analysis of each sub—period begins with a summary of the dominant
conceptual framework popular at the time, reviews the most surprising features
of both demand fluctuations and supply phenomena, and concludes with a retro-
spective evaluation of policy.
      Many shifts in macroeconoui.jc thinking can be traced to the influence of
particular events. The small role that monetary changes played in explaining
demand fluctuations in the first postwar decade helped maintain intact the
Keynesian multiplier framework, but the increasing importance of autonomous
monetary movements in the second decade laid the groundwork for a greater
emphasis on the potency of monetary policy in the late 1960s. The widespread
acceptance of monetarism owes much to the coincidence in 1968 of an unexpected
acceleration in inflation together with the failure of the tax surcharge enacted
in that year. Similarly, the increased degree of inertia evident in the behavior
of inflation from 1954 on helped win ready acceptance for the idea of a stable
Phillips—curve tradeoff, while the refusal of inflation to abate in 1970 helped
solidify the victory of the natural hypothesis.
      A major theme of the paper is the gradual but profound shift in macror
economics from the dominance of demand issues to a new emphasis on supply topics.
Price controls, crop failures, and OPEC actions in the l970s have brought supply
shocks to the forefront of policy discussions, revived fiscal policy as a means
of countering supply shocks, and lessened support for a monetarist reliance
on simple policy rules.




                                                    Robert J. Gordon
                                                    Department of Economics
                                                    Northwestern University
                                                    Evanston, IL 60201

                                                    (312) 492—3616
"Experience, some people say, is like a light ona caboose, illuminating
only where we aren't going. But we scrutinize the past for its elements of
prologue, and consolation."
                                              —
                                            George F. Will (1979)



                          I.   INTRODUCTION


     The main issues in current discussions of macroeconomic theory and

policy are very different from those of the late 1940s. Most shifts in

economic opinion can be traced to the impact of changing events on ideas.

In some cases the evolution of the economic aggregates helped to decide a

debate between schools of thought. In other cases events occurred that

could not be understood within the context of existing paradigms and re-

quired the invention of new explanations.

     The most useful framework for an analysis of postwar changes in

macroeconomics is the familiar microeconotnic dichotomy between demand and

supply. Most questions in macroeconomics can be usefully divided between

issues concerning (a) the determinants and control of aggregate demand and

(b) those concerning aggregate supply, that is, the factors that influence

the division of changes in aggregate demand between prices and real output.

In the early postwar years macroeconomics was almost exclusively concerned

with the explanation of aggregate demand within a Keynesian framework that

emphasized the need for an activist fiscal policy to offset the instability of

of private spending. By the end of the 1970s concern with demand management

had been pushed aside by two central supply issues——the explanation and

control of inflation, together with the causes and cures of the secular

slowdown in the growth of aggregate labor productivity that had occurred in

the past decade.1
                              TABLE OF CONTENTS




  I. INTRODUCTION                                      1

 II.   ESSENTIAL FEATURE'S OF TEE POSTWAR ERA          4
       The Demand Side                                 4

       The Supply Side                                 8

III. THE FIRST POSTWAR DECADE, 1947-57                13
       The Conceptual Framework                       13
       Major Surprises of the First Postwar Decade    18
       A Retrospective View of Stabilization Policy   27

1V. THE SECOND POSTWAR DECADE, 1957-67                30
       The Conceptual Framework                       30
       Major Surprises of the Second Postwar Decade   32
       A Retrospective View of Stabilization Policy   39

 V. THE THIRD POSTWAR SUB-PERIOD, 2967-73             43
       The Conceptual Framework                       43
       Major Surprises of the 1967—73 Period          46
       A Retrospective View of Stabilization Policy   57

VI. THE FOURTH POSTWAR SUB-PERIOD, 19 73-79           59
       The Conceptual Framework                       59
       Major Surprises of the 1973—79 Period          63
       A Retrospective View of Stabilization Policy   68

VII. CONCLUSION                                       72

       FOOTNOTE'S                                     76

       REFERENCES                                     85

       TABLES                                         92

       FIGURES                                        97
                                                                    2

     Until 1973 the central area of macroeconomic controversy was the

determination and control of aggregate demand. Two main issues were the

subject of debate: the relative potency of monetary and fiscal policy,

and the case for the activist use of discretionary policy as contrasted

with a nonactivist policy stance relying on rules. Opinions on the first

question shifted almost continuously, from the heavy emphasis on fiscal

policy and low regard for monetary policy common in the late 1940s, to

an intermediate view that incorporated both monetary and fiscal policy in

discussions of the late 1950s and early l960s, to a common tendency after

1968 to doubt the potency of fiscal policy and assign a strong causal role

for monetary changes as initiating fluctuations in aggregate demand growth.

     The debate between activists and nonaccivists revolved around three

further issues—differing beliefs in the inherent stability of private spend-

ing, differing beliefs in the potency of price flexibility as an automatic

self—correcting force to offset the impact of instability in spending, and

differing degrees of trust or distrust in the feasibility of stabilizing

government policy actions. The fiscal—monetary and activist—nonactivist debates

revolved around logically separate sets of issues. It would have been possible,

for instance, to believe that monetary policy was potent and fiscal policy

impotent to control aggregate demand, and yet still be in favor of activist

monetary policy intervention. Nevertheless, American economists tended to

coalesce around either a fiscal—activist or monetary—nonactivist position,

with the adjective "Keynesian" often applied to the first group and "monetarist"

to the second. Because they tended to believe in the potency both of money's

impact on spending and of price flexibility as an automatic stabilizing
                                                                         3

 mechanism, monetarists tended to put more emphasis than Keynesians on

 variations in monetary growth as the most important cause of variations in

 the inflation rate, as summarized in Milton   Friedman's   famous dictum (1963)

 that "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon."


     During most of the period before 1973 the intellectual tide shifted

 in a monetarist direction, both toward a belief in the potency of money and

in the defects of policy activism. But since 1973 the advent of supply

shocks as a major destabilizing force has caused the tnonetarist tide to ebb.

Supply shocks not only erode the case for the monetarist "rule" that money

should grow at a constant rate, but they also open up a new role for fiscal

policy in the form of cost—oriented changes in taxes and subsidies to counter-

act the effect of supply shocks on the overall price level. One element of

the monetarist credo——distrust of government actions——remained strongly

intact as the decade of the 1970s drew to a close, since the major impact of

tax changes had thus far been to raise costs and prices and aggravate

economic instability.

     A review of the interaction between macroeconomic events and ideas

over the 1947—79 era can be organized either by topic or by chronological

period. This paper begins by comparing the behavior of important aggregate

variables across four sub—periods of the postwar era In order to identify

the major changes that call for an explanation and that have been the source

of changing ideas and doctrines. Subsequently the four sub—periods (1947—57,

1957—67, 1967—73, and 1973—79) are examined in more detail. For each interval

we identify the economic ideas about which there was a consensus at the

beginning of the period, then examine major economic events and trace the
                                                                         4

impact of unexpected changes on the evolution of theory, policy, and private

behavior. We regularly take advantage of historical hindsight by forming

judgtnents on policy mistakes and the desirability of alternative policy

actions.




                 II.   ESSENTIAL FEATURES OF THE POS1VA.R ERA


       The most important features of the postwar era are well known. In
contrast to the century     before   World War II, the postwar economy has been

characterized by much less instability in real output and unemployment

together with a tendency toward chronic and persistent inflation. The

growth of aggregate demand has been both faster and more stable during the

postwar years, with no instance after 1949 in which annual nominal GNP growth

actually   declined. On the supply side, the responsiveness of prices to

fluctuations in nominal GNP growth has gradually diminished (Cagan, 1975),

and price movements have more and more exhibited sluggish and inertia—

dominated behavior that inhibits policymakers from ending inflation through

restrictive demand—management policies. Although the willingness of

Americans to accept continuing inflation might seem astonishing to a visitor

from earlier eras, the dominance of decentralized nonsynchronized wage—

setting institutions has given households and firms every incentive to pro-

tect themselves against inflation rather than take unilateral action to stop

inflation.


The   Dem1nd Side

       Major   features of the postwar era can be traced with the aid of Table 1,



                                                                                    S
                                                                           5

which compares growth rates and ratios of important economic aggregates

across seven sub—periods spanning the interval between 1923 and 1979. The

averages for all series before 1947 are shown in column (4) and since 1947

in column (9). The table first examines variables relevant for the deter-

mination of aggregate demand growth, and then examines the growth of nominal

GNP from the supply side. Finally, several ratios are discussed, including

the ean an scancard ceviacion of me GN? gap and the unemployment rate,

as well as the share of investment and government spending in GN?.

       It is easiest to think of "aggregate demand" as final sales measured

in current dollars, or "nominal final sales." This concept is equal to

nominal GNP minus inventory change. Because inventory changes are unimportant

over the long intervals examined in Table 1, we present on line I.A.1 the

growth rates of nominal GNP itself. It is evident that nominal GNP since

1947   has grown at almost double the rate of the earlier 1923—47 period,        and

that   the    difference is even more   promounced if World War II is ignored.
Another important feature is the similarity of the growth rates of nominal
GNP in    the first two postwar sub—periods, followed by a substantial accel-
eration      during each of the last two sub—periods. Thus rapid and accelerating

growth in aggregate demand stands as one of the most important features of

the postwar era.

       When we search for an explanation     of the four percentage point accel-
eration in nominal GNP     growth   between the second and fourth postwar sub—periods,
we find in the next line that most can be accounted for by an acceleration

in the growth of the money supply (the M2 definition). But the behavior of

the money supply is of no help at all in explaining the overall difference
                                                                    6

between the pre—1947 and post—1947 growth rates of nominal GNP, since monetary

growth was exactly the same in the latter period as in the forner. Thus an

understanding of the reasons for the more rapid postwar growth of aggregate

demand cannot simply point to the behavior of money but rather must be based

on a more complete explanation in which monetary and nonmonetary factors

interact.

    The gradual shift in the emphasis on money in explanations of aggregate

demand behavior in the last 15 years reflects a transition in the relationship

between nominal GNP and money that occurred at. the same time. The postwar era

began with monetary explanations in low repute, not a surprising development

in light of the loose relation between nominal GNP and monetary growth,

particularly in the itmnediate prewar years 1937_40.2 During the first

decade of the postwar period money played a relatively small role in explain-

ing movements in nominal GNP, and the popularity of the Keynesian multiplier

paradigm reflected this fact, with money a mere sideshow forced in most

models to exert its full influence on spending through a narrow interest rate

channel. But the simultaneous acceleration in nominal GNP and monetary growth

beginning in the 1960s gained many new advocates of the notion that money is

the prime mover in the determination of aggregate demand.

     The traditional multiplier models are built by a "bottom up" procedure

that begins with components of spending. Economic instability originates

with "autonomous" components of demand, while a major portion of consumption

is "induced" and plays the passive role of an obedient child. The motivation

for an activist fiscal stabilization policy is rooted in the belief that con-

sumption fluctuations amplify rather than dampen the inherently unstable


                                                                           4
                                                                           7


behavior of autonomous spending. Section I.A.2 of Table 1 illustrates the

erratic growth rate of nonresidential fixed investment in the pre—1947 period

that provided the impetus for the dominance of Keynesian thinking, particularly

the decade—long cessation in the growth of investment in the 1930s following

the ebullient experience of the 1920s.

       While nonresidential fixed investment has exhibited substantial fluc-

tuations on a year—to—year basis throughout the postwar years, the aveige

growth rates during the first three postwar sub—periods exhibit a remarkable

stability. In fact consumer investment (line 2b) has been less stable than

business investment (line 2c), although the growth of both slumped after

1973. Before 1973 Federal government expenditure was the primary source of

instability across sub—periods in   the   postwar era. In   contrast   to the l930s

when   expanding government expenditures helped to fill the void left by the
collapse   of investment, postwar fluctuations in government spending have

been an autonomous source of instability, largely in connection with the

Korean and Vietnam war episodes.

       The growing size of government has been associated in recent years with

many evils. Thus it is surprising that when Federal spending on goods and

services is combined with that of state and local government, we find at the

bottom of Table 1 (section II.B) that their share in GNP exhibited no increase

at all between the 1957—67 decade and the most recent 1973—79 sub—period,

after the enormous growth in the share that occurred between the 1920s and

the Korean war. The same section at the bottom of the table shows the

remarkable stability of the average share of business investment, in contrast

to the instability of the share during the interwar years.
                                                                     8

     If the share of govertunent spending on goods and services has not in-

creased in the 1970s, why has so much public attention been focussed on

the increasing role of government? The answer lies on the bottom line of the

table in the continuous and steady increase in the ratio of transfer payments

to CNP, which has swollen from a mere 0.7 percent in the 1920s to more than

10 percent during 1973—79. Combining goods and services with transfer pay-

ments, we find that the total share of government spending has increased

from 8.8 percent during the 1920s to over 30 percent in the 1970s.

     While the increased importance of government has allocative consequences

that many have called into question, there can be no doubt that the greater

size of government has helped to stabilize the level of economic activity.

When real income begins to fall, corporate and individual income tax revenues

drop even faster, while transfer payments are either maintained in the case

of social security or rise in the case of unemployment benefits and welfare

payments. Thus, leaving aside its own contribution to instability during

the Korean and Vietnam wars, government has introduced an inertia into the

quarter—to—quarter changes in spending that may have made a greater contri-

bution to stability than the commitment to discretionary activism embodied

in the Employment Act of 1946.


The Supply Side

     Two of the most important measures of the nation's economic performance

are real GNP and the unemployment rate. Throughout the postwar era both have

been explicit targets of policytnakers, and the actual level of each variable

has been compared in public policy discussions to target values for each.
                                                                         9

In the early postwar years this target of policy was called "full employment,"

although policymakers did not set specific numerical goals for the unemploy-

ment rate or real output. Then in the Kennedy—Johnson era an official

"interim full—employment unemployment rate" of 4.0 percent was adopted, and

Okun (1962) devised a simple method to calculate the "potential" real GNP

that   was compatible with this numerical unemployment target. No specific

behavior of inflation was predicted to accompany the state of full employment;

as we shall see, economists in the late l940s differed regarding the compat—

ability of full employment and price stability, while the post—1958 Phillips

curve framework explicitly warned that a modest but chronic inflation might

accmpariy the achievement of full employment.

       Milton   Friedman's   landmark Presidential Address (1968), together with

two insightful papers by Phelps (1967, 1968) warned that there was an

equilbrium unemployment rate that was independent of the inflation rate and

outside the control of aggregate demand policy. Friedman's label for this

equilibrium condition, the "natural" unemployment rate, was gradually adopted

in policy discussions to mean the unemployment rate below which inflation

would continuously accelerate. Statistical studies found that the "natural"

unemployment rate was higher than the previous 4.0 percent target and had

risen considerably after 1963. Although in government documents the

corresponding level of real GNP is still called "potential GNP," the overly

optimistic record of past official potential GNP estimates, together with

considerations of symmetry, suggest that the output which the economy is

capable of producing at the natural rate of unemployment be called "natural

real GNP," as on line I.B.1 of Table 1.
                                                                   10

     Since 1923 the growth of natural real GNP has fluctuated in a narrow

range, rising from its minimum annual rate of 2.5 percent achieved in the

1920s to its maximum of 3.7 percent during 1967—73. Actual real GNP grew

somewhat more slowly than natural real GMP during the 1923—47 period and

slightly faster thereafter, mainly reflecting the evaluation that 1947 did

not represent a year of full utilization of capacity.6 As is shown next in

the table, the modest slowdown in the growth of actual real GNP in the 1970s

masks a greater deceleration in the growth rate of labor productivity (output

per hour), due to the fact that hours have grown rapidly since 1967 while

productivity growth has slackened off. The causes of this slowdown in

secular productivity growth have eluded economists and stand as one of the

major unexplained macroeconomic puzzles.7

     The inevitable consequence of the acceleration of nominal GNP growth

during successive postwar sub—periods, combined with the slowdown in real

GNP growth, has been an acceleration of inflation that has exceeded in mag-

nitude the acceleration in nominal CNP growth. The entire postwar period

has been characterized by a steady rise in prices that has no precedent

in the history of the previous two centuries and is made even more remarkable

by the observation that the consumer price level was no higher in 1940 than

in 1778 (David and Solar, 1977, p. 16). While the acceleration of inflation

in the l960s appears to be largely the result of faster monetary growth, the

further upsurge in the 1970s cannot be explained solely by the behavior of the

money supply.

     Inflation, however, cannot be treated merely as a "residual" that by

definition equals the difference between nominal GNP and real GNP growth;
                                                                     11

  the acceleration of nominal GNP growth and deceleration of real GP growth

  in the 1970s were not two completely independent and exogenous processes.

  Real output behavior can be influenced by the inflation rate through at

  least two routes. First, for any given growth rate of nominal GNP, more

  rapid inflation cuts real GNP growth and tends to induce a recession, reducing

  the ratio of actual to natural real GNP. Second, inflation has effects on

  the growth rate of natural real GNP itself, especially when most tax legis-

 lation is stated in nominal terms. Inflation tends to raise the real effec-

  tive corporate tax rate, thus curbing the incentive to purchase business plant

 and equipment. Through this and other channels, inflation may be partly

 responsible for the decline in the growth of productivity and in real

 natural GNP during the latter part of the 1970s, although recent studies in-

 dicate that the slowdown in investment explains only part of the productivity

 sty.
      The final section of the table displays means and standard deviations of

 two measures of the utilization of resources, the "gap" between actual and

 natural output, and the unemployment rate. These measures contrast the

 enormous waste of resources during the 1929—41 decade with the much more in-

  tensive and stable utilization experience of the postwar years. The close-

 ness of the sub—period mean values of the gap before 1973 to a zero value and

  the reduction of its standard deviation after 1977 is evident. The sub—period

 unemployment rate figures have tended to drift upward during the postwar

 years, reflecting the gradual shifting of the estimated natural unemployment

• rate used in the definition of natural real GNP, i.e., the unemployment rate

 considered compatible with the maintenance of stable inflation. An apparent
                                                                       12

anomaly (to be explored below) is the marked acceleration of inflation after

1973 despite a relatively slack utilization experience; this suggests either

that the true level of natural real GNP may be even lower than assumed in

the table, or that there is more to the avoidance of inflation than achieving

a zero real GNP    "gap."8   For instance a supply shock can simultaneously

boost the inflation rate and cause a contraction in real output relative to

natural output.9

     The higher and more stable level of the utilization of resources in the

postwar years has been accompanied not just by faster inflation on average,

but also by less variability of prices than in earlier decades. Although

prices could be counted upon to fall in prewar recessions, there has been

no actual decline in the GNP deflator (measured as a four—quarter change)

since 1949. Just as the greater role of government has introduced an

inertial tendency into aggregate demand behavior, so the greater confidence

by firms and workers that severe setbacks will be avoided has led to an

inertial tendency in U. S. wage and price behavior.

     Several important shifts in events and ideas stand out in this initial

review of postwar trends. First, the increased correspondence between the

growth rates of nominal GNP and money, in contrast to their much looser

connection before 1947, helps to explain the emergence of monetarism and

and the diminished emphasis on the simple multiplier framework for the analysis

of demand fluctuations. Second, the growth in the size of government after

1947 was mainly reflected in transfer payments rather than goods and services.

Increases in transfers, and in the taxes that finance them, both have con-

tributed to economic stability and to taxpayer resistance that has recently
                                                                      13

increased support for conservative politicians. Third, after 1967 the

growth of labor productivity decelerated markedly, with the growth in natural

real GNP buoyed only by rapid growth in hours. Together with the relatively

high and stable level of utilization of resources achieved during most of

the postwar period, the emergence of rapid inflation naturally shifted

concern among economists and laymen from finding cures for unemployment to

coping with inflation and its consequences. The role of supply shocks in

contributing to the high and unstable inflation rate of the 1970s, together

with the slowdown in secular productivity growth, created a tilt in the

concern and attention of economic thinking toward aggregate supply problems

from the dominance of aggregate demand issues that characterized macro-

economics in the postwar years until the mid—l960s.



              III. THE FIRST POSTh'AR DECADE', 1947-52'


The Conceptua7 Frnork

    The central paradigm of macroeconomics as it emerged from the Second

World War was the Keynesian multiplier theory and its endorsement of an

activist fiscal policy to overcome the inherent instability of private

investment. Monetary theory lurked in the shadows, ignored by most economists

except in academic exercises based on the simplified Hicksian IS—LM

aparatus that allowed an instructor to demonstrate how a low interest elasticity

of investment or a high interest elasticity of the demand for money could

render monetary policy impotent to cope with a depression.10

     The major event that had discredited monetary policy was the juxtaposition

between early 1938 and late 1940 of a weak economic recovery, explosive
                                                                         14

monetary   growth, complete price rigidity, and a short—term interest rate

that had dropped close to zero. Despite a monetary growth rate that was

rapid and constant between early 1938 and late 1941, the economy's recovery

floundered until defense spending began in earnest in late 1940, after which

real GNP suddenly jumped by almost 20 percent in a single year, a chronology

that ingrained a deep—seated belief in the potency of fiscal policy and the

"pushing   on a string" analogy for monetary policy. The acceptance of
Keynesian doctrine led in turn   to a   retrospective deemphasis on   the role of

monetary factors in the Great Contraction of 1929—33, a view that now appears

largely accurate for 1929—31 but seriously misleading for 1931_33.h1

     BY current standards monetary policy received little attention in the

contemporary literature of the late l940s. Money was not ignored totally,

and many economists took note of the fact that the quantity of nominal

money had tripled between 1940 and 1945. The enormous wartime increase in

the quantity of money might not avert a postwar depression, however, because

the experience of the late 1930s had demonstrated that "idle currency and

idle bank deposits do not bid up prices. Someone has to spend to do this.

The amount of cash and other liquid assets possessed by the public constitutes

only one of the factors that influence the rate of the public's spending"

(Seltzer, 1945, p. 832). Nevertheless, despite the loose connection between

money and income, "There is great risk that the deflationary effects of a

radical rise in interest rates might be so severe as to throw the whole

economy into a crushing business depression" (Seltzer, 1945, p. 844).

    This curious inconsistency, with a monetary expansion viewed as

impotent and a monetary contraction viewed as too dangerously potent to
                                                                          15


    risk, helped to maintain support for the Federal Reserve's policy of

    pegging the government bond rate in the late 1940s. Memories looked back

    not only to the period of monetary impotence in the late 1930s, but also the

    period after World War I when the economy plunged into a sharp recession

    in 1920 despite the doubling of the nominal money supply during the war.

    So great was the influence of the 1919—21 experience (and earlier postwar

    deflations) that the panel of business economists surveyed by Joseph

    Livingston expected a postwar deflation for six successive semi—annual fore-

    casts    despite the rapid price increases that occurred through the end of
    1948:

                                 Livingston Panel
                                 Expectation of              Actual Change over
                 Survey   Date   12—month CPI Change          Following 12 months

                 June 1947              —6.64                 8.09

                December 1947          —0.03                  5.82

                June 1948              —1.52                  0.02

                December 1948          —2.48                 —3.00

                June 1949              —5.58                 —1.43

                December 1949          —2.25                  3.68

            Source: Carlson (1977, p. 33)




            In retrospect the exaggerated fears of a postwar depression, with

    predictions of 8 million postwar unemployed common during 1945, reflected a

-   failure    to notice a crucial difference between the World War I and World War II

    experience. While the ncmina7 money supply doubled between 1915 and 1920,
                                                                    16

price controls were sufficiently weak to allow the GNP deflator also

to double, leaving the real money supply in 1920 slightly below its 1915 value.

Controls on prices during World War II were tight enough to limit the

1940—45 increase in the GNP deflator to 30 percent, thus allowing the real

quantity   of money almost to double. As a result the postwar inflation was

both inevitable and necessary to achieve a reduction in real balances.

Similar statements can be made about the real public debt, which more than

tripled between 1940 and 1945. In the context of the swing in opinion from

the Keynesian to monetarist paradigm in the late l960s, we might note that

greater attention to the distinction between real and nominal magnitudes

would have been helpful in the l940s as well.

     Issues involving aggregate supply received much less attention than

those involving the determination and control of aggregate demand. Implicit

or explicit in most discussions of aggregate supply was a knife—edge model

describing an economy that suffered from either a "deflationary gap" or an

"inflationary gap" but was rarely at the delicate point of balance between

them. The "gap" terminology was itself ambiguous because a "deflationary

gap" was accompanied not by deflation of prices but rather by unemployment

and fixed prices. Once again the experience of the late 1930s had been

influential, particularly the period between mid—1938 and mid—1940 when an

unemployment rate exceeding 15 percent was accompanied by virtually complete

price stability.12 The willingness to assume fixed prices in underemploy-

ment cut off the private economy's automatic stabilizing rudder and led to

the automatic conclusion that government intervention was necessary to

avoid high unemployment.
                                                                      17


     Inflationary gaps occurred mainly as the result of wars and could be

illustrated on the Keynesian multiplier diagram as the consequence of

fiscal expansion. 13 The possibility that unemployment and inflation might

co—exist in a normal situation was only rarely considered; the Phillips curve

was still a decade in the future. The unfortunate coincidence of high

unemployment and rising prices in the 1933—37 recovery had not been

adequately explained or integrated into the basic Keynesian analytical

framework. 1 On the other hand, the notion that full employment would

bring a transition to an inflationary condition led to considerable con-

cern about the definition of full employment itself. An incorrect estimate

of the knife—edge might lead to a "vicious spiral of wages and prices."15

    Perhaps on rio topic does hindsight make the state of economic thinking

in the late l940s seem as archaic as in the area of productivity and

economic growth. Productivity growth was not viewed primarily as the well-

spring of economic progress, but rather as a source of unemployment. Ex-

cessive productivity growth was cited as explaining the paradox that in 1940

and 1941 the U. S. economy produced substantially more than in 1929 but

had a much higher level of unemployment.16   It was little noticed that the

same increase in productivity that had occurred in the 1930s made possible

an increase in real private GNP per hour in 1946 of 43 percent over 1929,

the last previous peacetime year with an unemployment rate below 4 percent.

From our uncomfortable vantage point in the late 1970s with a trend rate of

productivity growth of barely one percent, the ability of the economy to

generate a two percentage point rate of increase in productivity between

1929 and 1941 must remain something of a mystery in light of the low rate of
                                                                         18

fixed investment that occurred during the 1930s. Contemporary critics who

blame our poor productivity performance on government regulation and on the

negative impact of inflation on the incentive to invest steuning from our

non—indexed tax system must wonder how productivity managed to grow during

the 1930s at double the rate of 1973—78 in spite of an investment/GNP ratio

only two—thirds as large.

     The lack of attention to productivity and long—term economic growth

reflected the obsession with the possibility of underutilized resources and

the doubt that the economy could remain along a full—employment path.17 The

enormous achievements of the U. S. economy during the war must also have im-

pressed economists and others with the high ZeveZ- of productive efficiency in

the U. S. economy, particularly in contrast to war—ravaged Europe and Japan.

Thus supply constraints and productivity slid well down on the list of

economic concerns and became relegated to specialized courses in defense

economics.




Major Surprvses of   the   First   Posar Decade

     1. Demand   fluctuations. Major     events   in the first postwar decade were

roughly consistent with the Keynesian multiplier theory of aggregate demand

fluctuations. As illustr.ited in Figure la, where four—quarter rates of change

of nominal GNP and money (M2) are compared for the 1947—58 interval, monetary

growth was much less volatile than that of nominal GNP, so that shifts in

nominal CNP were almost entirely accounted for in an arithmetic sense by

shifts in velocity. In the context of the theoretical IS—LM paradigm,

economic instability steimned from movements of the IS curve back and forth
                                                                             19

    along a relatively fixed LM curve.

         The Korean war was overwhelmingly the most important source of economic

    instability during the 1947—57 decade. The unexpected North Korean invasion

    on June 24, 1950, added an explosion of defense spending on top of an already

    healthy recovery from the 1949 recession. Of the 18.4 percent change in

    nominal GNP   in   the four quarters ending in 1951:1, 14.9 percentage points was

    contributed by velocity and only 3.5 by money.

         While the Korean war was a political surprise, its economic consequences

    were similar to those of World War II and provided no important reason to

    question prevailing economic doctrine. Surely the greatest economic sur-

    prise of the first postwar decade was the failure of anything resembling a

    postwar depression to occur, with mild postwar recessions in 1949 and 1954

    roughly duplicating in magnitude the minor setbacks of 1924 and 1927. The

    maximum   four—quarter   decline in nominal GNP was 3.4 percent in the year

    ending in 1949:4, and 1.9 percent in the year ending in 1954:2. In retro-

    spect the high postwar level of real balances and real government debt was

    probably the major factor that prevented the long—awaited postwar depression

    from occurring. Monetarists might note that the downturn in the four—quarter

    M2 growth rate in 1948:2 occurred two quarters prior to the downturn      in
    nominal GNP   growth,    indicz.ting a possible causative role for money, while

    the absence of any absolute decline in money during 1949 helped to arrest the

    economy's decline. There was no similar pattern in monetary growth that

    helps to explain the timing of the 1954 recession. A monetarist might point

•
    to the relatively stable growth performance of M2 between 1951 and 1955

    (with four—quarter growth rates ranging between 3.0 and 5.6 percent) as
                                                                     20

helping to explain why the 1953—55 decline in defense spending had such a

short—lived impact on the economy and why the 1955 recovery was so robust.

       The Keynesian components—of—expenditure analysis of the timing of

economic fluctuations can be set forth with the aid of Table 2, which

illustrates shifts in components of real GNP between key quarters during the

first postwar decade. Section B of the table splits real GNP into real final

sales and inventory accumulation and points Out that the 1949 recession was

so mild that there was no decline at all in real final sales. The recession

was entirely attributable to a small temporary adjustment in the level of

inventories.

      An important feature of the 1948—49 episode was the role of government

spending in prolonging the length of the expansion through the end of 1948

by offsetting the 1947—48 decline in net exports. The mildness of the 1949

setback itself can be attributed not only to the fortuitous countercyclical

swing in total government spending, but also to the timing of the first

major postwar restyling of all "big—three" auto models in 1949. The appeal

of the new models boosted real final sales of automobiles in 1949:2 fully

38 percent above the 1948 average. This episode stands in contrast to the

procyclical swings in auto buying that marked subsequent recessions.

       Since the 1949 recession resulted entirely from inventory behavior, a

recovery in early 1950 was inevitable as soon as the temporary   liquidation
of   inventories ceased. In fact the 1950 expansion was rapid even before the

outbreak of war in June, with consumer investment in autos and houses at the

forefront. Once the war began, consumers who had vivid memories of wartime

shortages rushed to purchase all types of consumer goods, and the share of
                                                                      21

consumer durable purchases in real CNP reached a level (9.2 percent) that

was not to be exceeded until the first quarter of 1973.

        From late 1950 on, investment by consumers and businessmen fell back,

and the expansion was carried along during its remaining years by a 279

percent increase in Federal spending on goods and services which peaked——

along with the cycle itself—in 1953:2. In real terms the subsequent re-

cession was more severe than the 1949 episode; the peak—to—trough drop in

real final sales was 1.9 percent, in contrast to a 1.3 percent increase in

the earlier case. Residential construction, net exports, and state and local

government all helped to stabilize the economy, and the drop in consumer

and business fixed investment was very moderate. The role of monetary

policy in converting residential buildings and state—local government into

automatic stabilizers is particularly important; dropping non—mortgage

interest rates caused funds to be channeled into mortgages and state—local

borrowing. Rousing starts rose by 40 percent between December 1953 and

December 1954, and state—local real spending jumped by 9 percent in a single

year.

        1955 was a vintage year for the American economy. The automatic

stabilizers and stable monetary growth policy had prevented the decline in

defense spending from causing a serious setback. With both the Korean war

and the danger of postwar depression in the past, households and business

firms could contemplate a new era of business prosperity and set Out with

determination to acquire the higher stock of durable goods that was con-

sistent with this new level of "peacetime permanent income." By mid—1955

real investment had jumped to a level 22.3 percent higher than had been
                                                                   22

achieved in the peak 1953 quarter, offsetting almost dollar—for—dollar the

1953—55 drop in Federal spending. Further evidence of a fundamental change

in expectations is provided by the stock market. The real value of the

Standard and Poor's index rose by 102.3 percent between 1953 and 1959, com-

pared with increases of less than 40 percent in the preceding and following

six—year periods.

     The 1955 investment explosion was led by consumer purchases of auto-

mobiles. Paul Samuelson once announced to an M.I.T. graduate class that he

would "flunk anyone who could explain why auto sales in 1955 were so high."

A complete quantitative explanation is never likely to be produced, because

several of the sources of the 1955 auto boom cannot be quantified rigor-

ously. In addition to the basic accelerator mechanism that makes auto sales

depend on the growth of real income, and the effect on expectations of the

mildness of the recession, the boom was amplified by a substantial easing in

installment credit terms that introduced 36—month installment contracts for

the first time, and also by the timing coincidence that all of the "big

three" makes introduced radically new models simultaneously in the 1955 model

year for the first time since 1949.18

    Between 1955 and 1957 the expansion changed in character. The counter—

cyclical behavior of residential housing exerted a drag on the expansion,

as did the slump in consumer durable sales from the unsustainable 1955 level.

In the two years after 1955:3 real GNP managed to grow at only a 1.9 percent

annual rate. The common practice of referring to the 1955—57 expansion as

"an investment boom" is completely misleading. It should actually be labelled

"an export boom," reflecting the 27 percent surge in real exports between
                                                                   23

1955:3 and the post—Suez peak in 1957:1. In contrast, real state—local

spending rose by 7.6 percent over the same six-quarter interval, while real

business investment grew only 4.4 percent.



     2. Supply Phenomena. Before World War II price movements mirrored the

behavior of nominal GNP, instantaneously absorbing a substantial fraction of

nominal spending changes. For instance, falling prices absorbed 51

percent of the 1929—33 drop in nominal GNP. In Figure lb we find that the

four—quarter rate of change of the GNP deflator shows a similar tendency

to mirror nominal GNP changes during the 1947—52 period, with a timing

pattern that is virtually simultaneous. Perhaps the most important supply

phenomenon of the first postwar decade was the change in the behavior of

prices after 1952; the inflation rate no longer responded rapidly to

nominal GNP change but rather seemed to be dominated by inertia. Prices

hardly responded at all to the spending surge in 1953 and 1955, and to

the drop in spending in 1954. Whereas a price decline had insulated real

spending in the 1949 recession, the opposite occurred in 1954 when almost

the full brunt of the nominal GNP decline was translated into real GNP.

     After 1954 the inflation rate displayed the pattern that has become

so familiar in the l960s and 1970s. Price increases responded only

sluggishly to the behavior of nominal spending, so that the peak 1957

inflation rate in Figure lb occurred six quarters after the peak growth

in nominal spending. And over the entire decade between 1954 and 1964 the

variance of inflation was astonishingly low when viewed from the perspective

of earlier history. The reasons for this shift in behavior have never

been adequately explained. One approach would point to the stability of
                                                                   24

expectations of the price level: between December 1954 and December 1965 the

12—month rate of expected price increase by the Livingston panel never went

outside the range of zero to 1.25 percentage points. But this observation

is not an explanatIon, since the main reason for the stability of expected

inflation must have been the stability of actual inflation.

     The assignment of responsibility for the changing behavior of wages

and prices remains an unfinished research task. Cagan's careful analysis

(1975) of the cyclical behavior of wholesale prices in the l920s and the

postwar years confirms "a gradual decline in price response to recessions

over the postwar period." His interpretation is that "an intensification

of general anticipations of inflation over the postwar period has lessened

the response of manufacturing prices to short—run variations in demand"

(1975, p. 55). Sachs (.1980) restates Cagan's interpretation by asserting

that the new postwar intention to pursue countercyclical stabilization

policy shifted expectations toward the belief that recessions would be

temporary and that business firms would feel less need to reduce prices to

sell their goods. Sachs also emphasizes the growing importance of long—

term wage bargaining. By these interpretations the change in the character

of the inflation process evident in the 1952—54 period may be traced ul-

timately both to the Wagner Act of 1935 and the Employment Act of 1946.

    The relation between inflation and nominal GNP growth displayed in

Figure lb has another interpretation. This alternative viewpoint would

state that nothing special happened to the inflation process in 1952—54;

rather the earlier development of price inertia is disguised by the special

events that dominated price behavior in the early postwar era.   The

immediate postwar disequilibrium between nominal money and the controlled
                                                                       25

price level led to a temporary surge of inflation after the termination of

controls in 1946. And the outbreak of the Korean war in mid—1950 led to

a speculative surge in raw materials prices that coincided with a wave of

anticipatory buying, creating a short—lived coincidence between nominal

GNP growth and price change. The stability exhibited by the inflation rate

after 1952 reflected the termination of these special factors and the in-

fluence of Korean war price controls rather than any sudden change in under-

lying behavior. While this account is plausible, and reminds us that any

discussion of price movements during 1946—52 must take account of special

factors, it nevertheless cannot explain why price behavior was so different

in the recessions of 1949 and 1954, and this difference remains the basis

for the claim that price behavior underwent a basic change after 1952.19

       Nominal GNP changes are divided by definition between changes in

prices and in real GNP. Thus in Figure lb the distance between the upper

and lower line represents increases in real GNP. A more revealing display of

real   GNP behavior is provided by Figure ic. The real GNP "gap" is the
percentage difference between "natural" and actual real GNP   and   ranges be-
tween a maximum value of 9.2 percent in 1949:4 to a minimum value of —4.3

percent in 1953:1. When the gap is in negative territory the economy is

utilizing its resources more intensively than is compatible with the avoidance

of accelerating inflation, while a positive gap tends to occur during re-

cessions. Figure in also displays the relationship of the actual unemploy-

ment rate to the "natural" race of unemployment. Since a zero output gap

is defined by the same criterion as the natural rate of unemployment, we find

that the actual unemployment rate rises above the natural rate of unemployment
                                                                      26

in   roughly the same quarters as the output gap rises above zero. The close

relation between the output gap and the difference between the actual and

natural unemployment rates has long been christened "Okun's Law," and

ironically the "law" seems to work better after the publication date of

Okun's original article (1962) than before.

      A comparison of Figures lb and lc suggests three outstanding puzzles

about   aggregate   supply behavior in the first postwar decade. First, why

was the output gap so high in 1947—48 when unemployment was so low?

Second, why was there no acceleration of inflation in 1952—53 in light of

the low levels of unemployment and the negative output gap? Third, why

was unemployment so much more stable than the output gap in 1955—57?

      The first puzzle about the low level of output in 1947—48 can be

restated in another way: the unemployment rate was roughly the same in

1948:2 and 1951:1, but real GNP was 15.7 percent higher in the later

quarter. The compound annual growth rate between the two quarters was

5.4 percent, much faster than anyone's estimate of the long—term growth

rate of the economy's "natural" or "potential" real CNP. Because of the

absence of any reason why long—term economic growth should have been so

much faster between 1948 and 1951 than either before or after, the "natural"

output series used to compute the GNP gap is based on a linear interpolation

between 1929 and 1950, accounting for the pecularity in Figure lc that

the output gap was large in 1947—48 despite the low level of actual

unemployment.20 Given the fact that the 1948—51 increase in manufacturing

real output was 20 percent and in the government sector was 30 percent,

I conjecture that a great deal of private and government capital con-

structed during World War II was temporarily underutilized in 1947—48, due
                                                                    27


 to the low level of defense spending, and that labor was temporarily ab-

 sorbed in low—productivity service occupations.

      The second supply puzzle centers on the low level of inflation in

 1952—53 when the unemployment rate was only 3 percent, in contrast to the

 acceleration of inflation in 1955—57 when unemployment was 4 percent. The

 only available explanation is that wage and price controls during the

 Korean war must have been quite effective. While Schultze (1959) proposed

 an explanation of the acceleration of inflation between 1955 and 1957 based

 on structural imbalances in the economy, subsequent econometric work finds

 little in the 1955—57 experience that cannot be explained within a Phillips

 curve framework.21 The third puzzle, the failure of unemployment to

 increase between late 1955 and mid—1957 when the output gap was rising, can

 be explained by a consistent tendency of business firms to become overstaffed

 in the last stages of every postwar business expansion.22


A Ret ospective View of Stabilization Policj

     Herbert Stein (1969) has labelled the post—Depression commitment to

 fiscal stabilization policy as the "fiscal revolution in America." Yet in

 the broadest sense fiscal policy has been the most important destabilizing

 influence in the postwar economy. In the first postwar decade the enormous

magnitude of the rise and subsequent fall in defense expenditures was the

dominant feature of aggregate demand fluctuations, and the expansion of

spending for the Vietnam war in 1965—68 destabilized the economy again.

•By a narrower criterion that takes defense spending as exogenous and outsIde

the purview of discretionary stabilization policy, however, fiscal policy

deserves relatively high marks in the 1947—57 decade. Several actions
                                                                         28

were taken that helped to reduce the variance of income growth, and there

were no actions that worked in the opposite direction.

      The most important stabilizing action was the rapid move to raise tax

rates iumiediately after the outbreak of war in mid—1950. The "natural—

employment" Federal surplus (NES) reached 6 percent of GNP during the last

half of 1950, and this helped to dampen the surge of anticipatory buying

and accounted for part of the reduction of consumer durable spending that

occurred in 1951. After 1950 the NES was allowed to slide from +6 percent

of GNP to —3 percent by early 1953, a fiscal stimulus that might have been

extremely inflationary were it not for the influence of price controls. 23

       Two   other   stabilizing actions were taken, but in each case the cyclical

timing was fortuitous rather than deliberate. Only six months before the

1948 business—cycle peak, Congress passed a large tax reduction over

President Truman's veto, but there is no evidence that the proponents of

the tax cut foresaw the dcwnturn. Then in 1954 there was a cut in income

and excise taxes, but this represented the expiration of wartime—related

taxes rather than an activist initiative designed for stabilization purposes.

If there was a "fiscal revolution" in the first postwar decade, it was in

the willingness to allow the government budget to move into deficit during

recessions, thus allowing the automatic stabilizers to work, in contrast to

the destructive tax increases engineered by Herbert Hoover in 1932 under

the   budget—balancing rulebook of pre—Keynesian fiscal policy.
      Most discussions of monetary policy in the first postwar decade
center   on the contrast between the Federal Reserve's pre—Accord pegging

policy and its post—Accord shift to a counter—cyclical stabilization policy.
                                                                       29

We have already noted the relative stability of the growth rate of M2 in

Figure la during the post—Accord 1951—55 period, in contrast to the de-

stabilizing drop in monetary growth during late 1948 and early 1949 as the

Fed "accoodated" the economy's decline. The timing of monetary growth

between 1953 and 1957 cannot be faulted, with a stabilizing boost in

monetary growth in 1954 and decline in 1955—56. Perhaps the main flaw in

monetary policy was the acceleration in monetary growth in late 1951 and

1952, which may   have   partially accounted for the intensity of the last

stage of the business cycle expansion in early 1953.

     Another view of monetary policy is presented in Figure id, which

compares the detrended level of the real money supply (M2) with the ratio

of actual to "natural" real GNP (the latter is equal to unity minus the

GNP "gap"). To achieve economic stabilization the detrended real money

supply should drop when the economy is expanding and should rise during

recessions, and so we would hope to find a negative relation between the

two series in Figure Id. Despite the pegging of interest rates in the pre—

Accord period, we see that the negative relation was quite strong throughout

the first postwar decade, with real money being allowed to drop substantially

during the 1947—48, 1950—51, and 1955—57 expansions. The expansion in real

money on 1949 and 1954 also operated in a stabilizing direction. Once

again, the major flaw in the timing of monetary policy was the 1951—53

expansion in real balances.

     In retrospect the record of stabilization policy in the first postwar

decade, while not perfect, stands out as the best of the four postwar sub—

periods. The prompt increase in tax rates in 1950 to finance Korean war

expenditures contrasts with the failure to take decisive action to reduce
                                                                         30

 the government deficit in 1966. .1ith the exception of the overall de-

stabilizing role of government military expenditures, the basic effect of

fiscal and monetary actions was to stabilize the economy. Hindsight allows

some quibbling with the behavior of the monetary authorities, but these

actions did not have long—run adverse consequences for economic performance

as did the mistakes of subsequent postwar sub—periods.




                    IV. THE SECOND   POSTWAR DECADE, 1957-67


The   ConceptuaZ Frcvnework

       There   was no   quantum change in the consensus paradigm of aggregate
demand behavior in the first two postwar decades. Rather there was a

gradual but continuous shift in opinion toward an increased role for money

and monetary policy, marked by mileposts including the Patman Committee

Inquiry, the report and study papers prepared for the Commission on Money

and Credit, the negative reaction of many economists to the downgrading of

money in the Radcliffe Report, and the influence of the monetary research

of Milton Friedman, his students, and others.2 As in-the case of any

body of opinion about the operations of the "real world," the growing

belief in the importance of money can be traced to several episodes in the

first postwar decade. Those who believed that the large outstanding stock

of    public debt prevented effective monetary action and required the pegging
of    interest rates either lost credibility or changed their opinions when

the higher interest rates that followed the 1951 Treasury—Federal Reserve

Accord failed to have any disastrous consequences for debt management or

the economy's performance in general.25 The relative mildness of the 1954
                                                                      31




recession was due partly to countercyclical monetary policy and helped to

lessen the belief that monetary policy was only effective in countering

inflation and suffered from an asymmetric impotence in dealing with slack

demand. The continued acceleration of inflation despite rising interest

rates in 1956—57 tempered the belief that monetary policy had unique

curative powers to combat inflation. By 1962 Harry Johnson was able to

observe that "the wheel has come full circle, and prevailing opinion has

returned to the characteristic l920s view that monetary policy is probably

more effective in checking deflation than in checking inflation."

     In contrast to the steady process of change in the consensus analysis

of aggregate demand, the supply—side framework was completely dominated by

the influence of the Phillips (1958) article on the historical U.K.

relation of wage change and unemployment, together with the Samuelson—Solow

(1960) popularization of the "Phillips curve" relation between inflation

and unemployment for the American audience. In retrospect the instant

success of the Phillips curve framework reflects the inability of the


previous "knife—edge" inflationary gap analysis to explain, without resort

to ad hoc   stories about "cost—push," why inflation   accelerated in 1956—57

without   excessive   overall demand pressure or why it continued at a significant

rate during the 1957—58 recession. For the first time since the 1946

Employment Act, economists came generally to recognize that two of the goals

of the Act, ful1emp1oyment and price stability, might not be compatible.

Only if by happy coincidence the negatively sloping Phillips Curve crossed
                                                                         32
 the   zero—inflation point at an unemployment   rate   generally regarded as "full"

would no policy problem arise. If, however, full employment and price

stability were not compatible, policymakers were forced to choose among a

set of second—best    points along the Phillips Curve. The history of economic
policy between    1957 and 1967 can be summarized in the choice during 1957—60

by Republican policytnakers of a point relatively far to the southeast along

the Curve, and the rejection of that point by Democratic policymakers after

1961 in favor of a stimulative "new economics" designed to reach a point

further to the northwest.

        Another area of change in aggregate supply analysis was the increased

attention to growth in output and productivity, and the interrelations

between growth, investment, and economic policy. Although little attention

was paid to the rapid rates of economic growth being achieved in most

European countries, there was great concern—especially after the launching

of Sputnik in late 1957——over the rapid growth rate achieved by the Soviet

economy and the possibility that the Soviet Union might overtake the U. S.

as an economic power. This new attention to growth as a policy problem

brought the theoretical models of Tobin (1955) and Solow (1956) and the

empirical work of Solow (1957) and Denison (1962) quickly into the mainstream

of the economics curriculum, and the interest in growth went so far that in

1964 James Tobin could write, "in recent years economic growth has come to

occupy an exalted position in the hierarchy of goals of government policy"

(1964, p. 1).



Major   Surprises of the Second Pos'ar Decade
       1.   Derand FZuctzatons. In contrast to the first postwar decade
                                                                    33

when nominal GP fluctuations were extremely large in relation to fluc-

tuations in monetary growth, and were explained in an arithmetic sense by

contemporaneous movements in velocity, in the second postwar decade money

(M2) and nominal GP exhibited a much tighter relation, as is illustrated

in Figure 2a. Beginning in the 1960s the velocity of M2 (that is, nominal

GNP divided by M2) displayed a remarkable constancy that lasted until 1977.26

Another important feature of Figure 2a is the tendency of money to exhibit

a significant lead in advance of turning points in nominal GNP. During the

1958 recovery, 1959 decline, 1961 recovery, 1966 setback, and 1967 expansion,

M2 displayed a consistent lead of about two quarters, suggesting that money

was no longer a sideshow in explaining fluctuations in economic activity

but rather was a central driving force.

    The change in the relation between money and nominal GNP after 1957

which is surely the most surprising aggregate demand event of the second

decade by any ex ante criterion, has been little discussed in the litera-

ture. Although at first glance the main difference between figures la and

2a might appear to be the decline in trend velocity growth after 1957, in

fact the dev'ations froni trend of nominal GNP and money are much more

closely associated in the latter period than the former.

     The timing lead of monetary change before nominal GNP change illustrated

in Figure 2a is presumably the source of the finding of the "St. Louis

equation," first estimated for this period by Anderson and Jordan (1968),

 that monetary change is an independent cause of nominal GNP change. The

alternative explanation for the close relation between money and spending is

 that the Federal Reserve 'accommodated' autonomous changes in spending as
                                                                     34

it attempted to maintain a stable interest rate. This secànd explanation
emphasizes the "reverse feedback mechanism" from spending to money that has

played a major role in debates regarding the causes of the Great Contraction

of 1929—33 (Temin, 1976). The timing relationships seem to support a

money—to—GNP chain of causation during most of the 1957—67 decade, and a

search   for independent actions by the Federal Reserve leads to the conclusion
that the Fed deliberately tightened money and raised interest rates in 1957,
1959—60, and 1966. But the interpretation of the 1961—66 expansion is more

ambiguous.

    The standard interpretation of Federal Reserve actions in the early

1960s concentrates on interest rates rather than monetary aggregates as

indicators of the tightness or looseness of monetary policy. Thus the most

popular explanation of the simultaneous acceleration in money and nominal GNP

growth in 1961 is that the Fed passively accommodated an expansion caused by

nonmonetary factors. Yet a closer examination casts some doubt on this

interpretation of passive accommodation. Far from holding interest rates

constant, the Fed allowed the Federal Funds rate to drop from its late 1959

peak of 4.5 percent to below 2 percent in mid—1961 by boosting the growth

rate of the monetary base. Then short—term rates were allowed to increase

in steps that were compatible with a steady but gradually accelerating

growth rate of money until early 1966, when a sudden sharp jump in interest

rates was accompanied by an immediate slowdown in monetary growth.

    We turn now to Table 3, which shows the main components of expenditure

during the second decade in the same format as Table 2. The 1958 recession

appears to have been almost identical to the 1954 episode in its overall
                                                                   35

magnitude, as measured by the peak—to—trough decline in real GNP. The two

episodes were also virtually identical in the magnitude of the decline in

real final sales. The most important difference was in the composition of

the decline in expenditures; in 1958 government expenditures rose, whereas

in 1954 they had fallen precipitously. The 1958 decline in real private

final sales was much greater than in 1954.

     The 1958—59 recovery in the economy was extremely rapid but was cut

short by the steel strike that began in the third quarter of 1959. While

the strike doubtless interfered with the momentum of the recovery, it ap-

pears in retrospect that the deflationary impact of monetary and fiscal

policy during this period was so intense that the expansion would have

aborted even without a steel strike.

     The most important feature of the 1957—62 period was the sluggish

behavior of investment. Consumer durable expenditures did not reach the

1955 peak level again until 1962:1. Nonresidential business fixed invest-

ment slumped below its 1957:3 peak until late 1961. In the 1958—60 expan-

sion only residential investment showed any buoyancy.

     The 1958—60 expansion presents fascinating problems for proponents of

alternative theories of income and investment determination. Present critics

who decry the impact of government deficits on investment would find little

solace in the laggard 1960 investment performance in light of the high ratio

of the natural—employment surplus (NES) to GNP reached in 1960. The episode

seems to point to a high real interest rate as a major hindrance to investment.27

     The literature devoted to the 1961—66 business expansion would fill

several libraries. The remarkable inertia displayed by the inflation
                                                                           36

process in the early 1960s allowed virtually all of the faster nominal GNP

growth to be transmitted directly to real GNP. And       rapid   GNP   growth over a
sustained period of five years (through mid—1966) created an enormous invest-

ment boom, as is illustrated in Table 3. Total real fixed investment rose

by 48 percent between the 1960:4 cyclical trough and the 1966:1 peak in the

"growth cycle" (achieved when the ratio of actual to natural real GNP

reaches its peak). Both components of real nonresidential investment shared

this experience, with   increases   in consumer durable spending over the same

period of 56.1 percent, and in business nonresidential investment of 60.5

percent. In their usual fashion both residential investment and net ex-

ports peaked relatively early in the expansion, with maximum cyclical levels

reached for both components coincidentally in 1964:1.

     The second postwar decade ended with a period of monetary restriction.

A much—discussed and publicized increase in interest rates initiated by the

Fed in late 1965 carried the Moody's Aaa rate up from 4.60 percent in November,

1965 (roughly equalling the early 1960 peak) to a temporary peak of 5.49

percent in September, 1966. M2 growth slowed modestly, although not nearly

by so much as 1959—60, and nominal GNP growth followed with only a one—

quarter lag.

     In the language that was soon to be adopted, the 1966 housing slump

represented a classic example of "crowding out" caused by an expansion in

government spending during a period of a constant or declining real money

supply. The behavior of real money may be caused in turn either by nominal

money or the price level, and in 1966 both    operated   to cause a marked slowdown

in real M2 growth in the four quarters ending in 1967:1. The sum of real
                                                                    37

government and fixed investment spending grew only 1.7 percent over this same

four—quarter period, with 76 percent of the $23.6 billion increase in real

government spending cancelled out by a drop in fixed investment, most of which

took the form of a drop in housing expenditures.28


     2. Supply Phenomena. Several crucial issues in current macroeconomic

debates are dependent on the data displayed in Figure 2b. Most important,

the econometric message that U. S. inflation fluctuations are dominated by

inertia, and depend little on current policy or nominal GNP movements,

stands out clearly in the diagram. The 1957—64 period also represents the

classic example within the Phillips curve context that high unemployment

has only a modest impact on inflation. Despite the fact that unemployment

was above the "natural" rate continuously between late 1957 and late 1.964,

nevertheless the inflation rate decelerated only from 3.3 percent in the

four quarters ending in the cyclical peak quarter of 1957:3 to a minimum

of 1.3 percent in 1964:1.29 This small extent of deceleration plays an

important role in the objections of those who have opposed (in 1969, 1974

and 1979) a rapid deceleration in nominal demand growth to combat inflation.

If inertia truly dominates the behavior of inflation, then a slowdown in

nominal demand growth that is faster than the maximum possible slowdown in

the inflation rate will lead to a slump in real GNP and a period of high

unemployment and underutilized resources.

    The rapidity of the 1961—66 expansion in real CNP can be viewed from

the perspective of Figure 2c, which compares the behavior of unemployment

with that of the real GNP "gap." From a level of +5.1 percent in 1961:1,
                                                                   38

the gap declined to —4.4 percent in 1966:1, implying that real GNP grew

by 9.5 percent relative to its "natural" or trend level over that five year

interval. At first glance there is nothing in the juxtaposition of Figures

2b and 2c to provide any contradittlon of the reigning Phillips curve para-

digm of the l960s, because the acceleration of inflation from about one

percent to roughly 3 percent between 1961 and 1967 would appear to be

compatible with a northwest movement up the stable Phillips curve asso-

ciated with a decline in unemployment over the same period from 7 to 3.8

percent.

     The collapse of the stable Phillips curve after 1967 is Sometimes

allowed to obscure the preponderance of data points during 1967 that

supported the policy stance of the Administration. Ignoring the lone

voices of Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps to whom few listened in 1966,

a "natural" unemployment rate is a creation of hindsight wisdom that

should not blind us to the environment faced by policvrnakers.30 While

recognizing that the overall unemployment rate had been allowed in 1966 and

1967 to slip below the longstanding "full—employment goal" of 4.0 percent,

there was little in the behavior of prices in 1967 to invalidate the

notion that the full employment target was attainable on a permanent basis.

     Many features of aggregate economic data in the mid—1960s that thcn

appeared to represent the dawn of a new era now appear to be the results

of a transient overexpansion of the economy. The high levels of productivity,

the profit share, and stock prices reached in 1965—66 were particularly

ephemeral, both because the overall level of capacity utilization that had

rade them possible was unsustainable, and also because both productivity and
                                                                    39

profits enjoy temporary bulges when output growth is rapid as a result of

lags in hi.ring   and in wage adjustment.


A   Retrospective View of Stabilization Policy
      A judgment on the merit of fiscal policy in the second postwar decade

naturally begins with the evolution of the natural—employment surplus (NES).

Between 1956 and 1963 the NES fluctuated between zero and two percent of

GNP, with most quarters recording the higher rather than the lower value.

The only major fluctuation over this interval was a brief drop into negative

territory during 1958, reflecting the remarkable temporary stimulative ex-

pansion of government expenditures.31 The sharp increase in the NES from

—0.5 percent to +2.5 percent of GNP between late 1958 and early 1960 later

led to the accusation by Walter Heller (1966) and others that tight fiscal

policy had caused the business expansion to abort prematurely through the

"drag" of overly high progressive tax rates.

      One man's "fiscal drag" is another man's policy to stimulate investment

by maintaining the Federal budget in surplus. The budget—balancing emphasis

of the Eisenhower Administration was at least partly based on the desire to

encourage business investment and long—term economic growth.32 There is

no necessity for a high natural—employment surplus to exert a "drag" on the

economy if it is combined with an appropriate monetary policy designed to

maintain the economy at its "natural" level of resource utilization. This

possibility of tight fiscal and easy monetary policy could have been put

into practice in the last two years of the Eisenhower Administration but was

not, because of the drastic tightening of money that occurred in 1959—60.
                                                                   40

Thus Heller's critique must be reinterpreted as stating that a high natural—

employment surplus can be a drag on the economy if monetary policy fails

to provide the necessary economic stimulus.

     The history of fiscal policy during the rest of the second postwar

decade consists of the much—heralded strategy of the "new economics" of

cutting the natural—employment surplus by a series of tax reductions, in-

cluding a major cut in the personal income tax in early 1964, reductions in

both excise and personal income taxes in 1965, and new tax incentives for

investment introduced in 1962. Between mid—1963 and late 1965 the NES

fell from +1.5 to —1.0 percent of CNP in response to the series of tax

cuts, and then fell to —2.2 percent in 1967 as a result of the failure of

the Administration and Congress to raise taxes promptly to pay for Vietnam

expenditures.

     There are two available interpretations of the relative roles of

monetary and fiscal policy in achieving the vigorous economic expansion

of 1961—66, depending on one's view of monetary behavior in 1961—66 as

active or passive. The juxtaposition of nominal GNP and monetary growth

rates in Figure 2a could be interpreted to suggest that the expansion was

basically a monetary phenomenon, with the impact of fiscal stimulus evident

only in the temporary surge of velocity growth that occurred in late 1965

and 1966. Yet the proponents of fiscal activism would claim that the growth

of the. money supply was a passive variable that depended on the vigor of the

economic expansion. Thus expansionary fiscal policy had its main impact

not solely through its direct stimulative effect on spending but also

indirectly by allowing the Administration to gain control of the money supply

and foster a more vigorous monetary expansion after 1962.
                                                                     41

      While it is doubtless true that fiscal policy forced the Federal

 Reserve to accelerate monetary growth, nevertheless the distinction between

 the direct and indirect multiplier effects of fiscal policy was not suf-

 ficiently appreciated in the mid 1960s. Policyrnakers took literally Arthur

 Okun's (1968) finding that the multiplier for the 1964 tax cut had been a

 very large 2.8, not realizing that this figure encompassed riot only the

 direct impact of the tax cut but the indirect effect accomplished by ac—

 cominodative passive response of the money supply. This misunderstanding

 had unfortunate consequences in 1968, when the Fed failed to play the

 accommodative role upon which the Okun multiplier estimate depended.3

      The comparison in Figure 2d between the real money supply and the

 output ratio provides a simple measure of the stabilizing or destabilizing

 role of monetary policy. But in the second postwar decade monetary policy

 deserves failing marks, particularly for the extent of the decline in real

 balances in 1959—60 even after the economy slumped into recession, for the

 sluggish growth of real balances in 1960—63 despite the low level of the

 output ratio, and most notably for the irresponsible expansion of real

 balances between 1965 and 1968 after real GNP had exceeded its "natural"

 level.

      Throughout the first two decades most discussions of macroeconomic

 issues assumed tacitly that the United States was a closed econcimy. There

 were two main sets of influence of the external world on the U. S. economy.

 First was the destabilizing effect of two temporary export booms in 1947

• and 1956—57 that helped determine the timing and also added to the intensity

 of the 1949 and 1958 recessions. Second was the shift in 1958 from a long
                                                                      42

period of dollar shortage to one of dollar surplus, with a continuous

loss of official U. S. reserves over most of the decade after 1958. Be-

cause the U. S. current account was in surplus in every year between 1954

and 1969 with the single exception of 1959, there was general agreement

that the balance—of—payments "problem" arose from capital outflows, and that

the only solution to the problem was the maintenance of high short—term

interest rates. To prevent the balance—of—payments policy objective from

interfering with the goal of achieving long—term economic growth, the

Kennedy Administration fostered the "Operation Twist" policy of using debt

management simultaneously to boost short—term rates while lowering long—

term rates.

    Subsequent research suggested that Operation Twist had not achieved

its objective, and the raw numbers support this conclusion, as for instance

in the fact that three—month Treasury bill rates were the same in 1956 and

1962 while the Moody's corporate Aaa rate in the latter year was almost

a full percentage point higher (not lower as intended). And in an important

reinterpretation of the U. S. international situation, Despres, Kindleberger,

and Salant (1966) concluded that there had been no problem at all. Rather,

the U. S. for many years had been operating as a giant financial inter—

inediary, simultaneously borrowing from foreign governments in a form that

created an official balance—of—payments deficit while lending back to

foreign nations by buying up long—term foreign assets. The U. S. came out

ahead in this set of transactions if it could earn a higher rate of return

on its foreign assets than it paid out in interest on its reserves.
                                                                    43


                 V.   THE THIRD POSTWAR SUB-PERIOD, 7967-73


The Conceptual Frcnework

     At its zenith in early 1966, an activist view of fiscal policy ap-

peared to have achieved an unassailable victory over its critics. Few in

the profession disagreed with Walter Heller's proclamation that "We now

take for granted that the government must step in to provide the essential

stability at high levels of employment and growth that the market mechanism,

left alone, cannot deliver" (1966, p. 9). Since the use of changes in

government expenditures for stabilization purposes interfered with allocative

considerations, frequent changes in income tax rates became the central

policy tool. While the consensus policy paradigm did not neglect monetary

policy, nor deny that monetary tightness could interfere with the pace of

economic expansion, monetary policy was basically kept in the background

and relegated to a role of maintaining a low and stable level of long—term

interest rates to foster the goal of stimulating long—term economic growth.

The Democratic advisers in the Kennedy—Johnson Administrations had argued

that a substantial reduction in the unemployment rate could be achieved at

the cost of only a moderate acceleration of inflation, and with an in-

flation rate of only 3.0 percent in the four quarters ending in 1967:4

their gamble appeared to have paid off.

     This policy framework collapsed with amazing speed after 1967 as

the result of the interaction of events and economic writings. My

graduate school classmates and I were acutely aware of the timing of this

turn in the intellectual tide, as we began our first teaching jobs in the

fall of 1967 and almost immediately found our graduate school education
                                                                      44




incapable of explaining the evolution of the economy. The most important

ingredient in this intellectual revolution was the influence of the

Friedman—Phelps "natural rate hypothesis" (NBH), which denied the ability

of policy makers arbitratily to select any inflation—unemployment combination

along a stable tradeoff curve.3 Instead below a critical "natural" rate

of unemployment the inflation rate would continuously accelerate, adding

new urgency to Brainard's contemporaneous warning (1967) that policymakers

could not know precisely the multiplier impact of their actions and had to

take care to avoid overshooting the target level of real GNP.

     Soon after the Friedman—Phelps demonstration that the full—employment

target of the policy activists might be unsustainable, Andersen and Jordan

(1968) struck another blow with empirical equations that implied that fiscal

policy had no impact at all on nominal spending over as short a period as

a year. Although activist advocates eventually regrouped and presented

convincing evidence of fatal statistical flaws in the St. Louis procedure

(i.e., Goldfeld and Blinder, 1972), their disarray lasted long enough

partially to discredit fiscal activism. To add to the overall indictment

of fiscal policy provided by the St. Louis equation, Robert Eisner (1969)

made an important attack on the efficacy of the temporary tax changes

favored by mid—l960s policy activists. Using the framework of Friedman's

permanent income hypothesis of consumption, Eisner argued that a temporary

income tax cut or surcharge would fail to alter permanent income and thus

would have a low spending multiplier. Further, the lag in the effect of

fiscal policy might be long and/or unpredictable, with the length of the
                                                                      45

lag depending on the public's subjective assessment of the likelihood that

the tax change soon would be reversed.

     These academic criticisms of the activist case might not have been

so persuasive if they had not been accompanied by supporting events. In-

flation accelerated between 1967 and 1969 far beyond the expectations of

activist proponents. Futher, inflation failed to slow down in the recession

of 1970 and early 1971, as would have been expected along a fixed Phillips

curve. The dramatic drop in the personal saving rate in late 1968 and

the failure of spending growth to slow appreciably in response to the

temporary tax surcharge was consistent both with the St. Louis claim that

monetary multipliers had previously been underestimated and fiscal multi-

pliers overestimated, as well as with the Eisner critique.

     The   continued   economic expansion of 1968, even in the last half of the

year after the tax surcharge had been introduced, also helped to lead to

the de—emphasis of the interest rate as a monetary instrument and to the

increased emphasis on monetary aggregates. Once again, it was an economic

event that helped popularize an economic idea, in this case Irving Fisher's

(1930) distinction between nominal and real interest rates, revived by Mundell

(1963) and Friedman (1968). Conventional econometric models, even the

newly devised MIT—FRB model with its carefully constructed monetary sector,

had neglected the fact that while the demand for money should depend on the

norrrnal interest rate, the demand for investment goods should depend on the

real interest rate. The models thus were unable to explain why investment

did not slump in 1968 in response to an increase in the Moody's Aaa rate

from the 5.1 percent level recorded in early 1967 to the 6.0—6.5 percent

range recorded during 1968.
                                                                       46

Major   Surprzses of the 1967-73 Period

     1. Demcoid Fluctuations. The    relation between money and nominal GNP

growth during the 1967—73 interval shared the main features of the 1957—67
decade. A sharp deceleration in the monetary growth rate beginning in

early 1969 was followed with about a two—quarter lag by a marked (but less

sharp) deceleration in nominal GNP   growth.   The 1969—70 episode in Figure

3a seems to repeat the basic pattern of 1959—60, with the minor deceleration

of 1966—67 significantly less severe in intensity. The recoveries in

monetary growth in 1967—68 and in 1971—72 were also followed with a short

lag by recoveries in nominal GNP growth. The major irregularity concerns

the period between 1971 and 1973, when two years lapsed between the peak

growth of M2 in mid—1971 and the peak growth in nominal GNP   in   early 1973.

The overall trend grouch in M2 and nominal GNP was about the same over the

period, reflecting the constancy in the velocity of M2 exhibited by the

data for the entire period between 1960 and 1977.

     Table 4 exhibits the main components of real GNP in the same format as

for the first two postwar decades. After early 1967 the economy resumed

a rapid expansion, with growth in real final sales of about 7.5 percent in

the six quarters ending 1968:3. During this interval the growth in Federal

spending decelerated, and the expansion was fueled by a six—quarter increase

in consumer investment (durables plus housing) of 21 percent, an increase

that can be explained mainly as a result of the. vigorous growth in monetary

aggregates over the same period.

    The most important issue concerning the behavior of aggregate demand

during the 1967—63 period concerns the temporary income tax surcharge that
                                                                           47

was introduced in July, 1968, and since has come to represent the tWaterloofl

of activist fiscal stabilization management. While the charge that the

surcharge failed to dampen consumer spending has been debated in a series

of econometric articles, the crude facts of the episode are suggestive

(all dollar amounts are in current prices):

                              1968                            1968
                            First Half                      Last Half


                                     Percent of                     Percent of
                      $   Billions   Personal Income $   Billions   Personal Income



Consumer Durable            77.3          11.6            82.7           11.8
   Expenditures

Consumer Nondurable        445.8          66.6           466.1           66.4
   Expenditures

Consumer Interest and       13.8           2.1            14.5            2.1
   net transfers to
   foreigners

Personal Saving             42.4           6.3            33.8            4.8

Personal tax and            89.7          13.4           104.4           14.9
   nontax payments

Personal Income            669.0         100.0           701.5          100.0




The most important finding in the table is that a drop in the share of

personal saving in personal income exactly offset the increase in the share

of tax payments. There was no change at all in consumer spending out of

personal income, although the share of consumer spending in personal disposable

income increased from 90.3 to 91.9 percent. A more complete verdict on

the episode requires a model to predict what would have been expected to
                                                                    48

happen to consumer spending, given the behavior of income, wealth, and

other variables. The latest conclusion by Blinder (1978) is that "over a

one—year planning horizon, temporary taxes are estimated to have only about

20—60 percent of the impact of permanent taxes of the same magnitude, and

rebates are estimated to have only about 10—50 percent of the impact."

Both the facts in the table and Blinder's evaluation would appear to support

Eisner's initial point that the effects on consumption of temporary tax

changes are likely to be weak, uncertain, or both.

     After the peak of the growth cycle was reached in 1968:3, i.e., after

the ratio of actual to natural real output reached its cyclical maximum,

the economy moved sideways for the next year. Defense spending had peaked

in the summer of 1968, and the modest drop in Federal spending over that

year was roughly cancelled out by a further increase in investment. A sur-

prising feature of the evolution of spending during 1969 and 1970 was the

more moderate extent of the decline in housing expenditure than in 1966—67

despite the drastic extent of "disinterinediacion" that drained money from

commercial bank time deposits and from savings institutions. Government

spending   expanded rapidly in 1966—67 and slumped continuously between

between mid—1968 and mid—1971, thus "crowding out" housing in the earlier

period and "crowding in" housing in the later period.

     The mildness of the 1970 recession is evident in Table 4, with a

peak—to—trough decline in real final sales of only $1.9 billion, all of

which can be accounted for by the General Motors strike of 1970.36 In

fact the behavior of the economy in 1970 is better described as a "hiatus"

than as a recession, and is more than accounted for by the drop in Federal
                                                                      49

defense spending. In the league table of postwar recessions measured by

the change in real final sales between the NBER peak and trough quarters,

1970 on a strike—adjusted basis was more severe than 1949 or 1960, but less

severe than 1954, 1958, or 1975. The automatic stabilizers worked with a

vengeance: real personal income in the trough quarter was up 2.2 percent

over the peak quarter; real personal disposable income was up even more due

to the partial expiration of the tax surcharge.

     The subsequent expansion was relatively sluggish in real terms

throughout 1971, but then exploded at a frenetic pace through the growth

cycle peak, with a five—quarter increase in real final sales between 1971:4

and 1973:1 of 9.1 percent. By far the most remarkable aspect of the ex-

pansion was the behavior of real consumer investment, including both con-

sumer durable expenditures and residential investment, which leaped at an

enormous annual rate of 16.8 percent between the trough and growth—cycle

peak (adjusted for the 1970 auto strike). Juxtaposing this record with

the behavior of monetary growth in Figure 3a, it is hard to avoid the con-

clusion that the boom of 1972—73 was primarily due to the influence of the

acceleration of monetary growth in 1971, although some credit is due to

consumer optimism engendered by the price control program of 1971—72.

     By all standards 1973:1 was a vintage quarter for the American economy.

The ratio of actual to natural output reached almost as high a level as

the previous peaks achieved in 1966:1 and 1968:3. Consumer and business

investment reached the highest all—time level of the postwar era when ex-

pressed as a ratio to natural real GNP. The record achieved in 1973:1

exceeds that of other peak quarters which have been highlighted in this

paper:
                                                                        50


                           Ratio of real consumer and business investment
                           (excluding net exports and inventory accumulation)
                           to real "natural" GNP, selected quarters, percent

                 1973:1                        26.8

                 1950:2                        25.1

                 1978:4                        25.0

                 1966:1                        24.5

                 1968:3                        23.6

                 1955:3                        23.5

                 1960:1                        21.0

                 1948:3                        20.9


     Several other interesting features of the spending components are

evident in Table 4. After two decades of roughly 6 percent growth in real

terms, state and local real spending increased at only 4 percent during

1967—73, and 2.3 percent between early 1973 and late 1978, leading one to

ask why the Proposition 13 revolt against excessive spending did not occur

earlier. Net exports were much lower during 1968—70 than at any previous

time during the postwar period, reflecting the overvaluation of the dollar

that culminated in the dollar crisis and Smithsonian agreement of 1971.

The fact that net exports .rere higher in the peak quarter 1973:1 than

in the trough quarter 1970:4 suggests that the intervening devaluations of

the dollar had begun to stimulate the U. S. trade balance.

     After early 1973 the economy faltered. A boom in net exports did not

succeed in offsetting the continued decline in Federal spending and a

reduction in consumer investment, so that real final sales were lower in

1973:4 than in   1973:1.   The NBER cyclical peak is set in late rather than
                                                                           51




early 1973 only because of a massive accumulation of inventories that

temporarily maintained real GNP, threw the economy's inventory—sales ratio

out of equilibrium, and partially explains the severity of the recession

during the winter of 1975.


     2.   Supply Phenomena. The   collapse of the policy paradigm that

relied on a fixed Phillips Curve   occurred   in three stages during the   period
between   1968 and 1971. First, the economy's 1968 recovery from the 1967

slowdown carried inflation up to the 4.5 percent region, in contrast to

the inflation rates of 3.2—3.5 percent that had been experienced in 1966

at roughly the same rates of unemployment and resource utilization. This

outcome led to general recognition that lags in the inflation process

might have been ignornd, that the position of the Phillips Curve might be

sensitive to expectations of inflation, and that there was a long—run Phillips

Curve with a steeper slope than the short—run schedule. Nevertheless, as

long as the steeper long—run curve had a negative rather than vertical

 slope, there was still a policy tradeoff to be exploited by policymakers.

     The second stage of the collapse occurred during the recession of

 1969—70. In contrast to the drop in inflation recorded in each preceding

postwar recession and in the growth slowdown in 1967, there was no

noticeable decline in inflation during 1970. The change in the GNP deflator

over the four quarters ending in 1970:4 (the trough quarter) was 5.0 percent,

little different than the 5.2 percent rate recorded during the four

quarters of 1969.
                                                                    52

     Finally, the last stage in the collapse occurred during the first

two quarters of the 1971 economic recovery. Despite a sluggish rate of

real CNP growth that failed to bring unemployment down from its 6.0 percent

peak rate, inflation still refused to abate, and in fact accelerated to

a 5.9 percent annual rate. Wage growth accelerated as well, leaving little

hope that policyinakers could rely merely on high unemployment to achieve

any significant deceleration in the inflation process. The early 1971

experience was soon reflected in the verdict of econometric studies that

there was no longer any basis for belief that the long—run Phillips curve

was negatively sloped rather than vertical.38 And a more important im-

mediate consequence was that the behavior of wages and prices in the first

half of 1971 caused the Nixon Administration to give up on its policy of

"gradualism" and to reverse its previous disavowal of controls by in-

stituting a wage and price freeze on August 15, 1971.

     The initial three—month. freeze in wages and prices was followed by

several further "Phases" of controls with varying rules. A crude verdict

that the program had a temporary impact is provided in Figure 3b, which

shows that the inflation failed to slow down to any significant degree in

response to the 1969—70 deceleration of nominal GP growth, but then

dropped substantially in 1972 despite the rapid acceleration of nominal GNP

growth.   Another crude verdict can be provided by an inspection of the

annual percentage rates of change over selected intervals of three different

measures of consumer prices:
                                                                    53



                                                                 Personal
                                                Personal       Consumption
                                              Consumption        Deflator
                                 CPI            Deflator    Net of Food & Energy


        196a:3 — 1970:2          5.9                4.6              4.6

        1970:3 — 1971:2          4.3                4.4              4.5

        1971:3 — 1972:4          3.3                3.4              3.0

        1973:1 — 1974:1          8.7                8.2              5.0

        1974:2 — 1975:1         10.5                9.9              9.8




Some early evaluations of the control program focussed on the behavior of

the CPI. Since the CPI had already decelerated very substantially in the

year ending in 1971:2, it was claimed that the controls had no special effect

and the relatively low inflation rate of late 1971 and 1972 just represented

the continuation of a process of deceleration that was already underway.39

But the picture is very different if we look at an alternative and generally

superior measure of consumer price change, the deflator for personal con-

sumption expenditures. By this measure there was virtually no slowdown in

inflation prior to the onset of the controls, and then a sudden drop by

about 1.5 percentage points over the next six quarters when the influence

of food and energy prices is excluded from the deflator.

    The subsequent history of consumer prices also leads to differing

evaluations, depending on which index is used. The rules of the control

program were loosened in the transition from "Phase II" to "Phase III" Ftt

the beginning of 1973. According to the CPI, the acceleration of inflation
                                                                      54

 in 1973 to rates faster than any experienced in the post—Korean period

 indicates that the controls had ceased to have any impact, and that infla-

 tion reflected the excessive expansion of aggregate demand. On the con-

 trary, the "net" personal consumption deflator rose in 1973 and early 1974

at a rate little different from the 1969—70 experience and suggests that

any stimulative impact of demand was cancelled out by a lingering effect

of the controls.


     Subsequent econometric evaluations tend to conclude that the price

controls did succeed temporarily in holding down the price level by two—to—

three percentage points during 1972 relative to what would have been ex-

pected to occur in the absence of controls with the sie level of resozrce

utilization. In 1973 the controls had little impact either way, and then

after the formal abandonment of controls in 1974:2, the entire earlier effect

of controls was dissipated by a rebound in the price level. There was

virtually no impact of the controls on wage inflation (except perhaps in the

construction industry), so that the controls exerted their effect on

inflation only by squeezing profit margins rather than by causing a
deceleration of the entire inflationary process.

     Between late 1972 and the spring of 1974 there was a rapid ac-

celeration in the overall inflation rate, more than half of which appears

to have been caused by an acceleration of food and energy prices, and

the remainder by some combination of nominal demand growth and the loosen-

ing of controls. Farm prices almost doubled between early 1972 and the

summer of 1973, as the result of the simultaneous occurrence of several

adverse factors, including the delayed impact of che 1971 dollar devalua-

tion, crop failures in many.parts of the world combined with massive sales
                                                                      55

of U. S. wheat to the Soviet Union, and a peculiar disappearance of

Peruvian anchovies from their normal feeding grounds. The reference to

this episode as a "supply shock" here and in other papers does not deny

that the worldwide economic boom of 1972—73 may have had some impact on

the relative price of food, but rather represents the judgment that most of

the unprecedented jump in this relative price stemmed from the upward

shift of a supply curve rather than the movement of a demand curve out-

ward along a fixed supply curve. The formation of the OPEC cartel and

its impact on oil prices in 1973—74 also seems to have been mainly an

autonomous supply shift.

     The appearance of supply shifts as a source of chan2es in_the

inflation rate, first in the form of price controls and then in the form

of an explosion of food and oil prices followed by a post—controls rebound,

was by far the most important economic event of the 1970g. No longer

could stable aggregate demand growth insure a stable path of real GNP or

unemployment, nor could unstable behavior of real GNP or unemployment be

blamed solely on the policymakers controlling aggregate demand. Policy

discussions now had to be framed in terms of the optimal degree of

"accommodation" of supply shifts by policymakers, who now had to be

viewed as much less autonomous and powerful in light of the new constraints

they faced.

     While most of the    story of policy responsiveness to supply shocks
belongs   in the history of the post—1973 sub—period, the issue first becomes
relevant during the 1971—73   control   interval. Because the temporary
success   of the controls allowed the inflation rate to slow while demand

growth was accelerating, a large gap was opened between the growth rates
                                                                      56

of nominal GNP and inflation. Real GNP surged ahead, the GNP gap fell

close to its postwar minimum, and unemployment declined as well, as shown

in Figure 3c. Far from accommodating the controls program by decelerat-

ing the growth of nominal GNP, monetary policyinakers allowed the growth of

money and nominal GNP to accelerate. In this sense the output boom was

caused both by the effects of controls in shifting the division of a given

rate of nominal GNP growth toward faster real GNP growth and less price

change, and as well by the Federal Reserve in allowing nominal GNP growth

to accelerate.

     The 1967—73 period witnessed a substantial increase in the estimated

"natural rate of unemployment," the unemployment rate believed to be

compatible with steady inflation. The natural rate concept in this paper,

based on the work of Perloff and Wachter (1979), shifts upward after 1973

as a result of the demographic changes that raised the overall unemployment

rate relative to the rate for "prime—aged" adult males. For instance the

unemployment rate of males aged 25 and over was an identical 3.0 percent

in 1955 and 1974, but the aggregate unemployment rate increased between

the two years from 4.2 to 5.6 percent.'0 To the extent that it is valid

to infer that the tightness of the prime—aged male labor market has a

disproportionate impact on wage and price behavior, this demographic

shift helps to explain why the 6.0 percent unemployment rate experienced

during 1970 and 1971 had so little downward impact on the inflation

process.

     It was during the 1967—73 period that concern first surfaced about

the behavior of U. S. productivity growth. Indeed the 1967—73 average

growth in output per hour in the private business sector was at an annual
                                                                     57

race of 2.1 percent, down front 3.2 percent in the 1957—67 decade. It now

appears, however, that this slowdown mainly reflects cyclical phenomena.

The rapid growth of productivity between 1957 and 1967 can be partly

accounted for by the higher level of resource utilization in the latter

year, and productivity in 1973 appears to have been held down by a tendency

that seems to surface in the last stage of every business cycle for firms

to allow themselves to become overstaffed.1


A   Retrospective Vi.a   of Stzbilization Policy

       Almost nothing can be said on behalf of stabilization policy in the

1967—73 period. Nominal GNP growth was allowed to become much too rapid

in both 1968 and again in 1972—73. Both of these accelerations of demand

growth were preceded by accelerations of the growth of the money supply

that could have been avoided by adherence to a monetary growth "rule" of

the type long advocated by Milton Friedman, and both periods of monetary

acceleration were clearly irresponsible in light of the overly high level

of resource utilization in 1968 and of the need for a monetary deceleration

to accommodate the 1971—72 price controls. The 1969 monetary slowdown was

needed, but its severity would not have been required if the prior 1968

acceleration had not occurred.

       Throughout this paper we have inspected the relation between the

detrended level of real M2 and the ratio of actual to "natural" output

to form a judgment on the stabilizing or destabilizing role of monetary

policy. Figure 3d shows the extremely strong positive relation between

the two indexes over the 1967—73 period, with an autonomous expansion of

real balances in 1968 when the output ratio was already too high, a rapid
                                                                      58

drop in real balances that brought the output ratio below unity, and then

another expansion that continued after the output ratio had risen above

unity.

     The overheated expansion of 1972—73 is perhaps the leading postwar

example of Nordhaus' (1975) "political business cycle" in action. The

temporary success of the controls in holding down the price level in 1971—72

would have generated faster growth in real GNP even if nominal GNP had

been maintained along a constant—growth rate path. But the Fed's expan-

sionary monetary policy allowed nominal GNP growth to accelerate, perhaps

in the belief that the controls program had allowed an abandonment of

caution and the generation of a full—fledged pre—election boom. The

political business cycle model predicts that policy shifts to restriction

irnnediataly after the election, and indeed within three months the con-

trols program had been partially dismantled and monetary growth began to

decelerate.

     Fiscal policy receives demerits during 1967—73 as well. Real federal

government expenditures on goods and services were allowed to drop contin-

uously between mid—1968 and mid—1973, but the speed of decline was most

rapid between mid—1969 and mid—1970, thus aggravating the recession, and

the decline ceased between mid—1971 and mid—1972, thus intensifying the

expansion in total demand. Tax policy appears superficially to have con-

tributed to stability, since the effective personal income tax rate

dropped in 1970 and increased in 1972, but there is no visible stabilizing

impact of these changes because they were completely offset by opposite

movements in the saving ratio. Just as the temporary tax surcharge had
                                                                      59

not affected consumption appreciably in 1968, so its termination in 1970

had no effect, and taxpayers were smart enough to "pay for" the higher

tax collections due to overwithholding in 1972 by cutting their saving

rather than their consumpcion.2



                VI. THE FOURTH POSTh7AR SUB-PERIOD, 1973-1979


The Conceptua7 Frazework

    1973 represents the highwater mark of monctarisrri. Almost every

change in the intellectual consensus in the late 1960s had favored the

monetarist position on the issues of both monetary potency and anti—

activism, from the accumulating body of evidence that the major source of

changes in nominal demand had been prior movements in the money supply, to

the demise of the short—run Phillips curve that eliminated the scope for

any long—run effect of activist policy on the unemployment rate, to the

debacle of the 1968 tax surcharge episode.'3 It is fitting that 1973

ended with. the publication of Goldfeld's much cited empirical study that

showed the demand for money to be a stable and predictable function of

income and interest rates, thus appearing to eliminate instability in money

dcmandaas a qualification to the case for a constant—growth—rate rule.

     The major effect on economic ideas of the 1973—74 supply shocks was to

undermine the case   for a constant—growth monetary rule. The   theoretical

analysis   of policy responses to supply shocks, developed by Cordon (1975)

and Phelps (1978), starts with an appeal to arithmetic——a common feature

of all adverse supply shocks is that the division of any given level of
                                                                   60

nominal GNP is shifted toward a higher price level and a lower level of

real GNP.'' An expansive or "accommodating" demand policy can moderate

the impact on real CNP only at the cost of raising the price level and

aggravating inflation. Restrictive or tIextinguislingI demand policy can

moderate the price increase only at the cost of further aggravating the

shortfall of real GNP. The choice between an accommodative, extinguishing,

or neutral demand policy depends primarily on the nature of wage—setting

institutions and on the relative welfare costs of inflation and unemployment.

     The initial impact of an adverse supply shock, e.g., an OPEC price

hike, is to raise the share of total spending on the product in question

(energy), if its demand is price inelastic. The automatic consequence is

that a fixed level of nominal GNP will be devoted more to spending on

energy and less to spending on nonenergy goods and services. The reduced

amount of nonenergy spending in nominal terms could be reflected in lower

real nonenergy output, lower nonenergy prices, or both. Imagine first

that the domestic wage rate is fixed, and nonenergy prices are "marked up"

over that wage rate by a constant fraction. Than all of the impact of

the supply shock will fall on nonenergy real output. Because the wage rate

is unresponsive to aggregate demand, stabilization policy can boost nominal

income and thus real nonenergy output without raising nonenergy prices.

Policy cannot prevent the overall price level (of energy and nonenergy

products together) from rising, but it can prevent th wasteful loss of

nonenergy output. The crucial feature allowing this beneficent impact of

stabilization policy is the willingness of workers to accept a los5 in

real wages, that is, in the ratio of their fixed nominal wage to the
                                                                      61

higher overall price level.

       At the opposite extreme assume that domestic wages are fully and

instantly indexed to the overall price level and the change in the real

wage depends only on the pressure of real nonenergy demand in the economy.

Then the decline in the real wage required to balance the adverse impact

of the supply shock on labor productivity is inhibited by the indexing

formula and can be achieved only if stabilization policy allows real

nonenergy demand to decline. Complete cost—of—living escalation of the

wage rate (or de facto real wage rigidity in wage bargaining) thus makes

a   potentially serious recession and climb in the unemployment rate inevitable

in the wake of a supply shock, a feature that several authors have

pointed to as explaining the failure of European economies to recover

after 1975 as rapidly as in the U. S. In such an economy with real—wage

rigidity, the economy's short—run aggregate supply schedule is steep, and

stimulative aggregate demand policy will cause extra inflation with little

benefit in the form   of   extra real output.

      One of the most important phenomena in the U. S. economy is the

inertia displayed by year—to—year changes in the nominal wage rate, result-

ing from the institutions of long—term overlapping wage contracts with

decentralized bargaining. While only part of the economy is unionized,

the three—year contracts set in the unionized sector tend to set a

pattern for important parts of the noriunionized sector. Because the

aggregate nominal wage index depends mainly on its own past values, and

responds only partially to consumer price inflation and real demand

pressure, the aggregate real wage tends to be quite flexible. This creates
                                                                     62

a case for partial accommodation of supply shocks within the U. S.

institutional framework; the degree of additional inflation caused by

such acconodation is modest compared to the real output gained. A

serious qualification to accoimnodation comes mainly from the fact that the

U. S. is not a closed economy, and a greater degree of monetary expansion

in the U. S. than abroad tends to cause a depreciation of the dollar and

add extra inflationary pressure to the initial impact of the supply shock.

Depending on policy responses in other countries, the U. S. nevertheless

may obtain a real welfare gain by accommodation.

     During the 1973—79 decade the analysis of supply shocks consumed

relatively little space in academic journals compared to the implications

for economic policy of the tirational expectations hypothesis" that firms

and households base their decisions on all available information including

the past behavior of policytnakers. When combined by Sargent and Wallace

(1975) with the "Lucas supply hypothesis" (1973) that explains output

changes by current and prior unexpected changes in prices, the idea of

rational expectations led to a theorem that nominal demand policy is

impotent to affect real output by any kind of systematic policy that

responds regularly to past values of economic variables. Although it

caused much ferment in academic circles and many heated conference ex-

changes, the Sargent—Wallace theorem had little impact on policymakers,

because its underlying supply hypothesis depended on instantaneous price

flexibility and thus seemed more applicable to price—taking yeoman farmers

than to the price—setting institutions of the postwar U. S. Since 1954

U. S. price changes have been dominated by inertia, and it is hard to
                                                                     63

explain the volatile movements of real GNP by "surprise" changes in the

slow—moving aggregate price series.'5

     Another aspect of post—1973 economic performance that influenced

prevailing opinion was the inability of earlier studies of the demand

for money to explain the evolution of monetary aggregates. These un-

explained movements in velocity that Goldfeld soon labelled "The Case

of the Missing Money" eroded part of the intellectual underpinning of

the case for a constant—growth—rate monetarist rule. As Poole (1970)

had shown, instability in the demand for money provides a justification

for using interest rates as well as a monetary aggregate as instruments

of monetary policy.


Major Surprises of the 2973-79 Period

     1. Demand Fluctuations. The relation between the four—quarter

changes in nominal GNP and money displayed in Figure 4a are not nearly


as close, as during 1960—73. Not only did ta trend velocity of M2 begin

again to grow after a long period of constancy, but the timing of growth

peaks in nominal GNP was quite different than of peaks in money. Between

early 1976 and early 1979 M2 growth was fastest in just the period when

nominal GNP growth was slowest, i.e., between late 1976 and mid—1977.     On

the basis of the widespread prediction in early 1976 that the velocity

of M2 would continue to be stable, monetary policy performed
                                                               quite admirably
in keeping the four—quarter—change of M2 growth between early 1976 and

early 1979 within the relatively narrow range of 8.5 to 10.5 percent.

Nevertheless this record of monetary stability did not prevent nominal GNP
                                                                        64

growth from accelerating to a four—quarter change ending in 1979:1 of

13.3 percent, faster than any similar change recorded during the previous

twenty—seven years.

       A comparison w-ith similar figures for the earlier postwar sub—periods

suggests that both nominal GNP and monetary growth were more stable during

1973—79 than before. There were no sharp decelerations in monetary growth

as had occurred in 1959—60 or 1969—70. In fact the modest 1975 slowdown

in the growth rate of M2 was less marked than the 1948 and 1966 episodes.

The    fact that nominal GNP growth slowed down so much more than monetary
growth, and rebounded more at the end of the recession, resembles the pro—
cyclical fluctuations in velocity that occurred in the 1950s and probably
results from the extent of the inventory correction that was required in
1974—75. In    any case, nothing in the nominaZ.   figures plotted in Figure 4a
would indicate to an uninformed reader that the 1974—75 recession was the
most   serious of   the postwar era. The real story of that recession is of

instability of prices in one direction and real GNP in the opposite

direction.

        The components of real GNP in key quarters during the 1973—79 interval

are displayed in Table 5. The severity of the 1973—75 recession is evident

both in the behavior of real GNP and real final sales. The final sales

decline between the cyclical peak and trough amounted to 3 percent of GNP.,

as compared to less than 2 percent in both 1954 and 1958. On top of that

the shift from inventory accumulation in the peak quarter to decumulation

in the trough quarter amounted to 3.5 percent of real GNP, again higher

than in any previous recession. The decline in real final sales was uniformly
                                                                    65

severe in each component of consumer and business investment. Because the

peak—to—trough growth in state and local government spending was unusually

slow by past historical standards, and because Federal spending did not

increase, the only stabilizing component of expenditure was net exports.

     The 1975—78 recovery can be contrasted to the recovery between the

1970 cyclical trough and the 1973 growth—cycle peak. In both cases the

recoveries proceeded without any push from Federal government spending

and were led by consumer and business investment. The main differences

between the two expansions were in their intensity and duration: while

nominal GNP growth was as rapid during most of the 1975—78 expansion as

during 1972—73, there was no controls program to hold down inflation, so

that more of the recent expansion took the form of price increases and

less the form of real GNP growth. The evolution of the economy after

1978:4 was very similar to that after 1973:1. In both cases there was a

sideways movement of real GNP that occurred as a supply..induced accelera-

tion of inflation "used up" the available growth in nominal GNP. The 1979

situation was healthier than in 1973, however, because there was no spurt

of excessive inventory accumulation as occurred in 1973:4.


     2.   SuppZ.y Phenomena. The role of supply shocks in determining the

behavior of inflation and real output growth in the 1973—75 recession

stands out quite clearly in Figure 4b. The four—quarter inflation rate

steadily accelerated between early 1973 and early 1975 and then decelerated

even faster. A rough estimate is that the peak four—quarter inflation

rate of almost 12 percent can be broken down as follows: an underlying

5 percent inflation rate, plus the delayed impact of excessive demand
                                                                   66

growth in 1973 amounting to about 2 percent, plus an effect of energy and

food prices of about 3 percent, plus the effect of the post—controls rebound

of another 2 percent. The precise allocation of these estimates depends

on the particular quarter in question, since the direct impact of higher

energy and food prices reached its peak at the end of 1973 and the beginning

of 1974, while the post—controls rebound had its greatest effect in the

last half of 1974.

     Some commentators argue that the rapid deceleration of inflation after

the recession trough proves that restrictive demand management can be a

very effective anti—inflationary policy within a short period of time. But

this interpretation of the inflation slowdown of 1975—76 flies in the face

of everything else we know about the postwar period, including the extremely

gradual slowdown in inflation during the 1958 and 1960 recessions, the

absence of any significant slowdown in 1970—71 prior to the controls, and

the transient nature of several components of the 1974 inflation. If OPEC

raises the level of the relative price of oil, the rate of change of that

relative price will temporarily increase and then later decrease. Similarly,

the post—controls rebound was temporary by nature. Thus most of the moderation

of inflation in 1975—76 had little to do with restrictive demand policy,

although it does seem clear that there was a remaining component that can

be attributed to the recession itself.

     In 1978—79 inflation accelerated once again almost to the level reached

in late 1974 and early 1975. Although the precise details of timing were

different, the basic nature of the 1978—79 episode was similar. There was

no prior controls program to produce a rebound, but there were increases in
                                                                       67

relative prices of food and energy once again, as well as some effect of

the increasing utilization of resources during 1968. But most popular

discussions exaggerated both the intensity of the 1979 inflation and the

role of excessive demand growth in causing it. In 1979:3 the National

Income Accounts personal consumption deflator (PCD) increased at an

annual rate of 10 percent, of which fully 3.3 percentage points were due

to the direct effect of the higher relative prices of food and energy.

The net—or—energy—and—food consumption deflator increased at a rate of

6.7 percent, only about one percentage point faster than its 1976—77 pace,

far less of an acceleration than the misleading eight percentage point

speedup in inflation as registered by the CPI. Most commentaries on the

unprecedented discrepancy between the PCD and CPI emphasized the flaws of

the latter rather than the former. As of the third quarter of 1979 there

had   not   yet been any decline in real GNP on a four—quarter change basis

as had occurred throughout 1974 and the first half of 1975, reflecting the

fact that nominal GNP growth had been faster during 1979 and inflation

slower than at the same stage of the 1974—75 cycle.

       The behavior of unemployment and the GNP gap are displayed in Figure

4c. The duration of the recovery between early 1975 and late 1978 is

similar to that between early 1961 and late 1964. Each period finished with

the economy arriving at its natural rate of unemployment and output, with

the magnitude of reduction in unemployment and the GNP gap greater in

the 1975—78 recovery because of the deeper trough of the preceding recession.

Then after late 1978 the economy took a totally different turn than after

late 1964. Whereas the slow and steady expansion in the earlier episode had
                                                                       68

been followed by a rapid drop in the GNP gap as Vietnam war spending

began, in 1979 the supply inflation used up most of the available nominal

GNP growth and caused the GNP gap tc increase.

       The laments of economic policymakers at their inability to stop

supply inflation in 1979 echoed those of 1974. But now in 1979 there was

a new supply—side problem. The pace of productivity expansion had

progressively slowed during the 1975—78 economic recovery in comparison

with the experience in previous recoveries. By late 1979 it appeared that

the secular growth rate in productivity might be less than one percent,

and a search for the causes of the secular slowdown stimulated a number

of studies that were as interesting as they were inconclusive.7 Because

some foreign nations had not suffered as great a slowdown in productivity

nor as great an acceleration in inflation, the unfortunate supply events

of 1978—79 had the healthy effect of forcing chauvinistic U. S. economists

to pay more attention to the condition of the outside world. There was

no agreement, however, whether the poor Ti. S. productivity and inflation

performances were related, or whether there was some deeper social problem

in American society.48


A   Retrospective Vi of Stabilization Policy
      Different   standards must be applied in judgment of policyrnakers who

are forced to react to supply shocks than to those who live in a relatively

peaceful world in which demand instability is the only problem. Since a

supply shock in the form of higier prices of food or energy must worsen

either inflation or unemployment, and usually both, policymakers cannot
                                                                    69

hope to escape criticism. Recent evaluations of this policy problem have

pointed to the relative rigidity of the U. S. nominal aggregate wage rate as

the central factor allowing an accommodative monetary policy in response to

a shock like those faced by the U. S. in 1973—74 and 1979. And Gramlich's (1979)

calculations show that a reasonable weighting of the relaLive welfare costs

of unemployment and inflation makes an accommodative reaction yield a much

higher level of social welfare than an "extinguishing" reaction that

attempts to beat the inflation out of the system.

     Even among those who do not agree with the details of these studies

there appears to be little disagreement that policymakers made a serious

mistake in allowing monetary growth to decelerate in 1974—75. The remaining

question is whether an acceleration should have been allowed to occur, and

if so how much. This debate is unlikely ever to be settled, because it

depends not only on one's ability to trust econometric evaluations of

the consequences of alternative policies, but one's guess as to whether there

would have been a wage acceleration in response to more accommodative policies

as occurred in Sweden, Italy, and the United Kingdom.9 Those who thought that

the greater public awareness of inflation would substantially increase the

low degree of "pass through" of commodity prices into wages must be amazed

by the incredible inertia displayed by data on aggregate wage change in 1979.

Despite a doubling of the rate of consumer price inflation since 1977, there

has been barely one percentage point of acceleration of wage change.

     To add to the humility forced upon Ti. S. policymakers by their vulner-

ability to supply shocks and the slow rate of secular productivity growth

coripared to other nations, the 1978—79 period has demonstrated that U. S.

policy can no longer be made on the basis of domestic considerations alone.
                                                                     70

 The Federal Reserve no longer has the latitude to make its decision on

 the degree of supply—shock accommodation in isolation, because the pursuit

 of tighter monetary policies in Germany and elsewhere may make it im-

 possible for the Fed to accommodate without causing a substantial erosion

 in the value of the dollar. Not only does a dollar depreciation directly

reduce the real income of U. S. citizens, but it also tends to have unfor-

tunate political side effects, especially when it induces OPEC oil ministers

to increase the posted oil price once again. Nevertheless the stimulus of

accommodation to U. S. real income may still be a wise choice to maximize

U. S. welfare, especially if OPEC sets oil prices in relation to the price

of a market basket of its imports from all industrialized nations.

     While there was no discretionary increase in government spending on

goods and services during the 1974—75 recession, as had occurred in 1958,

nevertheless fiscal policy deserves credit for the size and timing of the

temporary tax rebate and permanent tax reduction introduced in 1975:2.

Although the criticisms levied at the 1968 tax surcharge apply as well to

the 1975 rebate, recent studies by Blinder (1978) conclude that there was

a non—negligible stabilizing effect. One may also argue that the tax

rebate was larger than would otherwise have occurred because policymakers

had absorbed the message of the criticism of the earlier episode. Finally,

it might be argued that a tax rebate may have a greater effect than a sur-

charge even if both are equally recognized as temporary, because some con-

sumers in a recession may face a liquidity constraint.

     The increased attention in macroeconomics to the supply side also

applies to fiscal policy. Analysts have pointed to the "wedge" that
                                                                      71

taxes drive between market prices charged by firms and the take—home pay

received by workers. To the extent that after—tax wage increases are

relatively slow to adjust to the pressure of restrictive demand policy,

there may be room for cost—reducing fiscal changes as an anti—inflation

device. For instance, if the social security payroll tax tends to be

shifted forward to prices to a greater extent than the personal income

tax, then a substitution of income—tax for payroll—tax financing of social

security would help to decelerate the inflation rate. The Carter Administra-

tion's economic advisers understood this point well but nevertheless allowed

major increases in the payroll tax to take place. This and other cost—

increasing measures, some.dmes called "self—inflicted wounds," added to

the upward pressure of food and energy prices on aggregate inflation. These

government—induced supply shocks, including increases in the minimum wage

and in the tightness of regulations, as well as in farm price supports, have

added to the dilemma faced by the Federal Reserve and increased the chance

that the Administration will find both inflation and unemployment at record

levels (for an election year) in 1980.

    Not only did the government inflict wounds on itself and the economy

in the. late 1970s, but it failed to use fiscal policy creatively to

reduce Arierican dependence on imported oil. In Europe and Japan high

indirect taxes on energy had long been in effect. These high taxes encouraged

energy conservation. In addition, OPEC price increase created a smaller

percentage increase in final energy prices——and hence less economic

disruption——in Europe and Japan than in the low—tax U. S. As early as 1974

American economists had urged adootion of policies to put heavy taxes on
                                                                     72

energy and to use the revenue to reduce .nonenergy prices (either by

subsidies or sales tax rebates).50



                                VII.   CONCIJUSIOZI



     In   contrast to the interwar period when fiscal policy was faced with

the problem of offsetting both a collapse in private spending and the

destabilizing impact of monetary restriction and bank failures, in the

postwar period external events were the most important single destabilizing

force, most obviously in the direct impact of Korean and Vietnam defense

expenditures on real GNP and in the effect of the formation of the OPEC oil

cartel   in the 1970s on inflation and unemployment. The record of stabili-

zation policy is mixed. The three most successful episodes of fiscal

stabilization were the prompt increase in taxes to finance the Korean war

in 1950, the countercyclical expansion of government expenditures in 1958,

and the tax rebate and permanent tax reduction of 1975. Although the 1958

and 1975 episodes had stabilizing effects, nevertheless.they were both too

little and too late. The most destabilizing fiscal episode was the failure

to raise taxes to finance the Vietnam war promptly in 1965—66, leading to

deficits and pressure on the Federal Reserve to expand the money supply

excessively in 1967 and 1968.

     A major theme of this study has been the changing relation between

changes in nominal GNP and money. Over the middle part of the postwar era,

roughly between 1958 and 1973, accelerations and decelerations in monetary

growth regularly preceded movements in nominal CNP growth of roughly the

same magnitude. onecary policy has not only been potent but also inept,
                                                                        73


bearing responsibility for the unnecessary recession of 1960, the excessive

expansion of nominal GNP growth in 1967—68, the recession of 1969—70, and

the second episode of excessive growth in 1972—73.

     The character of business fluctuations differed both before 1958 and

after 1973. In the first postwar decade monetary policy provided a stable

framework for an economy that suffered from business cycles as a result of

unstable government defense expenditures and to a lesser extent because of

autonomous fluctuations in exports. Only during the pre—Accord period did

monetary policy aggravate a business cycle, as when it allowed monetary

growth to decelerate substantially in 1948. After 1973 demand fluctuations

lost their central role as an explanation of business cycles and took second

place to supply shocks.   Monetary authorities made a mistake in slowing

monetary growth in response to the first supply shock episode in 1973—74

but do not bear a major responsibility for the timing   of   that recession.

In 1979 obsolete operating rules for monetary policy caused overly slow

monetary growth rates in the winter and overly rapid rates in the summer;

a relatively stable performance when measured by four—quarter changes was

not viewed as stable by speculators, so that the Fed found its freedom of

choice regarding the desirable degree of accommodation of the 1979 supply

shock was impeded by its sensitivity to external events and opinion.

     Economic ideas rarely lead economic events but usually follow them.

Although the relation between money and income was quite close after 1958,

the monetarist case. for policy rules and against discretionary activism did

not make much progress as an intellectual framework until the simultaneous

coincidence in 1968 of an inflation that accelerated beyond the predictions
                                                                   74


of existing models, a tax surcharge that failed in its ammounced mission

offslowing the economy, and a Presidential Address by the most articulate

and influential monetarist thinker. After a brief hegemony events once

again caused a shift in opinion, and the monetarist tide ebbed under the

pressure of supply shocks that added a new reason to question the optimality

of fixed monetary growth rules and as new "money demand puzzles" were dis-

covered. Not only were variations in the monetary growth rate incapable of

explaining the variations in the inflation rate during the 1970s, but

monetarists were forced to cede the frontier of creative policy thinking

to nonmonetarist schemes for using taxes and subsidies to counter the

impact of the OPEC cartel.

     Despite the multitudes of economists who make their living by fore-

casting the future, and despite the brilliance of a small minority among

them, virtually all the "surprises" recorded in this paper have eluded

prediction. The predicted postwar deflation and depression failed to

occur; the flexibly responding price level that dropped in recessions

gave way to the stable Phillips curve tradeoff which in turn gave way to

the natural rate hypothesis; the "new economics" of fiscal activism brought

not permanent high employment but rather transient job gains at the cost

of permanent inflation; an OPEC oil cartel that was initially dismissed

as about to collapse and irrelevant for macroeconomics actually ushered

in an entirely new way of thinking about economic fluctuations in which

aggregate—demand policymakers are hapless passive agents and must cede

center stage to supply—side policymakers with their redistributive tax and

and subsidy schemes; the arrival of flexible exchange rates brought not a
                                                                      75

new autonomy for the United States but   rather   a new dependence on the

opinions of foreign bankers and speculators.

     Nevertheless as the l970s drew to a close it was hard to avoid the

conclusion that pessimism had been carried too far. Many U. S. commentators

were so immersed in lamenting American problems that they neglected to

notice a different environment in some other nations. Life went on in

France and Italy with gasoline at close to $3.00 per gallon, suggesting

great potantial in the U. S. for a massive tax on imported oil to be

rebated in the form of subsidies or tax reductions on nonenergy goods and

services. Productivity growth continued, albeit at a slower rate than

before 1973, everywhere but in the U. S. and U. K., suggesting that the

solution to the U. S. productivity puzzle might begin by dismantling U. S.

policies that raised costs, discouraged saving, and protected lame—duck

industries and companies. Ironically the U. S. institution of staggered

and decentralized wage bargaining which in 1970—71 had impeded the govern-

ment's fight against demand—induced inflation actually proved to be a

blessing in dealing with supply—induced inflation, since sluggish nominal

wage adjustment made the U. S. real wage more flexible than that in most

other industrialized countries. As the U. S. entered the 1980s, a long

agenda of positive and forceful economic actions lay gathering dust,

awaiting   the new broom of a positive and forceful politician.
                                                          Robert J. Gordon

                                                                       76
                                FOOTNOTES

 1. The dichotomy between aggregate demand and supply factors, while

     useful for expository purposes, should not blind us to the numerous

     interactions between demand and supply factors. For instance, how

     strong are the forces that tend to bring about an equality between

     aggregate demand and supply? What   is   the optimal demand management

     policy in response to a supply shock? Gordon (1975) has emphasized

     the two—way interaction between wage—setting institutions and monetary

     policy, while Lucas (1976) has stated the general principle that private

    behavior (on both the demand and supply sides) should depend on

    policy actions and more generally on the evolution of all economic

    variables.

2. The loose connection between money and nominal GNP throughout the 1929—

    41 period is particularly evident in quarterly data, as demonstrated by

    Gordon and Wilcox (1980).

3. The increased role of government has reduced the multiplier effect of

    autonomous changes in spending and thus stabilized the economy. Hickman—

    Coen (1976, p. 194) estimate a multiplier for changes in real autonomous.

    spending (for five years after the change) of 5.09 under the conditions

    of 1926—40 and only 2.10 under the conditions of 1951—65.    Gordon (1978,

    p. 494) has calculated that the automatic fiscal stabilizers absorbed
                                                                              only
    5.5 percent of the decline in GNP in 1932, but 36.9 percent in 1975.

4. Many competing labels have been suggested for the state of unemployment

    that is compatible with steady inflation. Next to Friedman's "natural

   rate" label, the next most frequently used is probably the "NAIRU" (Non—
                                                                      77


     accelerating—inflation—rate—of—employment) coined by Modigliani and Papademos

     (1975) and Michael Wachter (1976).

 5. Starting with the 1977 Economic Report of the President the official

     Council of Economic Advisers' estimate of potential real GNP has been

     revised downward by a large amount. For instance, the estimate of potential

     real GNP in the 1979 report for 1976 is about $90 billion (or 6 percent)
                                                                                     1

     lower than the estimate for the same year in the 1976 report. See

    Economic Report of the President (January 1979), Chart 7, p. 75. This

     revision consists partly of a more pessimistic estimate of the long—term

     growth of labor productivity and partly a less ambitious 5.1 percent unem-

    ployment rate criterion in contrast to the old 4.0 percent criterion. The

     figures shown in Table 1 for natural real GNP were created by Perloff and

    Wachter (1979) for 1955—79 and by Gordon (1978) for earlier years.

 6. This judgment is related to the absence of any other explanation of the

    remarkable growth of real GNP between 1948 and 1951, a problem that is

    discussed below.

 7. The most accessible discussion of the puzzle is Denison (1979).


 8. Modigiani's Cl977) Presidential Address emphasizes the inability of

    monetary aggregates to explain the instability of the inflation rate

    in the 1970s.

 9. The consequences of supply shocks are studied in Gordon (1975a) and

    Phelps (1978).

10. While it does not use the IS—LM apparatus, the discussion of monetary

    policy in the second edition of Samuelson's textbook (1951, pp. 372—

    5) is titled "The Inadequacies of Noneary Control of the   Business
                                                                     78


    Cycle" and states that "superhuman efforts" are necessary to reduce long—

    term interest rates and that "investment is likely to be inelastic with

    respect to the interest rate." Included in the discussion (without

    qualification) is the famous phrase "You can lead a horse to water but

    you can't make him drink" (p. 373).

11. An attempt to provide a statistical estimate of the role of money in the

    Great Contraction, quarter by quarter, is provided by Gordon and Wilcox (1980).

12. This stability of prices is particularly evident in the monthly CPI

     figures for the period between the summers of 1938 and 1940.


13. See Samuelson (1951, p. 287—8).

14. To Samuelson's credit, he noted this problem (albeit briefly), and

     wrote: "Even more ominous is the possibility that prices may begin to

     shoot up long before full employment is reached. As a result full

     employment may never be reached." (1951, p. 303)

15. Beveridge (1945, p. 200). For a hopeful view that administered

     contracts and wage bargaining would make prices relatively inflexible

     and prevent an inflationary spiral at full employment, see Dunlop

     C19471, a paper that can be. cited as a precursor of recent attempts

     by Phelps and Winter (1970) and Okur. (1975) to explain why some

    wages and prices are administered rather than set in continuously

     clearing auction markets.

16. See. especially Graham (1947).

17. There is no discussion at all in Samuelson (1951) of productivity,

     economic growth, or economic development, except for treatments of

     Malthus, depopulation, and secular stagnation.
                                                                    79


18. The 1955 model change did not just involve a face lift. Chevrolet

     and Plymouth introduced V—8 engines for the first time. The hedonic

     price literature identifies a very substantial increase in automobile

     quality relative to price in 1955.

19. A full exploration of this topic is outside of the scope of this paper.

     For a more complete discussion see Sachs (1979) and Gordon (1980).

20. The interpolation procedure is more intricate than is described in

     the text and is described in Cordon (1978), Appendix C.

21. A unique feature of inflation in 1956—57 is that the acceleration in

     wages occurred before that in consumer prices. This timing pattern

     can be explained by wage—price models in which the effective minimum

     wage is a determinant of wage change, since the largest postwar increase

     in minimum wage occurred in 1956:1.

22. See Gordon (1979).

23. The postwar history of the full—employment surplus is given in Cordon

     (1978, p. 491).

24. A concise guided tour of contemporary opinion would include Tobin's

     (1953) review of the Patman Inquiry documents, Gurley's (1960) review

    article on the Radcliffe Report, Brunner's (1961) review article on the

    Report of the Commission on Money and Credit, and Harry Johnson's (1962)

     review article on monetary theory and policy. Prior tO the publication

    of the Friedman—Schwartz monetary history (1963), probably the most in-

     fluential pieces by Friedman were his original policy statement (1948),

    the book with his students that helped to revive a new version of the

    quantity theory (1956), the article on money demand that minimized the
                                                                     80

     role of the interest rate (1959), and the work with Meiselman that

     set the quantity theory in competition with the Keynesian multiplier

     approach (1963).

25. A concise contemporary critique of those who opposed flexible

     monetary policy is contained in Friedman (1951).

26. The velocity of M2 was 2.38 in 1960, and 2.43 in 1977. Afterwards

     velocity rose to 2.51 in 1978 and 2.59 in 1979:3. An adjusted

     measure of M2 that incorporates financial innovations in the late

     1970s retains the earlier characteristic of constant velocity——

     see Gordon (l979a).

27. Nevertheless, Clark (1979) has recently concluded that the simple

     accelerator theory outperforms other theories of investment behavior

     that emphasize the importance of changing interest rates and tax

     in entives.

28. A diagrammatic illustration of "crowding out" in 1966 is provided in

     Gordon (1978), pp. 127—9.

29. The extremes in the four—quarter change in the GNP deflator over the

    1957—67 period 'ere a peak of 3.9 percent in 1957:1, trough of

    1.3 percent in 1958:3, peak of 2.4 percent in 1959:2, trough of

    0.6 percent in 1961:1, peak of 2.1 percent in 1962:4, and trough of

    1.3 percent in 1964:1, peak of 3.7 percent in 1966:4, and trough of

    2.5 percent in 1967:2. The 1961—62—64 fluctuation provides part of

    the foundation for the current econometric conclusion that part of

    the influence of demand on prices represents the effect of the

    rate—of—change of output, not just the size of the output gap, as
                                                                   81

     shown in Gordon (1979a). The same paper examines implications of

     econometric estimates from the 1954—77 period for economic policy in

     1979—80.

30. Edmund Phelps reports that his first (1967) paper was written in the

     first half of 1966.

31. We note that real Federal expenditures on goods and services rose by

    6.1 percent between the 1957:3 peak cyclical quarter and 1958:4,

    and then declined by 6.4 percent between 1958:4 and 1960:1. Perhaps

    more surprising and remarkable is the record of state—local real

    spending on goods and services, with a 12.6 percent expansion in the

     first period and only a 0.5 percent rise in the second period, a record

     that presumably reflects the influence of monetary policy on state—

     local spending rather than any conscious attempt to pursue an activist

     countercyclical policy. The combined effect of government spending was

     thus strongly stabilizing, and I believe that the negative correlation

     of real GNP and real government spending during this episode accounts

     for much of the finding in reduced—form "St. Louis regressions" of

    GNP on money and government expenditures that fiscal policy is impotent.

     In Cordon (1971) 1 originally drew attention to the stabilizing role

    of government spending in 1958, and the negative correlation of

     private investment and government spending in 1953—55, as events that

     explain the low multipliers on fiscal variables in St. Louis—type

     reduced—form equations. A more general analysis of the consequences

     of endogenous monetary and fiscal policy for such equations is

     presented by Goldfeld and Blinder (1972).
                                                                      82

32. See Bach (1971, P. 100), and R. A. .Cordon (1974, pp. 133—6).

33. I have previously (1970, pp. 501—05) presented in more detail the

     argument that the lack of careful specification of the role of

     monetary policy in contemporary econometric models was directly to

     blame for the excessive rate of monetary expansion in 1968.

34. Phelps (1967) and Friedman's Dcember 1967 Presidential Address to

     the American Economics Association made essentially the same point.

     Although Friedman's presentation had a greater impact and was

     responsible for the coinage of the "natural rate" terminology,

     Phelps' 1968 paper attracted considerable attention at the August,

     1967, conference of the American Bankers Association.

35. Credit for the distinction between the investment—dependence on

     the real interest rate and money—demand dependence on the nominal

     interest rate belongs with Mundell (1963).

36. If the auto output figures for 1970:4 and 1971:1 are simply averaged

     together to eliminate the effects of the strike, we conclude that

     real GNP would have been $9.9 billion higher and real final sales

     $5.8 billion higher in 1970:4, thus making aggregate real final sales

     in that quarter about $4 billion higher than in the peak 1969

    quarter.

37. Thus perhaps Paul Samuelson's old challenge to his students to explain

    automobile sales in 1955 should be replaced by a challenge to a newer

    generation of economecricians to explain the configuration of invest-

    ment in 1973:1.

38. In Gordon (1972, p. 402) I showed that the data points accumulated
                                                                      83

     during 1969 and 1970 had made the econometric wage equation unable

     to reject the hypothesis- that past price change fed through completely

     to wages, i.e., that the long—run Phillips curve was vertical.

39. Feige and Pearce's (1973) early evaluation that the controls had

     little effect on prices was based on the behavior of the CPI.

     Gordon (1972) and Blinder—Newton (1978) based their evaluations on

     the behavior of the GNP deflator, especially that for the nonfarm

     sector.

40. These figures come from Gordon (1978, p. 251), where adjustments in

     the figures are explained and citations given.

41. In Gordon (1979b) the slowdown in productivity growth in the 1966:1

     1972:4 period relative to the preceding 1947—65 era is only 0.4

     percentage points once cyclical corrections are made, and this

     difference is not statistically significant.

42. Policy actions during this period are examined in detail in Blinder (1979).

43. The major problem for monetarists was the lack of inflation response

     to slower monetary growth in 1969—70, thus indicating that the

     economy's automatic powers of "self—correction" were weak.

44. Grarnlich (1979) provides a clear exposition of what he calls the

     "Cordon—Phelps" model and sets it in the context of a welfare—

     maximizing policymaker. Blinder (1980) extends the analysis to

     deal with aleternative OPEC pricing regimes.

45. It is evident from Figures ib, 2b, 3b and 4b that changes in real

     output have preceded price changes, leaving little room for unexpected

     price movements to explain output changes.
                                                                  84

46. The wage and price equations presented in Gordon (1979a) indicate

     that roughly half of the impact of a recession on the inflation

     process is proportional to the rate of change of unemployment, and

     the other half to the level of unemployment relative to natural

     unemployment. Thus inflation tends to decelerate when unemployment

     is rising, while in the first stages of the recovery, when unemployment

     is falling but still well above the natural rate, inflation tends to

    be relatively constant, as in 1961—63 and 1976—77.

47. See Denison (1979) for the widest—ranging discussion of the problem.

    Other papers either appear in or cited in the second 1979 issue

    of the Brookinas Papers on Econoimc Activtj.

48. Symptomatic of the new concern was the press attention given to

    Vogel l979).

49. For such econometric evaluations, see Eckstein (1978). Other studies

    are discussed in Blinder (1979).

50. A discussion of fiscal devices to offset supply shocks is contained

    in Gordon (1975a, pp. 194—6). An early advocate of a tax on imported

    oil to extract part of OPECts monopoly profit was Houthakker (1976).
                                                              Robert J. Gordon

                                                                       85

                                   REFERENCES

Andersen, Leonall C, and Jordan, Jerry L. 1968. Monetary and Fiscal

     Action: A Test of their Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization.

     Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 50:11—24.

Each, G. L. 1971. Making Monetary and Fiscal Policy. Washington: Brookings.

Beveridge, William H. 1945. Full Employment in a Free Society. New      York:
     Norton.

Blinder, Alan S. 1978. Temporary Taxes and Consumer Spending. NBER working

     paper no. 283.

_______________     1979.    Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation. New York:

     Academic Press.

_______________     1980.    Supply—Shock Inflation: Money, Expectations, and

     Accoucnodation. In Flanders, M. J., and Razin, A. eds., Development

     in an Inflationary World. New York: Academic Press.

________________   and Newton, William J. 1978. The 1971—1974 Controls Program

     and the Price Level: An Econometric Post—Mortem. National Bureau of

     Economic Research working paper no. 279.

Brainard, William. 1967. Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy.

     American Economic Review        57: 411—25.

Brunner, Karl. 1961. The Report of the Cocznission on Money and Credit.

     Journal of Political Economy          69: 605—20.

Cagan, Phillip. 1975. Changes in the Recession Behavior of Wholesale

     Prices in the 1920s and Post—World War II. Explorations in Economic

     Research 2: 54—104.

Carlson, John A. 1977. A Study of Price Forecasts. Annals of Economic anc

     Social    Measurement     6: 27—56.
                                                                          86

Clark, Peter K. 1979. Investment in the 1970s: Theory, Performance, and

     Prediction. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity           10:73—113.

David, Paul A., and Solar, Peter. 1977. A Bicentenary Contribution to the

     History of the Cost of Living in America. Research in Economic

     History    2:1—80.

Denison, Edward F. 1962. The Sources of Economic Growth in the United

     States and the Alternatives Before Es. Washington: Committee on

     Economic Development.

__________________    1979.     Explanations of Declining Productivity Growth.

     Survey of Current Business         59: 1—24.

Despres, Emile, Kindleberger, Charles P., and Salant, Walter S.

     and World Liquidity: A Minority View. Economist (London 218.

Dunlop, John T. 1947. Wage—Price Relations at Hih—Leve1 Employment.

     American Economic Review         37:243—53.

Eckstein, Otto. 1978. The Great Recession. Amsterdam: North—Holland.

Eisner, Robert. 1969. Fiscal and Monetary Policy Reconsidered. American

     Economic Review         59: 897—905.

Feige, Edgar L., and Pearce, Douglas K. 1973. The Wage—Price Control

     Experiment——Did It Work?         Challenge. 16.

Fisher, Irving. 1930. The Theory of Interest. New York: MacMillan.

Friedman, Milton. 1948. A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic

     Stability. American Economic Review            38:245—64.

_________________    1951.    Comments on Monetary Policy. Review of Economics

     and Statistics 33: 186—91.

_________________    ed. 1956. Studies in the Quantity Theorv of Money.

     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                                                         87

________________• 1959.      The Demand for Money: Some Theoretical and

      Empirical Results. Journal of Political Economy       67:327—51.

________________o 1963. Inflation: Causes and Consequences. New Delhi:

     Asia Publishing House.

_________________•   1968.   The Role of Monetary Policy. American Economic

     Review 58: 1—17.

_________________    and Neiselman, David. 1963. The Relative Stability of

     the Investment Multiplier and Monetary Velocity in the United States,

     1897—1958, in Commission on Money and Credit. Stabilization Policies.

     Englewood Cliffs: Prentice—Hall. 165—268.

_________________    and Schwartz, Anna. A Monetary History of the United

     States, 1867—1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Goldfeld, Stephen M. 1973. The Demand for Money Revisited. Brookings

     Papers on Economic Activity 4:. 577—638.

____________________    and Blinder, Alan S. 1972. Some Implications of

     Endogenous Stabilization Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

     3: 585—640.

Gordon, R. A. 1974. Economic Instability and Growth: The American Record.

     New York: Harper and Row.

Gordon, Robert J. 1970. The Brookings Model in Action: A Review Article.

     Journal of Political Economy 78: 489—525.

_________________    1971.   Notes on Money, Income, and Gramlich. Journal of

     Money, Credit, and Banking 3:533—45.

_________________    1972.   Wage—Price Controls and the Shifting Phillips

     Curve. Brookings Papers on     EconomicActivitv   3:385—421.
                                                                           88
__________________• 1975a.       Alternative Responses of Policy to External

     Supply Shocks. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 6:183—206.

_________________• 1975b.        The Demand for and Supply of Inflation. Journal

     of Law and Economics 18:807—36.

__________________• 1978.       Macroeconomics. Boston: Little—Brown.

—                    . 1979a.    Monetary Policy and the 1979 Supply Shock.

     National Bureau of Economic Research working paper, forthcoming.

_________________•    l979b.     The "End—of-Expansion" Phenomenon in   U. S.

     Short—run   Productivity     Behavior. Brookings Papers on Economic

     Activity   10: 000—00.

__________________ 1980.        Characterizing Shifts in the Cyclical Flexibility

     of Wages and Prices since 1900. American Economic Review 70: forthcoming.

__________________    and Wilcox, James. 1980. Moaetarist Interpretations

     of the Great Depression: An Evaluation and Critique. In Brunner, K.,

     ed., Contemporary Views of the Great Depression. Rochester: University

     of Rochester.

Graham, Benjamin. 1947. National Productivity: Its Relationships to

     Unemployment—in—Prosperity. American Economic Review 37: 384—96.

Grarnlich, Edward M. 1979. Macro Policy Responses to Price Shocks.

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 10: 125—78.

Gurley, John G. 1960. The Radcliffe Report and Evidence. American

     Economic Review 50: 672—700.

Heller, Walter W. 1966. New Dimensions of Political Economy. Ne.z York: Norton.

Hickman, Bert C., and Coen, Robert M. 1976. An Annual Growth Model of the

     U. S. Economy. New York: American Elsevier.
                                                                        89

Houthakker, Hendrick S. 1976. The World Price of Oil. Washington: American

     Enterprise Institute.

Johnson, harry C. 1962. Monetary Theory and Policy. American Economic

     Review 52: 335—84.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1973. Some International Evidence on Output—

     Inflation Trade—offs. American Economic Review 63: 326—34.

_____________________    1976.   Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique, in

     Brunner, K., and Meltzer, A. H., eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor

     Markets, volume 1 of a supplementary series to the Journal of Monetary

     Economics. 19—46.

Modigliani, Franco. 1977. The Monetarist Controversy or, Should We

     Forsake Stabilization Policies? American Economic Review 67:1—25.

__________________   and Papedemos, Lucas. 1975. Targets for Monetary

     Policy in the Coming Year. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 6:141—63.

Okun, Arthur M. 1962. Potential GNP: Its Measurement and Significance, in

     American Statistical Association Proceedings of the    Business   and

     Economic Statistics Section. 98—104.

______________   1968.   Measuring the Impact of t 1964 Tax Reduction.

     in 1-leller, Walter W., ed., Perspectives on Economic Growth. New York;

     Random House.

______________   1975.   Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs.

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 6:351—90.

Perloff, Jeffrey M., and Wachter, Michael L. 1979. A Production Function—

     Nonaccelerating Inflation Approach to Potential Output: Is

     Measured Potential Output Too High? in Brunner, K., and Meltzer, A. H.
                                                                       90

     eds., Three Aspects of Policy and Policymaking: Knowledge, Data and

     Institutions, volume 10 of a supplementary series to the Journal of

     Monetary Economics, 113—64.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1967. Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and

     Optimal Unemployment Policy Over Time. Economica 34: 254—81.

________________     1968.   Money—Wage Dynamics and Labor—Market Equilibrium.

     Journal of Political Economy 76: 678—711.


________________     1978.   Commodity—Supply Shock and Full—Employment Monetary

     Policy. Journal of Money, Credit, and Bankina 10: 206—2].

________________     and Winter, Sidney C., Jr. 1970. Optimal Price Policy

     Under Atomistic Competition. In Phelps, Edmund S., etal., Micro—

     economic Foundaticns of Employment and Inflation Thec. New York:

     Nor ton.


Poole, William. 1970. Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a

     Simple Stochastic Macro Model. Quarterly Journal of Economics 84: 197—216.

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1978. The Changing Cyclical Behavior of Wages and Prices,

     1890—1976. National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 304,

     forthcoming in American Economic Review 1980.

Satnuelson, Paul A. 1951. Economics, second edition. New York: McGraw—Hill.

__________________    and Solow, Robert M. 1960. Analytical Aspects of Anti—

     Inflation Policy. American Economic Review      50:   177—94.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil. 1975. Rational Expectations, the

     Optimal Monetary instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule.

     Journal of Political Economy 83: 241—57.

Schultze, Charles L. 1959. Recent Inflation in the United States, Study
                                                                            91



     paper no. 1 in Joint Economic Committee, Study of Employment, Growth, and

     Price Levels. Washington: Government Printing Office.

Seltzer, Lawrence H. 1945. Is a Rise in Interest Rates Desirable or

     Inevitable? American Economic Review 35: 831—50.

Solow, Robert M. 1956. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth.

     Quarterly Journal of Economics 70: 65—94.

_______________   1957.   Technical Change and the Aggregate Production

     Function. Review of Economics and Statistics 39: 312—20.

Stein, Herbert. 1969. The Fiscal Revolution in America. Chicago:       University

     of Chicago Press.

Temin, Peter. 1976. Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression? New

     York: Norton.

Tobin, James. 1953. Monetary Policy and the Management of the Public

     Debt: The Patmart Inquiry. Review of Economics and Statistics 35: 118—27.

____________   1955.   A Dynamic Aggregative Model. Journal of Political

    EConomy 63: 103—15.
    _______

____________   1964.   Economic Growth as an Objective of Government

     Policy. American Economic Review 54: 1—20.

Vogel, Ezra. 1979. Japan as Number One: Lessons for America. Cambridge:

     Harvard University Press.

Wachter, Michael L. 1976. The Changing Cyclical Responsiveness of Wage

     Inflation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 7: 115—159.

Will, George F. 1979. The Illusion of Progress. Newsweek, 94:59.
                                               TABLE 1                                                       92

                              Summary of Interwar and Postwar
                            Developments in the American Economy


                                         1923— 1929— 1941— 1923— 1947— 1957— 1967— 197— 1947—
                                          29       41           47       47       57       67       73      79D
                                          (1)       (2)         (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)     (8)      (9)
   Annual Growth Rates curing Interval

A. The Demand Side
  1. Nominal GNP                         3.3      1.6 10.9              4.3     6.7       6.0      8.6    10.1      7.5

      a. Money (M2)                      4.1      2.5         15.2      5.9      2.8      5.8      R.      8.7      5.9
      b. Velocity of M2               —.0.8,     —0.9         —4.3    —1.6       3.9      0.2      0.0     1.4      1.6
  2. Real GNPa                          3.1       1.9         2.8      2.4      3.8      4.0       3.4    2.3      3.5
      a. Nondurable Consumption         3.4       1.0         3.9      2.3      2.9      3.7       2.1    3.0      3.3
      b. Durable Consumption and        1.0       0.5         5.3      1.8      4.3      3.9       7.6    1.7      4.3
            Residential Investment
      c. Nonresidential Fixed           4.4      —1.7         8.3      2.3      3.0      4.6       4.0    1.7      3.5
            Investment
      d. Federal Expenditures           49a      19.5. —6.7            9.3      9.5      3.4     —4.3     0.4      3.2
      e. State and Local                49a       0.8   0.9            1.9      6.0      5.8       3.6    1.9      4.8
             Expenditures
  3. Real Government Transfers          9.1       9.8 17.8            11.6      3.5      7.4     19.0     5.1      6.2
             to Persons

B. The Supply Side
  1. "Natural" Real GNP                 2.5       2.8         2.7      2.7      3.1      3.5      3.7     3.0      3.3
  2. Real GNP                           3.1       1.9         2.8      2.4      3.8      4.0       3.4    2.3      3.5
  3. Real GNP in Private                3.5       1.8         2.9      2.5      3.5      4.5      3.7     2.5      3.6
        Business Sector
      a. Flours                         1.1      —0.3         1.1      0.4      0.3      1.3      1.6     1.7      1.1
   b. 0utpt per Hour                    2.4       2.1         1.8      2.1      3.2      3.2      2.1     0.8      2.5
 4. GNP Deflator                        0.2      —0.3         8.1      1.9      2.9      2.0      5.2     7.8      4.0
                                                          .

   Average Values during Interval
      Utilization Variables (percent)
   1. Real GNP "Ga"
       a. Mean                          1.2      22.4 —7.6             9.6      0.8      0.8     —0.9     3.1      1.0
       b. Standard Daviation            2.3      10.7 13.5            16.0      4.1      3.0      2.4     2.7      3.3
   2. Unemployment Rate
       a. Mean                          3.5      17.4         2.9     10.3      4.3      5.3      4.7     6.8      5.1
       b.   Standard Deviation          1.1       6.3         2.9      8.1      1.0      1.0      1.0     1.4      1.4
B. Other Ratios
 1.     Nonresidential Fi:.:ed        11.2       6.6          55       7.5      9.7      9.7 10.2 10.2             9.9
          Inves tment /GP
 2.     Government Expenditures/GNP     8.8     17.2      34.3        19.4                                        26.8
      a. Goods and Services             8.1     14.7      31.4        17.2     18.5     20.8     21.8     20.9    20.3
      b. Transfer Payments              0.7      2.5       2.9         2.2      4.1      5.6      7.9     10.4     6.5
                                                                     9 2a



Notes: a. Breakdown of Federal and state—local expenditures unavailable in 1920s.

       b. 1979 figures refer to the second quarter.
                                                           TABLE   2

                                        Real CNP (1972 prices) and Its Components,
                                   Selected Quarters During the First Postwar Decade




                                   Export       Cyclical   Cyclical    Buying   Cyclical   Cyclical   Auto     Cyclical
                                   Boom         Peak       Trough      Spree    Peak                  Boom     Peak
                                                                                           Trough
                                   1947:3       1948:4     1949:4      1950:2   1953:2     1954:3     1955:3   1957:3
                                     (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)      (8)

A.       Natural Real CNP          507.3        524.8      539.2                601.4
                                                                       550.9               621.0      646.3    691.6
B.       Real GNP                  468.0        495.9      489.2       542.4    626.2      605.6      660.3    685.6
          1.   Real Final Sales    470.9        490.6      496.9       534.4    621.1      609.7      652.5    681.9
          2.   Inventory Change     —2.9          5.3       —7.7         8.0      5.1       —4.1        7.8      3.7
C.       Consumption of Non—       277.3        282.6      284.7       298.9    322.6      324.6      343.5    367.0
                                            .
         durables and Services

D.       Fixed Investment          117.5        117.0      114.6       140.5    128.4      130.9      157.0    154.3
     '
          1.   Consumcr Durables    30.3        33.5        38.3        49.9     42.7       42.5       53.9     49.0
          2.   Residential          21.5        24.2        27.1        35.2     28.4       29.3       35.2     29.3
          3.   Nonresidential       48.0        51.8        43.5        53.0     55.8       54.8       63.1     67.1
          4.   Net exports          17.7          7.5        5.7         2.4      1.5        4.3        4.8      8.9
E.       Coveroment Purchases       76.0        90.9        97.5       94.9     170.1      154.3      151.9    160.6
          1.   Federal              36.3        47.9        48.1       44.1     115.9      95.4       87.8     89.9
          2.   State and Local      39.7        43.0        49.4       50.8      54.2      58.9       64.1      70.6



Sources:       Natural Real GNP prior to 1955 from Cordon (1978, Appendix B) and after 1955 from Perloff—Wachter
                                                                                                                 (1979)
               All otl:er series from National Income and Product           Table 1.2
                                                                  Accounts,
                                                  TABLE   3


                                  Real GNP (1972 prices) and Its Components,
                             Selected Quarters During the Second Postwar Decade




                                                                                Normal    Growth
                                    Cyclical   Cyclical   Cyclical   Cyclical   Output    Cycle     Housing
                                    Peak       Trough     Peak       Trough     Reached   Peak      Slump
                                    1957:3     1958:1     1960: 1    1960:4     1964:2    1966 :1   1967:1

                                       (1)       (2)           (3)     (4)        (5)       (6)       (7)


A.   Natural Real CNP                691.6     698.6      748.8      766.7      872.0     928.8     968.6

B.   Real GNP                        685.6     663.4      740.7      731.9      872.0     969.6     994.4

     1.   Real Final Sales           681.9     670.2      727.2      735.8      864.0     956.1     979.8

     2.   Inventory Change             3.7      —6.8          13.5    —3.9        8.0      13.5      14.6

C.   Consumption of Non—durables
     and Services                    367.0     365.8      397.0      402.5      460.7     501.3     517.6

D.   Fixed Investment                154.3     140.2      160.9      157.8      199.9     233.9     218.0

     1.   Consumer Durables           49.0      46.1          52.2    51.5       65.6      80.4      77.5

     2.   Residential                 29.3      28.7          38.2    33.4       44.1      42.7      32.7

     3.   Nonresidential              67.1      61.2          66.7    65.2       79.9     104.7     103.7

     4.   Net Exports                  8.9       4.2           3.8     7.7       10.3       6.1       4.1

B.   Government Purchases            160.6     164.2      169.2      175.4      203.5     220.7     244.3

     1.   Federal                     89.9      90.2          89.3    91.7      101.7     106.5     122.6

     2.   State and Local             70.6      74.0          79.9    83.7      101.8     114.2     121.7
                                                     TABLE   4

                               Real GNP (1972 prices) and Its Components,
                              Selected Quarters During the 1967—73 Interval




                                              Growth                                 End of    Growth
                                   Housing    Cycle          Cyclical    Cyclical    Slow      Cycle     Cyclical
                                   Slump      Peak           Peak        Trough      Growth    Peak      Peak
                                   1967:1     1968:3         1969:3      1970:4      1971:4    1973:1    1973:4

                                     (1)        (2)              (3)       (4)         (5)
                                                                                                                 —
                                                                                                 (6)       (7)
A.   Natural Real GNP              968.6     1021.0      1052.0         1098.0      1130.0    1188.0    1219.0
B.   Real GNP                      994.4     1061.8      1083.4         1071.4      1120.5    1229.8    1242.6
     1.   Real Final Sales         979.8     1052.6      1070.0         1068.1      1116.8    1218.1    1217.2
     2.   Inventory Change          14.6       9.2            13.4         3.3         3.7      11.7      25.4
C.   Consumption of Non—durables
     and Services                  517.6     550.3           565.2      583.5       598.6     642.8     647.7
D.   Fixed Investment              218.0     241.4           249.1      234.2       273.4     320.1     317.4
     1.   Consumer Durables         77.5      90.5            91.6       84.5       103.7     124.9     118.1
     2.   Residential               32.7      42.8            42.9       43.4        56.4      64.4      54.0
     3.   Nonresidential           103.7     107.9           115.2      106.0       109.6     128.5     132.4
     4.   Net Exports                4.1       0.2           —0.6         0.3         3.7       2.3      12.9
E.   Government Purchases          244.3     260.9           255.7      250.3       251.0     255.2     252.0
     1.   Federal                  122.6     129.5        120.6         108.0       103.2     100.7      94.3
     2.   State and Local          121.7     131.4
                                                                                                                     U'
                                                 TABLE 5

                               Real GNP (1972 prices) and Its Components,
                              Selected Quarters During the 1973—79 Interval




                                                                          Growth
                                             Cyclical      Cyclical       Cycle       Latest
                                             Peak          Trough         Peak        Quarter
                                             1973:4        1975:1         1978:4      1979:3

                                               (1)            (2)              (3)      (4)

A.   Natural Real GNP                        1219.0        1262.0         1428.0      1461.9

B.   Real GNP                                1242.6        1161.1          1426.6     1430.8

     1.   Real Final Sales                   1217.2        1181.6          1414.6     1420.8

     2.   Inventory Change                     25.4         —20.5              12.0     10.0

C.   Consumption of Non—durables
     and Services                             647.7         648.6             768.2    777.8

D.   Fixed Investment                         317.4         275.9             370.5    370.6

     1.   Consumer Durables                   118.1         106.0             152.1    147.0

     2.   Residential                          54.0           35.4             60.0     56.0

     3.   Nonresidential                      132.4          114.4            145.5    148.2

     4.   Net Exports                          12.9           20.1             12.9     19.4

E.   Government Purchases                     252.0          257.1            276.0    272.6

     1.   Federal                  :           94.3           94.8             99.3     97.6

     2.   State and Local                     157.7          162.2            176.6    175.0
                                                                                                '.0
                                                                                                0'
                                                                                         97•

                                                       LEGEND


          417000



    uJ
    z
    CD

           .10000
    (—)

    LL

    fD
               .03000


     -J
                   0
     =
     z             47.100         49.100      51.100       53.100       55.100      57.100

                                                       QUIRRIER

                                               Figure la




                .17000



          Lu
          CD

          =
          C—)
                 .10000


          IL
4
          U)
                  .03000


           —J           0
           =                                                                          57.100
                                                                           55.100
           Z —404000                             51.100        53.100
                         47.100      49.100
                                                           QUARTER



                                                   Figure lb
                                                      98
   .08600




  .04300




0.00000




—.04300
         7.ioo          53 . too
                                             57.100
                    QUATE!R

                   Figure    ic


 1 .054




 1.005




 .26
                                                           S




 .91J7
   47. 100
                      53.100       55.100   57.100
                  DUR1TEf

                 Figure id
                                                                          99



                 .11000


          LU
          z
          CD

                 .07000
          C-)
          LL

          (JD

                 .03000
          cc

          -J
          cc

                 .01000
                     57.100
                                                  QURTE

                                            Figure 2a
        .11000


LU
z
CD

        .07000
C-)

IL

U)
                                                                          LEGEO
I.—..   .03000
cc
I
-J
cc                                                                        —e-- c'r'

z —.01000                                                                      C4P
cc     57.100             59.100   61.100     63.100    65.100   67.100
                                            QUAJTE
                                            Figure 2b
                                                                                          100




 .07000




 .03000

                                                                                       LEGEND


—.01000
                                                                                       -4— GF
                                                                                       —I—- UEHP

                                                                                       -?*-- UNAT
— .05000
      57.100          59.100     61.100     63.100        65.100     67.100
                                          QUARTER


                                              Figure 2c


           1.066




           1 .025




               .984




               .943
                 57.100        59.100     61.100      63.100       65.100     67.100
                                                     QUARTER

                                              Figure 2d
                                                                           101




        .12000


 LU
 z
 CD


 =
 C-)
        408000




 OD                                                            LEGEND
 LU
        .04000


 -J                                                            .-.-. cLY
 'I
 zz 0.00000                                                    -+- C4M2
            67.100   69.100    71.100       73.100   75.100
                              QURITEI

                               Figure 3a




       .12000


LU
z
CD


=
C-)
       .08000

LL


U)                                                            LEGEND
LU
       .04000


1                                                             -- C4Y
zz o .oooco                                                   -H--- C4P
           67.100    69.100    71.100      73.100    75.100
                              QURRTER


                               Figure 3b
                                                                    102



    .08200




    .04100

                                                         LEGENO


—   .00000                                               —b--. GP

                                                         —H-- UEMP

                                                         —*— UNAT
— .04100
         67.100   69.100    71.100     73.100   75.100
                           QURLTE

                           Figure 3c




    1.036




    1 .000



                                                         LEGEND
      a 96'4



                                                         —•- M2f
                                                         —+— QON
      • 928
         67.1OC            7 .100
                           QURTE1

                           Figure 3d
                                                                             103




          .12600


    UJ
    z
    =
    C-)
          .08400

    U-
a
    U)
    LU
          .04200
    a:
    -J
    a:

    a: 0.00000
            73
                                              QUARTER

                                         Figure 4a




          .12600


    LU
    za:
    (.0


a
    =
    ()
          .05400

    IL
    C!)
    LU
          .04200
    a:
    -J
    zz 0.00000
     a:       73.100   74.100   75.100        76.100     77.100   78.100   79.100
                                               QUR1TEJ


                                         Figure 4b
                             104




 .08100




 .0q200




 .00300




— .03600
      73
                  QUARTER


               Figure 4c




  1 .048




  1.003




    .968




    .928
      73.100
                   QUARTER


               Figure 4d
