                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              INVENTORIES IN THE KEYNESIAN
                       MACRO MODEL




                     Alan S. Blinder



                  Working Paper No. 460




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                      February 1980




I have benefited from the helpful comments of Costas
Azariadis, William Branson, Jonathan Eaton, Ray Fair,
Stanley Fischer, Robert Gordon, Herschel Grossman, Dwight
Jaffee, Louis Maccini, Dennis Snower, Robert Solow, Yoram
Weiss, and an anonymous referee on earlier drafts.
Financial support from the National Science Foundation and
the Institute for Advanced Studies, Jerusalem, is grate-
fully acknowledged. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper 450
                                                                  February, 1980




                  Inventories in the Keynesian Macro Model



                                 AB S TRACT



       An otherwise conventional Keynesian macro model is modified

to include inventories of final goods by (1) drawing a distinction

between production and final sales, and (2) allowing for a negative

effect of the level of inventories on production. Two models are

presented: one in which the labor market clears and one in which it

does not. Both models are stable only if the negative effect of

inventories on production is "large enough." Both moels also imply

that real wages move countercyclically —   in   direct contrast to the

usual implication of Keynesian models. Detailed analysis of the market—

clearing model show that there should be negative correlation between

the levels of inventories and output, and between changes in inven-

tories and changes in output, over the business cycle. However,

inventory change should be positively correlated with the level of out-

put.




                                                         Alan S. Blinder
                                                         Department of Economics
                                                         Princeton University
                                                         Princeton, N. J. 08544

                                                          (609) 452—4010
                                                                       1.


      I. Motivation and Relation to Other Literature
          If a man from Nars visited this planet and spent a year or so
      reading all the macroeconomic literature of the past 15-20 years,
      he would not come away feeling that inventories are of much
      importance.  If we then gave him five minutes with the National
      Income and Product Accounts of the United States, he would quickly
      conclude that there was something lacking in his education.
      Inventories are important. Indeed, as a rough generalization, changes
      in the rate of real inventory investment have accounted for approx-
...
      imately 70 percent of the decline in real GNP during a typical postwar
      recession (see Table 1). It would seem likely, therefore, that
      inventories play a crucial role in the propagation of business cycles.
          If our Marbian read some of our leading elementary textbooks,
      he would again find a prominent role assigned to inventories as the
      principal force driving national income to its "equilihrium level---
      the level at which there is no undesired inventory accumulation or
      decumulation.        But if he tried to pursue this line of reasoning
      in   the more advanced textbooks, he would    tind little more.2 And
      if  he sought after discussions of inventories in the theoretical
      literature, he would come up nearly empty-handed.3 Inventories, in
      a word, have been neglected by macroeconomic theorists.
          In the period immediately following the publication of
      General Theg, there was a flurry of theoretical work on inventories,
      culminating in METZLERTS (l9#1) classic paper. Working with the
      simplest possible difference equation system, METZLER pointed out
      that inventory investment could conceivably destabilize an otherwise
      stable system. This paper extends METZLERs line of reasoning by
      showing   thnt, in
                       a modern Keynesian model, including inventories
             (a) a well-known condition for stability of a mDnetary economy
                   due to CAGAN (1956) becomes stricter on account of
                   inventories;
             (b) inventories add an addiLional stability condition to the
                 model- -a condition that is not innocuous since it could be
                 violated under plausible parameter values.
                                                                            2.




                                      Table 1

                     CHANGES IN GNP AND IN INVENTORY INVESTMENT
                               IN THE P0STThR RECESSIONS

                                                                        -
           (1)                 (2)              ()
                                           Decline     in
                                                                 ()
                                                               Column (3)
Dates      of Contraction Decline in Inventory              As a Percentage of
                TrouahRe a lGNPalnvestmenta                     2JlU.fl_L2)

l918:I            199:1#       6.7              13.0            19)4%

1953 :2           195:2       20.6              10.2             50
1957:3            1958:1.     22.2              10.5             1.7

1960:1            196O:I       8.8              10.             119

1969:3            1970:l-      12.0             1O.1             8I

l973:-i.          i97d         71.0                              65


a1 billions of 1972 dollars.
Source: The National Income and Product Accounts of the United
                 s, 1929-7U, and Qurrent_Business.
                                                                 3.

    But while METZLER stressed the destabilizing role of inventories,
many other authors have stressed their bilizi roles -Obviously,
inventories of finished goods give firms flexibility either to meet
abnormally high demand by selling more than they produce, or to cope
with abnormally low demand by producing more than they sell. Thus
production and employment can be stabilized relative to demand
when output is storable. It seems particularly important to recall
this role of inventories in light of the recent work on "spillovers"
by BARRO and GROSSMAN (1971, 1976) and others.
    One of the bases of the BARRO—GROSSMAN analysis is that, when
sticky wages and prices prevent the attainment of the full Wairasian
general equilibrium in the short run, the actually quantity
transacted in a market normally will be the um of. supply and
demand. This so called "mm condition" is based on the principle
of voluntary exchange, but retains its plausibility only if output
is non-storab1e. Consider, for example, the BARRO-GROSSMAN
generalized   excess supply scenario, If firms cannot sell all the
output   they would like to, they recL by reducing production al-Ad
firing workers.  In this way, excess supply in the goods market
"spills over" into the labor market as well. But what if output is
storable at moderate costs? It seems unlikely, under these
circumstances, that production cutbacks and layoffs would be a
rational reaction to moderate short-run gluts in the product market.
Instead, fi.rms can--and apparently do--maintain productioh and store
their excess output for subsequent sale. Only if pOor. sales
performance persist for some time, or are extremely large, do firms
reduce their work forces. In this way, inventories limit the
spillover of excess supply from the product market to the labor
markets to instances of extreme drops in demand.
    Or consider the BARRO-GROSSMAN scenario ofgeneralized excess
demand. In this case, workers who are unable to purchase the
commodities   they desire (because these commodities are in excer3s
demand) react by reducing their supply of labor. Why work when
(at the margin) there are no goods to buy? Thus excess demand in
the goods market spills over into the labor market. But once again,
barring generalized stock-outs, this will not happen in ri economy
                                                                     '4..


in which there are inventories of goods. There     may   well   he   a flow
excess demand for goods7 but, at least for a while, firms can meet
this excess demand out of inventories. Thus it seems unlikely that
excess demand for goods would lead to a drop in labor supply,
except in extreme circumstances .      It
                                        worth pointing out thai:
                                            is
this particular spillover mechanism accounts for hat may be the
most empirically distressing implication of the flARROGROSSMAN
model: that positive shocks to aggregate commodity demand2 starting
from a position of equilibrium, will reduce real output.
     The model considered here is very different from the BARRO-
GROSSMAN model, though at least one of its basic aims is identical:
to explain the link between aggregate demand and real output. For
example, the "mm condition" for the goods market does not appear
here because it makes little sense in the presence of inventories.
Instead,   I
           assume that consumers always purchase their quantity
demanded. Stockouts at the aggregate level are ignored. When there
is excess supply, firms add the. excess to their inventories
when there is excess demand, firms meet th:L: deood '; dra: don
inventories. In either case, the resulting :Lnvr ory imbalance
induces firms to adjust their production and em.ployment dcc Is IOfl 8
but the adjustments are gradual, so the sharp corners of BARRO
and GROSSMAN are smoothed out.6
    Finally, since the model proposed here offers O
way to forge the link between aggregate demand and real oitput,
mention should be made of the currently most popular wiy of doing
so.  In standard Keynesian analysis, money wages are assumed fixed
in the short run, so higher prices (caused by higher aggregate demand)
encourage employment and output by loweri                 By
contrast, in the main model presented here, money waqea xtove promptly
to clear the labor market, and real wages actually move
I   make the assumption                                     not for
                          that money wages are fully flexible
its empirical validity, but to illustrate that inven rri.cs provide
a link between demand and production that does not rely on wage
rigidities. Later in the paper, the assumption. of :Li:ntantly
flexible wages is replaced by an expectation5 .-augmerd:d £'hilltps
                                                                5.
curve and a "mm condition" for the labor market. It is ShOWn
that the analysis, while greatly complicated, is not altered i.n any
essential way by these changes. in particular, the conclusion that
wages move procyclically is maintained.
    The plan of the paper is as follows. The next section offers
a general discussion of the motives for holding
                                                inventories, noting
how each motive bears on the specification of macro models. Then,.
choosing one particular rationale for inventories, I develop and
analyze in Section III a complete macro model in which all markets
"clear." Section IV discusses the modifications required when the
labor market does not clear, and sketches how the analysis is
affected. Section V offers some brief concluding remarks.

II.    The ecificationof   Inventory    Behav ior
    Where should inventories be brought into conventional macro-
economic models? The answer depends on whether inventories are
inputs or outputs, and on why firms hold them7 but a wide variety
of micro models suggL thi. high: 1iveriLory stocks lead to 'ower
current output.      -

    Among the major motives for holding inventories that appear in
the literature is                               (see, for example,
HOLT, MODIGLIANI, MUTH and SIMON (1960)). The idea is that multi-
product firms can operate more efficiently if inventories give them
flexibility in scheduling production runs. So this suggests that
the stock of inventories, N, should enter the production function
as another factor of production in addition to
                                               employment,
E: y = f(E,N), N > 0. In a model like this, inventories could
either be inputs (i.e., raw materials nd intermediate
                                                       goods) or
outputs   (i.e., finished goods). The crucial question is whether and
how N affects the marginal productivity of labor. The basic
rationale seems to suggest that inventories raise labor1s productivity;
and, if so, this would stimulate employment demand. ut it should
also be true that, when the stock of inventories riss, the incentive
to raise it further by producing diminishes (as long as there are
diminishing returns to inventories). Thus, both the costs (via
higher productivity) and the benefits of production are reduced by
                                                                      6.

rising    N ,   with
                 consequently ambiguous effects on output.
    Other models of inventory behavior seem less ambiguous regarding
the effect of inventories on production. For example, it is
commonly hypothesized that firms hold inventories as a buffer_stock
in the face of.fluctuating demand (see, for. example, MILLS (1962))..
In that case, inventories are probably outputs which do not directly
effect the production function. Instead higher N reduces the
probability of having a stock-out. Given diminishing returns to
inventory-holding, this presumably leads to lower production.
    A closely related motive for holding inventories is speculation
on future_prc_movements. Indeed, this is almost indistinguishable.
from the buffer stock motive in that expectations of high future
prices relative to costs (the speculative motive) and large future
sales (the buffer-stock motive) amount to more or less the same
thing.
    While these last two motives amount to using inventories to
smooth   production     relative to demand, some firms may wish to do
just the opposite: to bunch production relat:Lvc to sales. This
could..happen where dramatically increasing returns to scale dictate
that production be done iti large "production runs," which are then
put into inventory and gradually sold. In this productiorun
model, it seems fairly clear that excessively high inventories will
induce a postponement of the next production run, and hence a
reduction in "average" output and employment over an interval of
time.
       Still another motive for holding output inventories, suggested
by CCINI(i977) among others, is that high inventory stocks may
Lirouite sinqie firm demcnd by                              Tp
this case, it seems appropriate to omit N from the production
function, but include it in the firm's demand function. But it is
not clear that N should have a similar stimulative effect on
aggregate demand.
    Othebs have        uggest.d   that   input inveitories  are held in order
to economize onrchasingcosts,               This could   be either because there
                                                                 7.


is a fixed cost to purchasing inputs- -the assumption that underlies
"optimal lot size" models, or because firms face a rising supply
price of inputs which makes it economical to smooth input purchases
relative to input usage.8 In such a case, the rate at which inventories
are used should appear in the production function, while the rate
at which they are urghased should depend on the existing stock.
    What effects, then, should inventories have on aggregate demand?
Presumably, all the models agree that siredinventoJnvestrne
should be a decreasing function of N . But there is no persuasive
reason to think that N has any direct effects on the other components
of aggregate demand--what are called final sales.
      What about aggregate supply? Considering first output inventories,
the production-scheduling motive suggests that y/N might
conceivably be positive. But the other motives seem strongly to
suggest the opposite: the higher the level of inventory stocks,
the less the firm will be inclined to produce. One would also expect
high inventories to lead to price cuts.
    But input    nventcr 's would have   diere.nt   fects   .

firm whose   inputs are storable, but whose butputs are not. If it
finds   itself
             with too many inventories, it will.have an incentive
to raise production (and employment) and cut prices. If it can
store both inputs arid outputs, the implication for production
decisions becomes unclear. It depends on the relative costs and
benefits of inventorying inputs versus outputs.
    Finally, the nature of inventories has implications for the
accounting  identity governing inventory accumulation or decurnulation,
N .   For example, if inventories are outputs, then N is the
difference between production and sales, so a ise in production
(other-things equal)-raises-N. But if inventori.es are inputs,
then N is the difference between input purchases and input
usage, which will fall when production rises.
      Themacroeconomic model presented here is based on a very
specific micro model of inventory behavior which I have p:eented
-in another paper (BLINDIR (1.978)). The model is-
                                                   one.of ouput
                                                                           8.

inventbries held for reasons of anticioated pric                       ciation or,
what   amounts to the same thing, as .a buffer stock held because of
anticipcted fluctuations in demand   As 1 show in that paper, the
level of inventories affects employment demand (and hence output)
negatively:
                       Ed     =    Ed(w N) Ed, Ed < o
                                            w   N
This          has the property that Ed(w,N*), where N* is the
desired or optimal level of inventories and w is the real wage,
is equal to the inverse of the marginal productivity schedule:
ftl(w). For higher inventories, the labor demand schedule lies
below the marginal productivity schedule; and for lower inventories,
it lies above.
    While I have derived it in a very specific context, let me try
to explain why I believe that such a labor demand function would
arise under quite general circumstances. Consider any of a family
of models where the fir.m maximizes the discounted present value of
its profits sublect to (Jmorig ohcr                things)   a oostreint that
inventory change equals production minus sales:
                                                               -
                 N =   f(E,...)        -   x   .




Any of a variety of variables could enter f() without affecting
theargument; similarly, sales or price could he endogenous or
exogenous for present purposes. The Hamiltonian for such a problem
would look like this:
               sales revenues wE - other costs- +-AIf(E,-..-.--.) - x],
where again I need not specify the nature of sales revenues or
non-wage costs. Here \ is the shadow value of inventoies5 aocJ a
well-known    result of       optimal control theory is that:
                          A
                              0'
where J is maximized (with respect to E and other vriabies)
profits, and N0    is the initial stock of inventories.
    The first order condition for optimal employment is
fE(E, ... ) = w/X at every instant, which has two important
implications:
    (a) in making rod.uctiori (as oposed to sales) decisions,
the firm compares its costs with A , not with the market price.
                                                                                    9.


This is because it is deciding whether to turn inputs into inventories.
Then, in deciding whether to jJ out of inventories, it will compare
A with the market price.9
    (b) optimal E is a decreasing function of w and an increasing
function of A , But this means that we can derive the abovernentioned
labor demand function by showing that A0 is a decreasing function
of N0 . Now note that:



        NQ
and that 2J/N must be negative in a wide variety of problems.
(This is just a statement of diminishing returns, and is, in fact,
a sufficient condition for a maximizing program to exist.)
    While the labor demand-function used here is therefore quite
general, note that the production-scheduling model raises the
possibility that y/N > 0 .                         It
                                  should come as no surprise that
models       with otuput inventories normally will he tbie                 or.:1y   if
rise in N reduces N = y x, where x is final sales. Thus the
                                               -

stability of the model hinges precariously on the effects of
inventorieson production decisions--a question that cannot be
answered by microeconomic theory, and that has barely been investigated
in empirical macroeconomics. 10
•        •       •                     •




III. A Macroeconomic Model_with_Inventories
    .1ecificationof the_Model
    The demand side of the model is quite standard, except that
recoqnition of inventoties requires that a di'tinction be drawn
between output and final sales. Thus, instead of an IS curve, the
following expression describes real final demand:
     x       =       c(y-t(y),r)   g       ,
                                                                                         (1)
where y is GNP (or national income), t(y) is real taxes, r is
the real interest rate, c is real private demand, and g is real
government demand, Th capital stock                     is ignorcd on   the qrourids that
it can be treated (roughly) as constant. Since the period of time
that I am concerned with is quite short, this seems more legitimate
                                                                                   10.
than it is in many other contexts.
      The demand side is completed by an LM curve based on the strict
transactionist view of the demand for money:11
           M/P =        L(r    +   z,y)                                            (2)
where    M is the nominal money stock2 P is the price level, and t
 is the expected rate of inflatiOn, Making the distinction between
 x and y raises interesting questions about which is the appropriate
transaction variable in the demand fuuction for money. But since
this is not the subject of this paper I sweep these issues under
the rug and adopt the conventional variable: gross national product.
Notice that (2) embodies the assumption that r adjusts instantly
to maintain money-market equilibrium, but (1) implies no such
assumption about the goods market. When inventories are changing
(x   y), the system is off the IS curve2 which is
               y   =   c(y -   t(y),r)    +   g.                                 (1)
      What I call an ag                       ate demand curve can be   derived from (1)
and   (2). First               invert     (2) to ohtaiu
                       R(, )         t R=        L.
                                                 —      > 0
                                                              mL         o,
where          m = M/P         is the real money stock. Then substitute () into
(1)   to obtain:
      x        =   c(y--t(y),R(y,m)       -
                                               n) + g
This can be written:
     x = D(y; rn,it,g),                                                          (Lv)
where the function D( . ) has tlie followincj derivatives:
      Dy = c y (i_tT) + c ry
                          R
      D =cR
          rr >0
      D =-cr >0
          it


      Dg=l
The conventional assumption in is-:ui ma:Lysis that D is a positive
number less than unity will be re:ilectod in what follows. Aggregate
demand is identified with sales by :i:uilnq that generalized stockouts
do not occur.
                                                                                                   11.


           The supply sideof the model consists of an equation that says
       that the labor market clears given the (possibly disequilibrium)
       state of inventories:
             d          s      s
            E (w, N) = E (w), E     0 ,                           (5)
       and a production function:12
            y = f(ES(w)).                                                                          (6)
       These two equations are solved very simply for an
       function:
                       =   Y(N),
   .where
               y
                                 ,, d w
                               y:fE)E—
                               —
                                                     ES
                                                                      .                       -
                                                                                                   (-j')



                                                 ESE
                                                  w w
             Given predetermined values for the three state variables: N, in,
       and c, equations (1.) and (7) determine the values of x and y for
,——-   any   given g .                   Figure           1 depicts -one such solution-on a standard
       "Keynesian cross" diagram. Equation () already tells us how y
   /   depends on the state variables. To obtain a similar solution function
       for     x           substitute () into                       (L) to get
                   -
                       =   x(N, in, it;g)                                                          (8)
       where:
             X
               N=D
                 yNY <0
                    z m,t,g
                       =                =
                                                              -

             X              D,                            .



       Thus,                                monetary          or fiscal policy effects x      but not. y
             The           position of the economy defined by Y) 3nd (8) will not in
       general             be an equilibrium because one or more of the state: variables
       will change. Changes in the                                  stock of inventorie a governed by
       a straightforward accounting identity:
               N=y-X.                                                                              (9)
                                                                                                                   :i'
       Changes in the expected rate of inflation are assumed to be                                     adaptive:
                           =   (P/P         -
                                                t)                >0.                              (10)
       Finally, since I assume that budget deficits are bond-financed,
       changes in real balances happen either (a) abruptly due to an open-
       market operation or (b) smoothly due to changes in the price level.
       Thus,
                                   in   = -m(P/P).
       This requires an equation                                  for price dynarrics, for which the
       following seems suitable:
x
                          y(N)

                              / /450




                          /

          / /
    / /
                                       y


                Fiqur 1
                                                                   12.


        P/P =     t + o(N*   -
                                 N),   > o ,                      (ii)
where N* is the specific (optimal) level of inventories that
makes Ed(w,N*) coincide with the marginal productivity schedule.
In general, as shown in BLINDER (1978), N* would depend on the
production function, the nature of inventory holding costs, the
entire future path of expected prices (and sales constraints, if
there are any), and the real rate of interest. However, I ignore
all this and treat N* as a constant in the shorun. Equation
(ii) has empirical support in that unfilled orders are the typical
indicator of excess demand in product markets in recent empirical
price equations (see, for example, GOIWON (1975)). And for firms
that pr ceto order, unfilled orders play the same role as
inventories play for firms that pigduce_tost. Indeed, unfilled
orders can he viewed usefully as negative inventories (see MCCINI
(1976)). From (ii), the equation for changes in the real money
supply follows immediately. Except at moments of open—market
operations:
        in              N)                                i2)
Equilibrium occurs only when (9), (10) and (12) are all equal to
zero. That is, when GNP equals final sales, expectations are
correct, and inflation is zero.
                                           1
    . 2 Coa rative Statics of Egi1ibr ium Pos it ions
    There seem to be three interesting questions to ask about what
policy variables (M or g) do to endogenous variables likey or w.
First, what are the instantaneous effects? Second, what are the
equilibrium effects?         Third, what do the paths look like in the
interim period? The          first question has already been answered: in
the first instant, a         rise in g or M increases x, hut has no effect
on either y or w (or         onthe inflation rate).. I turn next to the
second question.
    Using () and (8), and imposing the requirements for equilibrium,
the following equations define steady states of the model:
    Y(N) = X(N,m,it;g)   (N = 0)
    p/p =                          ( = 0)
             =   (N-N*)            (m =   o)
But the last two, in conjunction with the price equation (ii),
                                                                         13.


require that it = 0 and N = N* in equilibrium.
    Thus the equilibrium version of the model can be represented
by the standard IS curve, (it); the' LM curve with c = 0:
        M/P =    L(r,y);                                                (2')
and a classical labor market:
    w = ft(Ed), ES = ES(w), Ed              =   ES

In   its most compact form, equilibrium is defined by the single
equation:
      Y(N*) = x(N*, m, 0; g) .                                          (13)
Thus, y* = y(N*) is the "natural                 rate" of output, and w* = w(N*)
is the equilibrium            real wage. Neither of them can be eaneny
affected by policy.           Nor can x , since x = y in equilibrium.
      .namicAjustme nt Pas
      I turn next to the dynamic paths of the             important macroeconomic
variables, deferring for the moment the issue of whether the dynamic
system is stable. Since I ignore many variables that change in the
long run,      it is
                these short-run responses-not the steady states•
that are of     greatest interest.
           2 shows the model in an initial position of equilibrium
      Figure
at point A. Here x=y, so N is unchanging; inflationary expectations
are correct and equal to zero; and real balances are constant.
Now suppose there        is   a dose   of
                                      expansionary monetary (dM > 0) or
fiscal (dg > 0)          policy, shifting the demand curve upwards from

D0toD1
    Initially, the economy's position shifts upwards to B: sales
are raised, but GNP is not. But at B, inventories are disappearing.
Consequently, the        supply curve starts moving to the right (see
equation (v)), At          the sometime, two effects start working on the
demand   curve.        In a stable system, the more important of these is
that (ii) implies that inflation begins, eroding real balances, and
causing the demand curve to shift downwards towards D2 . The second
effect is that inflation raises inflationary expectations (by (10)),.
and   this reduces the real interest rate (by ()),              which   stimulates
x
                                           S
                                           12
                                           I
                                                      / /
                                           I


                                                / /         D1




                                                            D2



                                                            D0




                                   A




                          / /
                    / /
              / /
        / /
    /                                                            y


                                Figure 2
                                                                       iIi.



spending. The diagram assumes that the former effect dominates, so
that the position of the economy moves towards the south east, as
indicated by the arrow emanating from point B
    At some point--indicated in the diagram by point C--the supply
and demand curves (S2 and D2) intersect on the     line. At this
moment, the inventory decumulation is halted, and inventories begin
to be replaced. So the supply curve starts shifting back toward its
original position. However, while they are risinq, inventories remain
low, so the impetus for inflation remains. Prices keep rising while
real output falls. In fact, for a period, inflation is accelerating
while output is falling.16 Whether or not this is to be called a
phase of Ttstagflationfl or not is a matter of terrninological dispute.
But it does create an interval of time during which changes in unemploy-
ment and changes in inflation are positively correlated--an upwards
sloping "Phillips curve'T if you will.
    Before turning to the conditions under which this stable scenario
actually     obtains, let outline some of the observable consequences
                            me
of the model. Following a stimulus to gre:jete demand
     (1) Final sales rise quickly to a peek,' nd then decline to
         their original level. GNP rises much more slowly to a peak,
             and also declines. So the     composition of    GNP between final
           sales and inventory change varies dramatically over the cycle.
      (2) Both employment and real wages follow the path of GNP,, rising
           to a peak and then returning to their equilibrium levels.
             Thus, in contrast to the traditional Keynesian and search
             theoretic models, real wages move procyclically.
      ()     The trough in the level of inventories (N) coincides with
             Lhe         in out puL (both oLcur   oi L   C      F.cjure )
             As Figure 3 shows, N and y ispiay           correlation over
  /
 /           the cycle.
      (Li)   The peak in inventory investment (N) lags the peak in
             production. (In terms of Figure 2, N peaks at point B,
             while y peaks at point c.)18 As Figure 3 indicates, N
             and y are                correlated, while N and y are
             Jy, correlated over the cycle.
          a)
          E
          •1-




     >'


                    0
                z
                    IL




a
I.

I         E


          U
                                                                               l5.

    ()     Prices rise throughout the adjustment period, reaching a
                                                             the rate of
           permanently higher level. The           peak in
            inflation lags    the   peak in GNP.

    Thescenario just. outlined is, of course, of interest only if
the model is dynamically stable. A formal stability analysis of this
system is relegated t.o the Appendix, where it is shown that one of
the three necessary and su:Eficient: conditions for stability is:
         1+                    .                                           (i)
The righthand side of (il) is a            positive number which is smaller (a)
the slower the speed of adjustment of inflationary expectations, and
(b) and the more necJi.yi.e. is  -     N
                                       .  The iefthand side is familiar
from the work of CAGA (1956). CAGAN found that his model (a full
employment model where the "interest rate" variable in the demand for
money was    just r )     would     be stable if   and only if:
            L
          1±->o                                                            (i)
Here    I require   instead   (i), which       is stronger than (l'
       Notice the fundamental,      role   played by YN . Should           -     =

(1_Dy)YN     be   zero or pos'Lti.ve--a possibility raised by the production-
scheduling model .the modcyt, :i.s definitely unstable,            Even if it is
negative, the model w:i.il sLill be unstable unless N                      ts large
enough,    where the precise       meaning of   "large enough" is spelled
out in (ii).

       The model pre.senL:ed i.e the Last section includes Lwo important
features that :' am unhappy about. First, the assumption that the
labor market a].wayi clcar; Lu the short run means that the labor
market adjusts to shoc1s iuuc:h faster than the goods market, Second,
the "Keynesian" slier tru.u response of output to stabilization policy
can occur on :L: the aqcçr çL:e supply curve of labor slopes upward.
Both assumptions are open Lo doubt, to say the least. But both can
be avoided by asuwiuq :Les Lead that the labor market does not clear,
and instead wages edjusL Lo Lhe discrepancy between supply nd                   demand
                                                                     16.


for labor. I this section, I outline such a model. Since its formal
analysis is quite complicated, involving four differential equations
(for N, P, it, and w), interesting qualitative results are obtainable
only if I suppress price expectations and assume that     is a1was
                                                              it



at its steady state value of zero.
          'p.1__Specification
          I   specify a nonclearing labor market in the usual way. Actual
employment is determined by the principle of voluntary exchange:
      E = mm (Ed(w,N), Es(w)),                                (15)
•where now the ES(w) function may well have zero or negligible slope.
The production function is written:

              y =   f(E)                                            (6')
The aggregate supply function defined by (15) and (6'),
      y = f(min(Ed,ES))   y(N,w) ,                                  (16)
    depends on which regime we are in. Specifically:
           =
                    Ef' < 0 if Ed
                             <

•
                            if ES<Ed,
          y    =    EdfT < 0 if Ed < ES

               =Ef'
                w
                 S
                    >0 if E<Ed


          I also require a specification of wage dynamics1 for which the
    following Phillips curve model seems appropriate:
              w/w =        +   v(Ed(w,N)   -
                                               ES(w))   ,
                                                                   (7)
    where W is the         wage and     is a positive constant. Since
    I am restricting my attention to cases where     is zero, this reduces
    to:
        w/w = y(Ed - ES)
    SO that by subtracting P/P (using equation (ii) with t=0)       I

    arrive at a law of motion for the real wage:
              w/w = Y(Ed(w,N)E(w)) + 0(N - N*).
                                     -                             (18)
    Along with equations (9) and (12) (for N and ni) of the clearing
    model, this constitutes the dynamics of the disequilibrium model.
        The aggregate demand curve (Ii-) is exactly the same as in the
    clearing model, except tha L expected inflation is now constra i•ned to
be zero. So the new solution function for x:
                                                                       17.

          x   =   x(N,   in, w; g)                                   (19)
is defined by:
    x(N, in, w; g) =              D(y(N,w); in, 0, g
so that

    xN_DyN
    x =D
     in           in


    x
     w=Dyw
         y
    xg =1.
This completes the specification of the non-clearing version of
the model.


    What can we hope to learn from such a complicated model? First
consider the steady state properties, which hold also in a more
elaborate version of the model in which the adaptive inflationary
expectations equation is maintained. As before, (io) implies that
actual and expected inflation are equal, so that' (ii) mples that
N=N*. Then (12) implies that the equilibrium inflation rate is
zero, and(18) implies that the labor market clears: Ed(w,N*)                 ES(w).
This equation pins down the equilibrium real wage, and hence the
equilibrium values of E, y and x, and allows no effect of either
policy variable. The rest of the model (the full-employment IS-LM
model) determines r and P as usual. Nothing very interesting here.
    Of greater interest are the short-run responses of the variables
to shocks. But before enquiring into these dynamics, it is important
to know what parameter configurations render the non-clearing model.
stable. The            appendix     shows that stability requires:
          0 + YE <-.      0   ,                                      (20)
which turns out to be cri.ica1 to the cyclical response of real
wages (seebelow). Hereafter I assume that(2O) holds. Notice once
again that this is' an assumption that inventory effects on production
are Jrstrong enough.


    Given an initial state of disequilibrium in the labor market, what
are the effects of stabilization policy on employment and wages? The
answer Is obtained with the aid of Figure L, Here E5(w) is the labor
                                                                    18.


supply schedule, Ed(w, N0) is the labor demand schedule, and the
initial real wage is assumed to be w0--which leads to a ce
  P2L of labor (see point B). The initial level of inventories, N0,
could be above or below the optimal level, N*, and, depending on
where we are in the cycle, N could he either rising or falling.
Irrespective of this, any increase in g or M will reduce N(t) for
some interval of time, thus pushing N down
ebee. This is shown in Figure 1 by an uward shift in the
demand function for labor from Ed(w,N0) to Ed(w,N1) (where N1 < N0).
    That the expansionary stabilization policy has two distinct
effects on      h_            ha
                              QI1- .a. can be seen from
equation (18). First, a lower N raises w/w through the first term
in (18). This represents a "tightening" of the labor market (see
equation (17)). Second, a lower N reducesw/w through the second
term in (18). This happens because smaller inventories lead to
faster increases in product prices (see equation (ii)).
    But which effects dominates? The answer follows from stability
condition (20): ma stable system, the first effect must be stronger
so a reduction in inventories leads to an acceleration in real wage
growth in the short run. Figure 1. shows what happens to output. In
the absence of policy, wages would have fallen to some level like
w1 at time t1 ,   and the position of the economy would have been
point C, with employment E1 . Expansionary policy pushes the labor
demand curve outward and retards the fall in wages. Wages fall, only
to wj, and the position of the economy at time t1 is point D
instead. The effect of policy on employment is, therefore, E .; B],
a positive nurnher.
       Notice   that   this
                        model generates an unambiguous prediction about
the    short-run behavior of real wages, whereas in the BRRO-GROSSMPN
analysis "it all dependst' on whether prices
                                           or money wages react
more expeditiously to disequilibrium. How have I avoided this
indeterminacy and obtained an answer that does not depend on relative
adjustment speeds? The answer is that the short-run movement of w
dQ,S   still    depend on re1aive adjustment speeds, but stability condition
(20)   places   a   quantitative   restriction on V and 0 that enables
                             ---          c
                             I   I        I

                             I   I        I

                                 I        I
                                 I        I


     0P1

     P1




(0
C




                P1
                  0.
                                              P1
                                     2:
                02:                  A
                       P1            2:
                        0.       0

           V
                       z
           P1
                                                                           19.


    me to determine the sign w in the short—run.20
           Precisely analogous arguments can be used to show that employment
    and wages also rise when expansionary policies are applied under
    conditions of excess demand or of equilibrium. in each case, a stimulus
    to aggregate demand leads to an interval of time in which N is more
    negative and w/w is more Jive than it otherwise would have been.
    It can also be shown that output rises. Thus, just as in the clearing
    model, we conclude that real wages move procyclically. In addition,
•
    the present model implies a certain symmetry where BARRO and GROSSMAN
    sound      asymmetry. More demand always leads to higher real wages and
    higher output in       the   very short run, and less demand leads to lower
    real wages and output. However, the symmetry is only gualitative,
    not                Because employment is demand-determined when there
    is excess supply, and supply-determined when there is excess demand,
    the responses of w arid y            to   policy will surely differ in the two
    cases. in particular, we expect a much greater output response when
    there is excess supply of labor than we do when there is excess demand.



    1.     In a sense, the most basic conclusion of this paper may be that
           inventori.es really do matter in macroeconomic theory. The
           presenceof storable output apparently can change even basic
           ualitative aspects of the behavior of macro models.
    2. While the great variety of motives for holding inventories suggest
           anumber of ways in which inventories might enter the macro model,
           many of them seem to suggest that output inventories should have
       a negative effect on the demand for labor (or supply of output).
       Input inventories roua in an unexploret territory worthy of study.
    3. While inventories play an important stabilizing role at the level
       of the firm, they tend tobe destabilizing at the macro level in
       the sense that models with inventories are stable in a smeller
           subset of the parameter space than are models without inventories.
           This message dates back to Metzler (19L1); but the mechanisms and
           precise stability conditions are quite different in this model
           than they were in Metzler's. in general, stability requires not
           only   that   inventories have a negative    effect   on the demand for
         labor,    but that this effect be "large enough."
                                                                20.



1..   Because of inventory changes, short run fluctuations in aggregate
      demand have quicker and more dramatic effects on final sales than
      they do on production.
5. Real wages respond positively to positive shocks to aggregate
    demand, because inventory changes shift the demand curve for
      labor. In the case of a nonclearing labor market, this conclusion
      hinges upon a stability condition which again states that the
      inventory-induced shifts in labor demand are "large enough."
      s was pointed out in the introduction, this conclusion is the
'reverse of that reached by standard Keynesian analysis, and also by
search-theoretic models. This is because those models consider a
cyclically-sensitive labor 5Upply curve shifting along a labor demand
curve, while the model developed here has a cyclically sensitive
labor demand curve shifting along a fixed labor supply curve. If
both curves were allowed to shift simultaneously, demand stimuli
would have ambiguous effects on real wages. Which effect dominates
in practice is n empirical issue,
    It is probably apparent that other mechanisms that shift the
demand for labor during the business cycle could be introduced.2l But
putting inventories into the labor demand function is not a contrivance
designed to make real wages move procyclically. Quite the contrary,
it seems to be an almost inescpable conclusion on both microécbnomic
and macroeconomic grounds. From the micro perspective, given any
kind of imperfection in the market that allows the shadow value of
 inventories to depart from the market price, optimizing behavior
 seems to dictate that employment be a decreasing function of inventories
 in a wide variety of models.
                              -
                                 From the macro perspective, it is hard
 to make sense of either the Keynesian cross or the IS curve without
 explicit consideration of the firm Ts reaction to inventory imbalances
 6. Finally, the Keynesian model with inventories predicts that real
     output will move in the same direction as aggregate demand, regard-
     less of whether the demand shock is administered from an initial
     position of equilibrium, excess supply, or excess demand. in
      this respect, it contrasts sharply with the implications of the
      BRR0-GR0SSMAN model.
                                                     APPENDIX                                    Al.


                                                                     Clear ig,    Model
      Using the solution functions given in the text for y and x,
the dynamic system can be written as a system. of three differential
equations, the first two of which are nonlinear:
      N =       Y(N) - X(N,m,rt; g)


      it   = O(N*        -
                             N)
      Linearizing the nonlinear equations around equilibrium (x=y,
          = P/P o) gives the following stability matrix:
           it




                    N
                         -xn               -xm        -xit



       z=          Gm                      0           -rn




                  N-G'
                                           0              0 /
                                                             /
The ROTJIHHURWITZ nacessarv and ufficint ccdit:i.os •fo: (i.oco1
stability         in   this case are that: 2
      (i) tr() < 0                                                            -

      (ii) det(A) < 0
      (iii) -. e( YNXN)               [m xm -       x] -         GnX > 0
The   trace,
                   tr = N         -
                                      XN
                                            =
                                                 (lD)YN
is negative so long as                             (the marginal propensity to spend) is less
than unity
which is
                   and                is negative. The determinant is sinipiy
                              negative so          long
                                                                                             -
                                                             as rising real balances stimulate
                                                                                                 n     Xrn

demand,          unly condition (iii) requires                    iurther ana :Lys is,    and by us thy
the   definitions of Xm and X it can be expressed as equation (l1i)
in the text.



      In        the nonclearing model, w
                                 replaces     as the third state
variable. Also, the solution functions differ and depend on whether
there is excess supply or excess demand (see the text). The dynamic
system is:
                                                                                                               A2.


     N =    y(N,w)        -
                                  x(N,m,wg)
     m =     GTO(N
                     -
                          N*)
     w =(Ed(w,N) - ES(w)) (N - N*).
Linearizing it around equilibrium (N=N*, Ed                                             = ES) gives the
stability matrix:
               A' — x
                      N
                                            —x
                                                 m
                                                                      yw
                                                                       — xw\



                                                                  (EdES)/1
The three ROUTH—HURWITZ necessary and sufficient conditions for local
stability      are:
      (j*) tr(*)=yN_xN±yw(EE)<O
      (ii*) det(*) = Cmx                         1,(Ed                -
                                                                          ES) < 0

     (iii*) [y11. XN                                              :
                                                                              L(y


      The
                              -
                                  x)        (            +       Yw E) J

             first two are clearly satisfied whether the system has excess
                                                                              -     -
                                                                                        xN)   x orr >      0



demand      or excess supply in the :Labor market, hut (iii*) looks different
in   the two cases, The excess demand case is simpler since here
                     y-x
                       = (1 - D)y > 0 .


                                                         (
          = 0,                            The condition redudes to:

                     ES) (                  x)                        +   E) > d
which is true if and only                                if:
(20) 0 -F Y E < 0
as   stated in the text.
      When there is excess supply in the labor market, N XN = (i D)
     < 0 and      -
                    x) = (1          < 0, so a sufficient (though not
necessary) condition for stability is:
     N(Ew -              E5) >                       +       y   E)
But, looking back at (16), we see that yE =                                               yE      ,
                                                                                                      so   this reduces to:
                          -             f                    > Of' Ed
                                  YEd
                                                 w                  w'
which is true if (20) holds.
                                   FOOTNOTES                           Fl.

1.    Among the many examples that could be cited, see Samuelson
      (1976), pp. 222-225.
2.    For example, Branson 's (1979) popular text never mentions
      inventories once it gets past the rehash of freshman-level
      materials. Even Lovell (1975), himself an inventory expert,
      fails to give inventories any role in the elaborated IS-LM model.
.     A notable exception is Maccini (1976).
1..   Barro and Grossman note this quite          explicitly. See, for example
      (1971, p. 8n) or (1976, p. ln).
5.    The statement applies to the U.S. and other advanced industrial
      nations. The Barro-Grossman excess demand scenario may be
      applicable to centrally planned economies where consumer goods
      are in chronically short supply. (On this, see Howard (1976).)
      The preceding discussion is in the spirit of Leijonhufvud (l97).
6. This has important implications for econometric specification
    of macro models. The Barro—Grossman model, with its many cases,
      wouldrequire a complex switchincj regressions approach of the
    sort discussed e.g., by Goldfeld and Quandt (1976), The model
    that I shall present has no switches of regimes.
7. For a version of this scenario consistent with rational
    expectations, see Fischer (1977).
8. Alternatively, a falling supply price (e.g., quantity discounts)
    will give the firm an incentive to bunch its input purchases.
9.    For a full discussion of when A can or cannot differ from the
      market price, see Blinder (1978). Suffice it to say that some
      deviation from perfect markets-"-for example, some monopoly
      power-isrequired.
10. A notable exception is Fairls (1976) model. His equation for
    output (equation (10) on page 9) can be written (if I ignore
    lags and dummy variables):
                    y   =   constant   +   1.2x   -
                                                      .256N ,
      which certainly shows a rather strong negative effect of
      inventories on output.
I.
                                                                 F2.


11. See Ando and Shell (1975).
12. Given (),     it
                  does not matter whether I put       Ed or ES into the
    production function.
13. The expectational mechanism is not critical to any results in
    this paper, and is needed only to connect nominal and real
    interestrates. For a model with a similar, though somewhat
    simpler, structure that includes explicit stochastic terms and
    utilizes rational expectations, see Blinder and Fischer (1979).
1L.. Feldstein and Auerbach (1976) have suggested that, as an empirical
    matter, changes in N* proceed very sluggishly in U.S. durable
    manufacturing industry.
15. Had I modelled monetary policy as fixing the growth rate, M/M,
           than the level, M, inflation would be possible in
      rather
    equilibrium. However, my choice seems the more natural one in the
    context of an ultimately static model. The whole model can he
    transformed into a growth model with relatively little difficulty.
16. This conclusion is the only one in the paper that depends on the
    assumption of adaptive expectations. Because of this, the rate
      of   chanae of the rate of inflation is:
                        a   P
                                    - ON
                        a       =

                                =    - t) >   0 at the point where N = 0.
17.   In the model, they reach this peak in the "first instant," but if
      lags in the consumption and investment function were allowed, the
      "multiplier" would take some time.
18. Point B is where the slope of the trajectory, x/y, is equal to
    unity, for at this point N = x - y = 0
19.   Assuming (i4.), of course, does not guarantee monotonic convergence.
    I depicted this case in Figure 2, but nothing of consequence
    hinges on it; overshooting is possible.
20. An open question is whether the effect on w could be signed by a
    similar stability analysis of the Barro-Grossman model.
21. For example, he stock of capital or the intensity of its
      utilizationmight affect labor demand.
22. On this, see Blinder (1973) and Blinder and Fischer (1979).
 23. On this, see Blinder (1977).
214.  See, for example, Gandolfo (1971), p. 211.
                                       REFERENCES                              Ri.

Ando, Albert and Karl Shell, "Demand or Money in a General Portfolio
    Model in the Presence of an Asset that Dominates Money," in
    Gary Frornm and Lawrence R. Klein (eás.), The Brookins Model:
    persoectjvedRecentDeets (Amsterdam: North-Ho ha nd),
    1975.
Barro, Robert J.                Grossman, "A General Disequilibrium
                       and Herschel I.
    Model of Income and Employment," American Economic Re1iew, 61
    (March     1971), pp. 82-93.
                   ,                                         (Cambridge, U. K.:
    Cambridge University Press), 1976.
Blinder, Alan S., "2½ Difficulty with Keynesian Models of Aggregate
    Demand," in A. Blinder and P. Friedman (ed.) Natural Resources

    sJcj. (Academic                   Press: New York), 1977.
                          Inventories arid tbe Demand for Lhor3 rnimeo,
    Princeton      University, April 1978.
Blinder;Alan S. and Stanley Fischer, "Inventories, Rational
    Expectations, and theBusiness Cycle," Natiora1 Bureau of Economic
    Research Working Paper No. 381,           August 1979.
Branson,    William H., MacroeonornicTheoyandPolic1, Second Edition
    (New York: Harper and Row), 1979.
Cagan, Philip, "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinfiation," in M. Friedman
    (ed.),     Sdies in the Quanti Theory of Mon (Chicago: Univers ity
    of Chicago Press), 1956.
Fair,    Ray C.,
    Model (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger), 1976.
Feldstein, Martin S. and Alan Auerbach, "Inventory Behavior in Durable
    Goods Manufacturing: The Target Adjustment Model," oog
    PersonEconomicActivi, 2:              pp. 351-396.
                                              1976,
Fischer, Stanley, "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations,
    and the Optimal. Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy,
    February       1977, pp. 191-205.

Ga ndo   if o, Gia nc a rio, Ma thematical Me t'no    and Mode] S   in   Ec: onom Ic
    pnarnics       (Amsterdam:    North-Holland), 1971.
                                                                          R2.


Goldfeld,   Stephen M. and Richard E. Quandt, "Techniques for Estimating
      Switching Regressions,t' in S. M. Goldfeld and R.E. Quandt (eds.),
      Studies in Nonlinear Estirnat ion   (cambridge,   Mass.: Ballinger),
      1976.
Gordon, Robert J., "The Impact of Aggregate Demand on Prices,"                   -


      BroksPersonEconomiCAct1v11,                3      1975,   pp. 613 -6'i..

Holt,   Charles C., Franca Modigliani, John F.Muth and Herbert A. Simon,
                                                                (Englewood
     Cliffs, N.J. :Prentice-Hall), 1960.
..•Howard, David H., "The Disequilibrium Model in a Controlled Economy:
     An Empirical Test of the Barro-Grossman Model,"
      Review, 66 (December 1976), pp. 871-879.
Leijonhufvud, Axel, "Effective Demand Failures," The Swedis                ourrja
      of Econoic, 75, March    1973, p. 27-li8.
Love 11, Michael C.,
    (New York: John Wiley), 1975.
Maccini, Louis LT, "An Agqregte Dynemic Model of Short-Run Price
  -
      and.   OutputBeiiavior," Quarter1yn                 oncs, 90,.
      1976pp. 177-196.
                   "An Empirical Model of Price and Output Behavior,"
                   ,


   Economic Ingu1r, 15 (October1977), pp. i93-5l2.
Metzler, Lloyd A., "The Nature ad Sta.bi1iy  nvntory Cycles,"
      Review Ecgs,, 23, l9Ll.
Mills, Edwin S., priceO         talnventjLPolicy (New York:
      John Wiley), 1962.
Samuelson, Paul A,, Economics,     Tenth   Edition (New York: McGraw Hill),
      1976.
