                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE MARK III INTERNATIONAL
                   TRANSMISSION MODEL


                    Michael   R. Darby
                    Alan C. Stockman

                  Working Paper No. 1t62




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138


                       March 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper 462
                                                                    March, 1980




             The Mark' III International Transmission Model


                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper presents a summary and estimates of the Mark III International

Transmission Model, a quarterly macroeconometric model of the United States,

United Kingdom, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the Netherlands

estimated for 1957 through 1976. The model is formulated to test and measure

the empirical importance of alternative channels of international transmission

including the effects of capital and trade flows on the money supply, of export

shocks on aggregate demand, of currency substitution on money demand, and of

variations in the real price of oil.

     Major Implications of the model estimates are:   (1) Countries linked by

pegged exchange rates appear to have much more national economic independence than

generally supposed. (2) Substantial or complete sterilization of the effects

of contemporaneous reserve flows on the money supply is a universal practice

of the nonreserve central banks. (3) Qtiantities such as international trade

flows and capital flows are not wei.1 explained by observed prices, exchange

rates, and interest rates. (4) Explaining real income by innovations in

aggregate demand variables works well for U.S. real income but does not trans-

fer easily to other countires. The empirical results suggest a rich menu

for further research.



Michael R. Darby                                       Alan C. Stockman
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles                  University of Rochester
Los Angeles, California 90024                          Rochester, New York 14627

(213) 825—3343                                         (716) 275—4427
                                                   Not for quotation without
                                                   the authors' permission.
                                                   D.4: February 29, 1980



              THE MARK IlL INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION MODEL

                                   by

                            Michael R. Darby
                  University of California, Los Angeles
                  National Bureau of Economic Research

                                   and

                            Alan C. Stockjnan*
                         University of Rochester


     The Mark III International Transmission Model provides a convenient

framework for testing a variety of hypotheses about the workings of and

linkages among individual macroeconomies. It is a quarterly niacroeconometric

model of the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, France, Germany, Italy,

Japan, and the Netherlands estimated for 1957 through 1976.1 A number of

hypotheses are incorporated in the structure of the model so that the data

can decide their empirical relevance; test results for those hypotheses will

be reported in this paper. Other hypotheses could be left for separate



*The Mark III Model is an element in the NBER project on "The International
Transmission of Inflation through the World Monetary System." Our partners
in this effort —— Arthur E. Gandolfi, James R. Lothian, and Anna J. Schwartz
have made innumerable contributions to this modeling and created the NBER
quarterly international data base used in estimating the model. The authors
acknowledge the able research assistance of Daniel N. Laskar, Michael T.
Melvin, M. Holly Shissler, and Andrew A. Vogel and helpful suggestions from
members of the project Advisory Board and the UCLA Monetary Economics Work-
shop. An exploratory version of the model was reported in Darby (1979). A
fuller statement (Including derivations) of the model summarized here will
appear in the proposed NBER volume reporting project results. This work has
been funded by grants from the National Science Foundation (grant numbers
APR76—l2334 and APR78—13072), Scaife Family trusts, and Alex C. Walker
Educational and Charitable Foundation, and Relm Foundation. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


1The international data base created as part of the larger project has con-
sistent data series for all these countries from 1955 to 1976, but two years
of data are used due to various lags in the model and in the definitions of
expected values. The data bank is presently being extended through 1979.
These additional data will be used for post—sample prediction tests.
                                                                                    3




                                      I. The Model


     Brief ly the model consists of three sorts of submodels: (1) the re-

serve country (U.S.) submodel, (2) the nonreserve, pegged—exchange—rate

submodels, and (3) the nonreserve, floating—exchange—rate submodels. These

submodels are outlined in Tables 2, 3, and 4, respectively, using the nota-

tion of Table 1. Since these submodels are quite similar it is simplest to

go through them equation—by—equation. The reserve and nonreserve pegged

submodels each consist of eight or nine behavioral equations plus nine

identities. These basic behavioral equations can be identified by the

endogenous variable upon which we have normalized for simultaneous estima-

tion as the real—income, price—level, unemployment—rate, nominal—money,

interest—rate, export, import, import—price, and capital—flow equations. An

additional behavioral equation is added for the nonreserve—floating submodels

where the exchange rate is also endogenous. In these submodels we renortual—

ize the import and import—price equations to obtain the exchange rate given

the balance of payments determined in the new exchange intervention function.

This is detailed in the equation outlines below.


Real Income — Equations (Rl) and (Ni)

     The real income equation is a generalization of the Barro (1978)

equation which expresses output as responding to shocks (innovations) in the

determinants of aggregate demand with persistance effects modeled by a par-

tial adjustment process on lagged logarthmic transitory income
              —   log               The innovations which we consider (in nominal
[log y.
      J,t—l
                        )7
                         J,   _1L
money, real government spending, and scaled net exports) enter with a four—

quarter distributed lag, so the partial adjustment process is really im-

posed only after the initial four quarters.
                                                                                            4




Price Level —    Equations CR2) and (N2)
     The price level equation is obtained by equating nominal money supply

and demand and solving for the price level. The demand for money function

used is generalized from that of Carr and Darby (1979). The Carr—Darby

function allows for different adjustment processes depending on whether a

change in nominal money is anticipated or unanticipated. The logarithm of

real money demand is assumed to be a function of logarithmic permanent and

transitory income, the domestic interest rate, the foreign interest rate

allowing for expected depreciation, the lagged logarithm of real money, and

a four—quarter distributed lag on the money shocks.2 Thus a typical non—

reserve money demand function would be:


                       =
(1) log      —   log         —2    log y —      j3   (log   y. —   log   y1) —
                                                                                 j4 R   —


          ER1 + (4log E.+i)*] -
                                    j6     [log M,_i — log

     —
            j,7+i Nj,t_i —   cj2

Renormalizing in terms of the price level gives us equation(Nl) with the

signs reversed from those of the money—demand equation. A negative sign on

M. in the price level equation implies that there is a shock—absorber in-

crease in money demand due to an unanticipated increase in nominal money

supply over and above that indicated by movements in real income and the

interest rate.




2The foreign interest rate is included at the suggestion of Don Mathieson
and Michael Hamburger to test for the substitutability of foreign bonds for
domestic money. The U.S. interest rate is used for the nonreserve countries
and the U.K. interest rate is used for the United States. Carr and Darby
(1979) entered only the current money shock, but our distributed lag per-
mits the data to determine a more complicated adjustment process.
                                                                             5


Unemployment Rate —   Equations   (R3) and (N3)

     This is a dynamic form of Okun's law to allow for a distributed lag

effect of real income growth on changes in the unemployment rate. It is

included only in the U.S., U.K., and French subniodels. The other countries

in the model have unemployment rates which are uncorrelated with present

and past changes in real income. For those countries, transitory real in-

come replaces the unemployment rate in the nominal money reaction functions.


Nominal Noney —   Equations   (R4) and (N4)

     A standard nominal money reaction function (N4) has been adopted for

the nonreserve countries. We have specified a form with sufficient generality

to allow for varying lags in acquisition and utilization of information by

the various monetary authorities.3 The reaction functions explain the

nominal money growth rate by the current and appropriately lagged balance of

payments, the lagged unemployment rate or transitory real income, lagged

inflation rates, and current and lagged innovations in real government

spending. Semiannual observations were used for lagged values to reduce the

number of fitted coefficients except for the unemployment—rate or transitory—

income variable for which preliminary experimentation suggested a complicated

lag pattern. Since under floating exchange rates more attention can be

paid to inflation goals and less to balance—of—payments equilibrium, we

used a floating dummy variable (DF.) to estimate shifts in the inflation

and balance—of—payments coefficients during the floating period. The U.S.

equation CR4) differs from the nonreserve equations in (a) omitting all terms




3Preliminary investigation uncovered substantial variation in how quickly
different countries responded to the various determinants. In the exploratory
Mark II version of the model, money reaction functions were tailored to the
individual countries (see Darby (1979)). Experience with that approach in-
dicated both difficulties in cross—country comparisons and with understated
standard errors. The approach also does not prejudge whether domestic credit
is predetermined.
                                                                                 6




involving the balance of paytnents4 and the floating dununy and (b) including

two lagged dependent variables in response to a seemingly complicated adjust-

ment process indicated by earlier work.


Interest Rate —   Equations   (R5) and (N5)

     The interest rate is based on a goods market equilibrium condition,

but problems were encountered in specifying a dynamic investment function,

As a result, we explain the nominal interest rate by the expected infla-

tion rate and the real interest rate. The latter depends on the

lagged expected inflation rate, time, the lagged interest rate and four—

quarter—distributed lags on innovations in nominal money, real government

spending and real net exports. Thus, the interest rate and real income equa-

tions can be interpreted as reflecting the outcome of a short—period IS—LM

model which shifts around long—run equilibrium in response to current and

lagged innovations in the demand variables. Persistent effects on the real

interest rate are possible via the lagged expected—inflation and interest

rates.


Exports —   Equations   (R6) and (N6)
                                                  5
    We measure exports as a fraction of income.       These scaled exports are

explained by logarithmic transitory income, time, the lagged dependent var-

iable to allow for partial adjustment, foreign real income, the logarithm of

the real price of oil (dollar price divided by the U.S. deflator), and four

quarter distributed lags on the domestic and foreign price levels and on the




4mis exclusion was investigated at length in work reported in Darby (1980a).

5We similarly measure imports and capital flows as a fraction of income so
that a balance of payments scaled as a fraction of income results from im-
position of the identity to assure asset market equilibrium.
                                                                             7




exchange rate. We do not constrain the foreign price level to enter

converted by the exchange rate because purchasing power parities may have

changed with removal of capital controls simultaneously with pegged exchange

rate changes. We allow for different effects of exchange rate changes

during the pegged and floating periods.


Imports —   Equations (R7), (N7P), and (N7F)
     The scaled imports variable is explained by permanent income, lagged

dependent variable, and distributed lags on the relative price of imports

and domestic transitory income for the reserve and nonreserve pegged submodels.

For the non—reserve floating submodels, this import demand equation is

solved (renormalized) for the current relative price of imports.




Imports Prices —   Equations    (R8), (N8?), and (N8F)

     Itwas necessary to first difference the import price equation to clear

up severly autocorrelated residuals. In (R8) and .(NBP),the first difference

of the logarithm of import prices is explained by a constant and the first

differences of the logarithm of the real oil price, the scaled import variable,

the logarithm of foreign real income, the logarithm of the foreign price level,

the logarithm of the exchange rate, and also by the lagged dependent variable.

This import supply equation was solved in the floating version (N8F) for the

first difference in the logarithm of the exchange rate.


Capital Flows —   Equations    (R9) and (N9)

     The scaled net capital outflows is explained by the domestic and U.S.

interest rate and the expected growth rate of the exchange rate,6 the logarithm

6
 For the U.S. equation the U.K. interest rate and exchange rate serves as the
foreign variable.
                                                                               8




of the real price of oil, the scaled balance of trade, time, logarithmic transitory

income, the first differences in the logarithms of domestic and foreign real

income, and distributed lags on first differences of domestic and U.S. Interest

rates, of the expected growth rate of the. exchange rate, and of the logarithm

of real income.


Balance of Payments —   Floating   (N1OF) only

     In the nonreserve floating model, a tenth behavioral equation is added

to complete the model in view of the addition of the logarithm of the exchange

rate to our list of endogenous variables. This is our exchange intervention

equation which explains the scaled balance of payments by the lagged dependent

variable and the log change in the exchange rate as compared to the same log

change lagged one quarter and to the lagged differential between the domestic

and U.S, inflation rates.


Identities —   Equations (Rll)—(R17) and (Nll)—(N17)
     Ldgarithmic permanent income is defined in identities (Ru) and (Nh).

Identities (R12) and (N12P) determine the scaled balance of payments; this is
solved instead for scaled imports in the floating (N12F). Money and export

shocks are defined in Identities (R13), (R14), (N13), and (Nl4). Identities

(Rl5) and (N15P) define the relative price of imports; in the floating case,

this is solved for import prices as in (N15F). The expectational identities

(P16), (Rl7), (N16), and (N17) are for expections of next periods prices and

exchange rate based on current information. Their specification is discussed

in Section II. Nominal—income—weighted geometric averages of the other seven

countries' real income and prices are defined by identities (P18), (P19), (Nl8),

and (Nl9). The weights W. are the ratios of country j's total nominal income
                                                                             9




(converted by E. into dollars) for 19551 — 19761V to the total for all eight

countries. The parameters basey. and baseP. set the indices y and P to 1 for

1970 and are listed with the Wi's in Table 8. Although these variables are

endogenous for the whole model, they are treated somewhat differently in the

simultaneous equation estimation method outlined in Section IV.
                                                                                  10




                              II. Expected Values


     There are four explicit plus one implicit expectational variables in the

model: The explicit variables are (4.log •)*,          (4log   P•)*, (log M.)*, and

(X/Y); (log gj)* also must be estimated in creating the exogenous variable

g.,. The first two   of   these variables appear in the model with leads so that

they are based on current information. Therefore we treat them as endogenous

for purposes of estimation.7 The other three expected values are based only

on lagged information and are therefore treated as predetermined for pur-

poses of estimation.

     The three predetermined expectational variables are all based on optimal

univariate ARIMA processes. We also tried defining (log M.)* in terms of a

transfer function based on the money supply reaction functions (R4) and

(N4), but the univariate process worked somewhat better both in terms of

explanatory power and in meeting our prior notions regarding the values of

coefficients.8 Since we are treating real government spending as exogenous,

it was appropriate to model (log g)* by a univariate ARIMA process. Be-

cause of the short lags in the export equations and the relatively minor

role of export shocks in the model as estimated, we did not attempt a full—

scale transfer function approach for (X/Y).

     For the expected inflation rate (4Elog P)* we adopted a transfer func-

tion based on the price—level equations (R2) and (N2) with information lags




7See identities (R16),    (R17),   (N16), and (N17).

      is understandable if the acquisition and processing of information is
costly. See Darby (1976) and Feige and Pearce (1976). Further research on
the sensitivity of estimates to alternate definitions of (log M.)* will be
reported in the project volume.
                                                                              11




imposed. As detailed in Table 5, the expected inflation rate (4ilog

is the systematic part of a transfer function which has as input series

(log M.)*, two lags of log M., tlog _'
      3                     3        3,    .3
                                            R., 3,
                                                R.
                                                     t—l'
                                                            current and lagged

exchange—rate—adjusted foreign interest rate, two lags of log P., and
three lagged money shocks. Note that since this expected inflation rate

appears in the interest rate equation, it is appropriate to assume that

the information set includes current interest rates.

     Finally, expected growth in the exchange rate (4ilog E. t+l)* differs

by period and country. In general we do not wish to use the forward rate

for this expectation because (1) this would require an additional equation

for each nonreserve country to explain endogenously the forward rate's move-

ments relative to movements in the expected growth in the exchange rate, and

especially (2) the forward rate data are incomplete. For the floating period, we

fitted regressions explaining E÷i by the current values of the variables

appearing in the exchange rate equation (N8F) and the lagged dependent

variable. No significant autocorrelation appeared in the residuals. The

predicted value of these regressions is used as (4ilog Et+i)*. Details

are in Part A of Table 6. For the pegged period, we use a transfer function

which has input series useful to predict both a revaluation and movements

absent a revaluation. The expected change due to a revaluation is assumed

to vary with the level of the scaled balance of payments and with this level

times its absolute value.9 Movements absent a revaluation are captured by

the current growth rate and the logarithmic difference between the actual

and pegged values of E... The latter variable may serve as well in predicting




9This formulation closely approximates an expectation based on a Tobit
analysis in which both the probability of a change and the size of the change
varies with the balance of payments.                   -                   -
                                                                           12




revaluations. Finally lagged revaluation dummies are included because of

the different meaning of the variables in the quarter immediately following

a revaluation. Details are given in Table 6, Part B.
                                                                             13




                     III. International Linkages

     The behavioral equations in the model can be divided into the domestic

sector and the international sector. The domestic sector would contain the

real—income, price—level, unemployment—rate, nominal—money, and interest—rate

equations. The international sector determines exports, imports, import

prices, capital flows, and the implied balance of payments given a pegged ex-

change rate or exports, import prices, the exchange rate, capital flows, the

balance of payments, and the implied imports for floating exchange rates.

This section discusses how international influences modeled in the inter-

national sector affect the domestic sector.

     In the early monetary approach to the balance of payments literature,

much was made of the "law of one price level." In the Mark II model, we

attempted to enter the exchange—rate—adjusted foreign price level directly

into the price level equation, but only the domestic demand and supply for

money were significant. Two explanations .arose: (1) International price

arbitrage is trivial in impact for the aggregate price level. (2) The "law

of one price level" holds, but the balance of payments forces nominal money

supply to adjust practically instantaneously to real money demand times the

world determined price level. Therefore the Mark III model allows foreign

prices to affect the domestic price level via affecting first the trade

balance, then the balance of payments, then nominal money, and finally the

price level. If this pattern takes substantial time, it is consistent with

a Humean specie—flow mechanism but not the "law of one price." In addition,

an indirect "currency substitution" channel permits movements in the exchange—

rate—adjusted foreign interest rate to affect real money demand and hence

the price level.

     Similarly the impact of capital flows so much emphasized in the recent

monetary approach and asset approach literature enters indirectly. Domestic
                                                                                  14




interest rates are determined by domestic conditions including nominal money.

If they are inconsistent with the interest rate determined by asset arbitrage,

then capital flows would be induced which would affect the balance of payments,

then nominal money, and ultimately interest rates. Many recent writers

have suggested that massive capital flows would thus overwhelm any attempt

at independent    monetary policy by a nonreserve country maintaining pegged
exchange rates. We investigate the empirical importance         of this channel

here.

        Note especially that in   our   model both the trade balance channel and the
asset    channel may operate simultaneously.

        Some other economists have emphasized the absorption approach

via which foreign changes in income may affect domestic output and interest

rates via changes in export demand. This is reflected in the real export

innovation terms present in both real income and interest rate equations.

They in turn may affect nom-LnRl. money indirectly while balance of payments

effects would enter directly into the nominal money reaction functions.

        At this stage, it is clear that the logarithm of the real price of oil

enters into the export, import price, and capital flow equations. A future

paper will test whether there is an additional direct effect of this and

other international supply shocks on the real income and price level equa-

tions, or whether they operate through their effects on the balance of

payments and net exports.
                                                                             15


                         IV. Estimation Methods

      If a simultaneously determined model such as ours is estimated by ordi-

nary least squares (OLS), simultaneous equation bias occurs. This arises

because the endogenous variables respond to each other so that the random

disturbance in any one behavioral equation may be reflected in movements

of all the other endogenous variables. As a result when some endogenous

variables are used to explain the behavior of another endogenous variable,

their values are potentially correlated with the random disturbance in the

equation. Their OLS coefficients will reflect not only their effect on the

variable being explained but also the effect of its residual on them. Simul-

taneous equation methods are used to remove this spurious correlation due to

reverse—causality.

      The most popular simultaneous equation methods are two—stage and three—

stage least squares (2SLS and 3SLS, respectively.)10 Unfortunately neither

exists for our model. This is because the first stage of each approach in-

volves obtaining fitted values of each of the endogenous variables which are

uncorrelated with the other endogenous variables. This is done by fitting

OLS regressions for each endogenous variable as a function of all the pre-

determined variables (exogenous and lagged endogenous). In large samples,

these fitted values are uncorrelated with the residuals in the behavioral

equations and, when substituted for the actual values in OLS estimates of

the behavioral equations, give unbiased estimates of the coefficients. Un-

fortunately when the number of predetermined variables equals or exceeds the

number of observations, the first stage regressions can perfectly reproduce



'9ther, more complicated methods exist but could not be entertained for
such a large model as ours because of software and computing budget litni—
tat ions.
                                                                              16




 the actual values of the endogenous variables and no simultaneous equation

bias is removed.

     We reduce the number of predetermined variables relative to the number

of observations in two ways: (1) For each country we use as predetermined

variables only domestic variables for that country plus fitted values of

only those foreign variables which enter that country's submodel. The

fitted foreign variables are obtained by fitting interest rates, income, and

prices on each foreign country's own domestic variables and then forming

indexes (where necessary as indicated by identities (R18), (Rl9), (N18), and

(Nl9)) of these fitted foreign variables.   (2) Using this reduced set of

predetermined variables,11 we take sufficient principal components to explain

over 99.95% of their variance. Usually this involves thirty to thirty—five

components (Indicating thirty to thirty—five independent sources of varia-

tion in the instrument list). However, in estimating certain equations for

short subperiodsU it is necessary to limit the number of principal components

to half the number of observations In the subperiod. In either case these

principal components are used as our matrix for obtaining fitted values of

the endogenous variables in the first stage of our 2SLS regressions.

     In suary, the model is estimated by the principal—components—2SLS

method where (a) the basic instrument list for each country consists of

domestic predetermined variables plus fitted values of those foreign

variables which appear in the model based on foreign predetermined variables,

and (b) this basic instrument list is spanned by a number of components




11The actual lists of predetermined variables for each country are presented
in Table 8.


12That is, for the floating period for all nonreserve countries except
Canada and the pegged period for Canada.
                                                                            17




either equal to half the observations being used or sufficient tO explain

over 99.95% of the variance in the basic instrument list, whichever is

smaller.
                                                                             18




                         V. Estimation Results


     The estimated model is reported in Tables 9 through 18. We also dis-

cuss the estimates equation—by—equation.


Real—Income Equations (Ri) and (Nl) — Table 9

     For the United States, there appear to be substantial effects from

money shocks and weak to nonexistent effects from both real government

spending and export shocks. For the nonreserve countries, a few apparently

significant monetary shocks enter, but we generally cannot reject the

hypothesis that all the money shock coefficients are zero. This is shown

in Table 9A where only Canada among the nonreserve countries reaches even

the 10 percent level of significance. The apparent impotence of monetary

policy in the nonreserve countries may be real or it may reflect either a

greater measurement error in defining the money shocks or a stable monetary

policy which would also reduce the signal—to—noise ratio in the N. data.13

     The other demand shock variables, with occasional exceptions, also do

not seem to have much systematic effect on the nonreserve countries' real

incomes. The sensitivity of these results to alternative definitions of

demand shocks and effects of anticipated variables will be examined in a

future paper.




131f for example the nonreserve central banks smoothed out the Federal
Reserve Systeni's erratic growth—rate changes via an effective sterilization
policy, the actual variation In money shocks might be too small to estimate
a significant coefficient even though a substantial monetary shock, if it
were ever attempted, would have a substantial effect on real income. Al-
though such effective sterilization appears consistent with results reported
below, the authors are not agreed on its existence; see Stockman (1979) and
Darby (l980b).
                                                                              19




Price Level Equations (R2) and (N2) —    Table   10

        The price—level equations have the difficulties usually encountered in

the stock—adjustment formulation: A tendency for autocorrelatlon in the

residuals to bias the coefficient of the lagged dependent variable toward 1

and the long—run demand variables toward zero. We have included three

lagged money shocks in addition to the current one suggested by Carr and

Darby (1979). These serve to explain current movements in demand variables

in what are nearly first difference in (log P—log N) equations. Software

difficulties prevented us from trying a correction for autocorrelation.14

        The fact that current money shocks enter with a coefficient near —1

indicates that expected rather actual money enters in the price level equa-

tion. With a coefficient of —1, money shocks affect the current price level

only via indirect interest rate or real income effects. The shock—absorber

adjustment process suggested by Carr and Darby is thus supported by the

data.

        The foreign—interest—rate channel (.5) is both significant and of the

right sign only for the United Kingdom and Japan. Further, if we recall

that interest rates are measured as decimal fractions, we see that both

elasticities are very small in absolute value and compared to the elasticity

of money demand with respect to the domestic interest rate. Nonetheless we

are able to detect some asset substitution in two of our eight countries.




14The current TROLL system regression package has a program defect when
2SLS and correction for autocorrelation are used simultaneously. France,
Germany, Italy, and Japan appear to have significant positive autocorrelation
judging from Durbin's h statistic.
                                                                              20




 Unemployment—te Equations (R3) and (N3) — Table 11

      The unemployment rate equations indicate conformity to a dynamic version

 of Okun's Law for the United States, United Kingdom, and France.   For the

 other countries there was no significant correlation between changes in the

 unemployment rate and past and present changes in real income. As the

 equation was not required for the model, it was dropped for those countries.


Nominal—Money Equations (R4) and (N4) — Table 12

     The U.S. reaction function (R4) indicates a negative impact of lagged

inflation on nominal money growth, surprisingly weak (though) positive

effects from unexpected real government spending, and a stimulative effect

from a two—quarter lagged change in the unemployment rate. The time trend

term is extremely potent: For plausible steady—state values it increases

the growth rate of nominal money from 0.2 percent per annum in 1956 to 5.9

percent per annum in 1976. Although plausibly related to a gradual increase

in target inflation as a result of experienced inflation, the trend term

will be investigated in detail in a future paper on alternative monetary

standards.

     The results for the nonreserve countries reported in Part B of Table

12 are generally acceptable except for Italy which appears to follow no

systematic policy. The key element for international transmission is the

effect of the balance of payments on the money supply. Table 12A indicates

what fraction of the balance of payments is not sterilized by the central

bank —— a value of 1 indicates no sterilization and a value of 0
                                                                 indicates

omp1ete sterilization. During the pegged period, sterilization appears to

have been a universal practice, although there was a substantial impact

effect of the balance of payments on the German and Japanese nominal money
                                                                              21




supply. When we take account of lagged adjustments all countries except

Italy appeared to respond, albeit partially, to the balance of payments.

In principle a lagged adjustment may   be   sufficient to maintain a pegged

exchange rate system)5 The continued impact of the balance of payments on

nominal money during the floating period is consistent with a joint policy

of exchange intervention and monetary adjustments in response to exchange

rate pressures.


Interest—Rate Equations (R5) and (N5) —     Table   13

     The interest rate equations are not particularly satisfactory in terms

of expected values of the coefficients: The expected—inflation effect is

small to nil and so is the liquidity effect of nominal money shocks. Real

government spending shocks generally have a negative impact effect on

interest rates. An efficient—markets/random—walk story might appear to of-

fer an explanation, but these are short—term rates which can move in

predictable ways in an efficient market. Further the contemporaneous shocks

should help explain the random walk. We suspect the solution to the puzzle

may lie in the formation of expectations, but leave this as an area for

future research.


Export Equations (R6) and (N6) — Table 14

     The export equations are generally acceptable although price influences do

not seem very strong. An increaseñ real oil price enters as a proxy for in—



15The implications of sterilization (and hence endogenous domestic credit)
are examined in Darby (1980b) and Stockman (1979).
                                                                               22




creased    real income of the omitted rest of the world and has the expected

positive sign except for Japan. Foreign real income has much weaker positive

impact than would be expected from the absorption approach. The sum of the

current and lagged domestic price level is negative for all countries except

the U.S. and Canada, but the effects are universally weak. Similarly foreign

prices and the exchange rate generally have weak positive effects.


Import Equations (R7) and (N7P) —   Table 15, Part A

     The import demand equations display a J—curve type effect. An increase in

relative import prices initially (except for Germany and Italy) increases the

nominal value of imports relative to nominal income. Lagged quantity ad-

justment, indicated by negative coefficients on lagged relative import

prices, gradually offset the initial increase. While the price effects are

rather stronger here than for exports,'6 again there is no evidence of a

"law of one price level" operating strongly in the current period.


Relative—Price—of—Imports Equations (N7F) —   Table 15, Part B

     During the floating period, we solve the import demand equation for the

relative   price of imports. The equations have no obvious problems but the
implied parameter estimates are frequently quite different from those in Part
A   of Table 15. This may be due to biases from the (different) lagged dependent

variable which appears in each equation.


Import—Price Equations CR8) and (N8P) — Table 16, Part A

     The import supply equations Indicate that increases in foreign prices increase

import prices, although the coefficients are insignificant for the United States




       may be because with relatively reliable import price data we can
estimate separate import demand and supply equations while the export
equation is a market equilibrium equation in which the exchange rate and
foreign price level enter directly.
and Canada. Changes in exchange rates are significantly positive for the four

countries which changed their peg during the period of estimation, but not for

Canada, Italy, or Japan. There also appears to be a positive quantity effect

for a few countries. Oil prices are important only for the U.S., Italy, and

perhaps the Netherlands.


Exchange—Rate Equations (N8F) —   Table 16, Part B

     The inverted import supply equations are used to explain exchange rate

movement during the floating period. Although it is somewhat arbitrary in a

simultaneous model which one is declared ntthe!t exchange rate equation, this

one was chosen because exchange rates entered most directly and stronglyhere.

The approach clearly worked well for France, Italy, Japan, and the Netherlands

and not so well for the United Kingdom, Canada, and Germany. Why this is so

is puzzling to us.


Capital—Flows Equations (R9) and (N9) —     Table   17

     The capital—flows equations worked poorly indeed for the United Kingdom

and Japan, apparently reflecting the effectiveness of their capital controls.

For the other countries, net capital outflows generally were negatively re-

lated (albeit weakly so) to either the exchange—rate adjusted interest

differential [R. —   (4log E t+l —    R11
                                            or to changes in this differential,

judging from the coefficients estimated on its component parts. But the estimated

coefficients are neither large nor precisely estimated as would be suggested

by discussions of "interest arbitrage" in the asset approach. Apparently

foreign and domestic securities are treated as rather imperfect substitutes

in the portfolio. Alternatively, one must suppose most movements in the dif-

ferential reflect changes in the equilibrium value with no flows resulting.
                                                                           24




Balance—of—Payments Equations —   Table   18

     These equations attempt to model intervention in the floating—exchange—

rate markets. With few degrees of freedom, we could not experiment with

lags or alternative variables and based the equations on the variables

popularly discussed: movements in the exchange rate relative to recent

movements or lagged relative inflation rates and the lagged dependent

variable. This approach certainly did not explain intervention by the cen-

tral banks of France or the Netherlands, but was otherwise reasonably

serviceable. We investigated explaining the Netherlands—German exchange

rate and hence the Netherlands—U.S. exchange rate, but this approach was

even less successful.
                                                                            25




             VI. Conclusions and Areas for Future Research


     The research reported in this paper seems very informative to us in

the sense of inducing revision of prior beliefs and suggesting areas for

future research. This doubtless reflects the emphasis on theoretical as

opposed to empirical research in international macroeconomics. Hopefully

this imbalance will be redressed in view of the demonstrated payoff and of

the reduced cost of empirical work consequent upon the development of the

data bank by James Lothian and Anna Schwartz.

     Our main empirical results can be summarized as saying that the rational—

expectations—natural—rate results found for the U.S. do not transfer easily

to other developed countries and that linkages among countries joined by

pegged exchange rates appear much looser than is usually assumed at least in

the monetary—approach literature. In particular, substantial or complete

sterilization of the effects of contemporaneous reserve flows on the money

supply is a universal practice of the nonreserve central banks. Much future

research by members of the International Transmission Project and others is

required to substantiate or overturn these results, but the questions are

clearly posed.

     In greater detail, our major empirical findings are;

1. Although a natural—rate/rational—expectations reaLincome equation con-

firms strong effects from money innovations and weak effects from govern-

ment spending and export innovations in the U.S., the other seven countries

had little by the way of significant response to demand innovations.

2. The shock—absorber money demand equation of Carr and Darby receives con—

firmation. Thus innovations in nominal money have little effect on con-

temporaneous inflation despite small contemporaneous movements in real income

and the interest rate.
                                                                                                              34



                                                  TABLE      3

                                     Nonreserve Country Submodel
                                     Pegged Exchange Rate Periods
 EQUATIONS
                                                                                                   3
 (Ni)        iog yj =                 +       log y1 + (i—cs2) log                          +
                                 3                           3
                        +                                +                       + cii


 (N2)        log P = log N1 +                      + 812 log y' +         S3(log y.—log y) +

                        +   815[R1 +         (4Alog E. t+l)*] +               (log M.i — log
                                 3
                                              N           +c
                            1=0 j,7+j j,t—i                      j2




 (N3)1             =                 +
             Lij       uj..1             Til + f0J,2+i Alog y1,_ + c13




(N4)2    Alog N =                    +    n2t +              + n4(1 +
                        + n(s1...3 +                             + n.6(log         —
                                                                                       log

                        +
                            n.7[DF.(log P.1 — log
                        + n.8(log P                  —
                                                          log Pj,t—5 + fl19[DF1(logPj,t—3 —logPj,t—5)]
                                            j,t—3

                        + T11,10u1,_1 +                                                +   Ti.
                                                    fl1,1iu1,_2 + n12u.j,t—3                j,
                        +   Ti
                                 j,l4
                                         (B/Y) + Ti
                                             j       j,l5 [DF(B/Y)
                                                            j    jI+           j,l6
                                                                                      [(B/Y)
                                                                                                 j,t—l
                                                                                                         + (B/Y)
                                                                                                                   j,t—2'

                        + nj,17{DF[B/'oj,_1 +
                                                                      (B/Y)1,_2]} + n1,i8[(B/Y),_3 + (B/Y),_4
                        +   Ti
                                 j,l9 {DF.[th/Y
                                        j       j,t_3 + (B/Y)j,_4]} + 6j4
                                                                                 27




                                    REFERENCES


Barro, R. J., "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the

         United States," Journal of Political Economy, August 1978, 86: 549—80.

Carr, J., and Darby, M. R., "The Role of Money Supply Shocks in the Short—

         Run Demand for Money," U.C.L.A. Economics Department Discussion Paper

         No. 98, October 1979.

Darby, M. R., "Rational Expectations under Conditions of Costly Information,"

         Journal of Finance, June 1976, 31: 889—895.

_____      "The NBER International Transmission Model: The Mark II Disequilibrium

         Version, Estimates and Lessons," in the Proceedings of 1978 West Coast

     Academic/Federal Reserve Economic Research Seminar, San Francisco:

         Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 1979.

______     "The International Economy as a Source of and Restraint on United

         States Inflation," NBER Working Paper No. 437, January 1980. (l980a)

_____     "Sterilization   and Monetary Control Under Pegged Exchange Rates:

     Theory and Evidence," NBER Working Paper No. 449, February 1980. (1980b)

Feige, E. L., and Pearce, D. K., "Economically Rational Expectations: Are

     Innovations in the Rate of Inflation Independent of Innovations in

     Measures of Monetary and Fiscal Policy," Journal of Political Economy,

     June 1976, 84: 499—522.

Stockman, A. C., "Monetary Control and Sterilization under Pegged Exchange

     Rates," Department of Economics, University of Rochester, xerox, August

     1979.
                                                                               28
                                  TABLE   1
                        Symbols Used in Mark III Model
 baseP        Base to set mean value of logI to 0 for 1970 (i.e., P has geo—
              metric mean 1 for 1970).

 basey.      Base to set mean value of log      to 0 for 1970 (i.e., R has geo—
             metric mean 1 for 1970).

    (B/Y).    Balance of payments as a fraction of GNP. (GDP if CNP
              unavailable. For nonreserve countries this is on the
              official reserve settlement basis. For the U.S., we will
              try changes in the gold stock and the official reserve
              settlement basis.)


 (dY).       Net capital outflows as a fraction of GNP. (Measured as
                             —
             (X/Y) —
                       (I/Y)    (B/Y)).
DF.          Duy variable equal to 1 for floating—exchange—rate period;
             0 otherwise.


E.           Exchange rate in domestic currency units (DCUs) per U. S.
             dollar (E1   1).



             Actual value of E for fixed exchange rate period.


g.           Real government spending.


             Innovation in real government spending;     g —

             Imports as a fraction of GNP.
(I/Y)
             Money stock in billions of DCUs.


             Innovation in money; log   M — (log

P            Price deflator for GNP (or GDP) in DCUs per base—year DCU.
             (1970 — 1.000)


             Import price index. (1970     1.000)


             Index of foreign prices converted by exchange rates into U.S.
             dollars per base—year U. S. dollar.
                                                                                        29
        RO
    P         Real price of oil. (Dollar price of barrel of Venezuelan oil
              divided by P1.)


             Short—term nominal interest rate in decimal per annum           form   (Three—
             months treasury bill yield where available.)


    t        Time index (1955 I      1, 1955 II      2, etc.)


u.           Unemployment rate in decimal form.


W            Nominal income weight; share of country j        in   total sample
             nominal income.

             Exports as a fraction of GNP.
(X/Y)

2.           Innovation   in exports;           —
                                        (X/Y)       (XJY).

y.           Real CNP (or GDP if GNP    unavailable)    in billions of base—year DCUs.


             Permanent income in billions of base—year DCUs.


y            Index of foreign real income. (1970 = 1.000)


Z.           Relative price of imports; log P —        log   Pj.

*            Indicates expected value based on information up through
             previous quarter, with exceptions noted in Section II.


Country Indices:          1 United States              5 Germany
                          2 United Kingdom             6 Italy
                          3 Canada                     7 Japan
                          4 France                     8 Netherlands
                                                                                                                 30



                                                TABLE            2

                            Reserve        Country (U. S.) Subniodel

EQUATIONS
                                                                                                      3
(Ri)        log y1 =                 +   a12 log                     + (1—a12) log               + Z a13+jL..j
                                                                                                     1=0
                             3                                   3
                       + Z a1                           ÷
                            i=O                                 1=0a1,11+1x1,1 + ll



                            log                   +
 (R2)        log P1 =                M1 +               12log y + 13(log y1 — log y) +

                       +    152 — (41og                     E         )*J+16    (log
                                                                                                 —   log
                                                             2,t+1                                         Pi....i)
                             3
                       +                                    + c12
                            io ,7+Mi,t

                                              7
(R3         u1 =                 +          + E112+1 Mog
                   u1,_1                                                            + c13



CR4)        E1og M1 =                + fl12 t    + 13           g + 14 l,t—l +

                        + 15 l,t—3 + 14) +                              Ti16 (log
                                                                                             —   log

                                                            —
                        + l8 (log                               log           + Ti1,10
                                                                                            u1,_1 + fl11 u1,t_2

                        +                           +
                            1,12         U1,_3          Ti113 ui,_4 + Ti120 Alog

                        + l,2l 1og ,t—2 + c14


(R5)        R1 =   l1 +      12 + i3 (4bog P1 t+1)* + 614 Ri,_i + 615 (4iilog p)*
                   3                                    3                               3
              +    E
                   1=0 6i,6+iMi,_i
                                                +
                                                                6iio 1,_j           +
                                                                                                          X]_1
              +
                   15
                                                                                           31




(R6)              —e +0            + 8131 RO + 814(log y1 —
         (X/Y)1
                       1
                                                                          logy)
                                                        1
                                                  + E 0                   R
                  +                                            7+i log
                                                       i=o
                       1                               1
                  + E019 log P11 + Z                             log                 '16
                                                      i=o               1,t—i


(R7)                                            P
         (I/Y)1 = A11 + A12 /Y)i,t_i + A13 log
                                               y1
                       1
                  + ZA141 (log                    —    log   y11)
                       3
                  + z A16 z1,_ +
                      i=O



(R8)    log P —       log Pt..1 +          + 12 1og

                  + i3 Mog RO +1l4 1og y + 15 1(I/Y)1

                  + '16 og P +


(R9)1    (dY)1 =            ÷ l2 +      l3 log RO +

                  —
                      15    (4bog E2    t+1)* +
                                                                                P
                  +                                                      log
                      17    [(X/Y)1 —   (I/Y)1]   + l8 (log y1 —               y1)

                  +         log Y1 +          1o y + Z 1,ll+i1,t—i
                                                               1=0
                       2                           2
                  + E 1,l4
                         +1
                            R 2,t—i           —    E                 (41og E2,+i_j)* +
                      1=0                         1=0       1,17+1



(RiO)   No equation (E1 E 1).
                                                                                   32


 IDENTITIES:



 (Ru)       log          •11 + 12 log y1 + (l—412)1og L—1

 CR12)                                             —
             (B/Y)1      (X/Y)1 —         (I/Y)1       (dY)1


 (R13)             log N,1 —       (log     )*
                              —
 CR14)
                   (x/Y)1          (X/Y)

 (R15)      Z1 E   log P — log P1


 (Rl6)       (4log P              )*: See Table 5 for a complete listing.
                        1, t+l




 (R17)       (4tlog E            )*: See Table 6 for a complete listing.
                        2, t+l


                          8
 (RiS)      log y E l—w   E W1 log y. —
                       1 i=2                            basey1

                                   8
 CR19)      log P E                     w   (log P. —      log    E.) —
                                                                          baseP1
                        l—w1      i=2

ENDOGENOIJS VARIABLES



log   y1, log P1, U,     log N., IL1,         (X/Y)1, (I/Y)1, Log P, (dY)1;


log y, (B/Y)1, N.1, x1, Z1, (4iilog P1,1 )* (4log E2 t+l )*


PREDETERMINED VARIABLES

Exogenous   Variables
A     A                  'S             1
                                                         RO
g1,            81,t—2' 5lt3'
                                                   log P      ,   log P°1, t
•....   •       .i••. •   ••• ••...:.ua                                    •••.•   ••.._Jn..••.•._•..   •.•'•

                                                                                                  33




  Expected Values Based on Prior Information

   (log *, (X/Y)t

  Lagged Endogenous Variables

  (4Alog E2)*, (4ilog E2,_1)*, (4Alog E2,t..2)*,                     log


  log Ml,t_2. log Ml,t3 Ml,t_l Nl,t_2 Ml,t3, log P1,_1, log

                                        I        I
  log P1,—3' log P1,—4' log P1,_5, log P_1,                     -

                                            log —2' Rlt...l. Rl,t2.


  R1,t3 u1,_1 u1,_2 u1,_3, u1,_4 (x/1,_1, (x/1,_2, x1,_1

  x1,_2               log 37l,t.-l' log              log      log   1_4    log

  log           log                log         log         Z1,_1 Z1,_2 Z1,_3

  Foreign Variables (endogenous in full model)2
                 R                  R
  log E2, log P1, R2, log y1


 Lagged Foreign Variables

 log E2t1. log E2,t2 log E2,t_3. log
                                                           R2,t1 R2_2 R2,t_3 log

 NOTES:

 1. The United Kingdom (index 2) is used as the best alternative capital
     market in estimating the U.S. capital flows equation. Note that this
     equation is irrelevant to the previous equations unless the balance of
     payments affects the U.S. money supply.

 2. In estimating the submodels by principal—components 25L5, we include in
     our instrument list fitted values for these foreign variables based on
     the foreign countries' domestic predetermined variables.
                                                                                                              34



                                                  TABLE      3

                                     Nonreserve Country Submodel
                                     Pegged Exchange Rate Periods
 EQUATIONS
                                                                                                   3
 (Ni)        iog yj =                 +       log y1 + (i—cs2) log                          +
                                 3                           3
                        +                                +                       + cii


 (N2)        log P = log N1 +                      + 812 log y' +         S3(log y.—log y) +

                        +   815[R1 +         (4Alog E. t+l)*] +               (log M.i — log
                                 3
                                              N           +c
                            1=0 j,7+j j,t—i                      j2




 (N3)1             =                 +
             Lij       uj..1             Til + f0J,2+i Alog y1,_ + c13




(N4)2    Alog N =                    +    n2t +              + n4(1 +
                        + n(s1...3 +                             + n.6(log         —
                                                                                       log

                        +
                            n.7[DF.(log P.1 — log
                        + n.8(log P                  —
                                                          log Pj,t—5 + fl19[DF1(logPj,t—3 —logPj,t—5)]
                                            j,t—3

                        + T11,10u1,_1 +                                                +   Ti.
                                                    fl1,1iu1,_2 + n12u.j,t—3                j,
                        +   Ti
                                 j,l4
                                         (B/Y) + Ti
                                             j       j,l5 [DF(B/Y)
                                                            j    jI+           j,l6
                                                                                      [(B/Y)
                                                                                                 j,t—l
                                                                                                         + (B/Y)
                                                                                                                   j,t—2'

                        + nj,17{DF[B/'oj,_1 +
                                                                      (B/Y)1,_2]} + n1,i8[(B/Y),_3 + (B/Y),_4
                        +   Ti
                                 j,l9 {DF.[th/Y
                                        j       j,t_3 + (B/Y)j,_4]} + 6j4
                                                                                                                          35




(N5)    R =           +                    + 6.3(4iilog                 )* +              R          + 5 (4i1og P )*
        3       j]_            3                                                     34 j,t—l             35         j

                 3                                   3              A                      3
            +            j,6+i1j,t—i +
                                                                                     + E j,14              jti    + C35
                1=0                                                                       i=0



(N6)    (X/Y)3 =                       +
                                           032t + e33
                                                          log   P +             034(log Y3 —
                                                                                                         log y)
                           1                                                1
                                                                                                     R
                     + Z 0 5+i0(/Y)3,_1_I + E 0 7÷1lOg
                          1=0
                          1                                             1
                     +             0             log P3,_ + E 0                                log
                                           9+1
                         i=oj,                                      1=0
                          1                                              1
                     + zo
                                    3,13+1
                                           log               i
                                                               +E          0 i5+ij,ti log                                + £36
                                                                        i=0
                                                                                      P
(N7P)   (I/Y) = A                      + A (I/Y)             + A log y
                j         31                32       j,t—l          33
                          I
                                                                —                P
                     + E A 11(log                                   log         y.
                                                                                 3,
                          i=0
                           3
                     +    E A
                         i=0               6+1 j,ti j7


(N8P)   log P log                                +
                                                         + u32Lilog tl

                     + p.3tlog R0 + p34log y +


                     + 36Abog P + 37log E3 + £38
                                                                           36




(N9)    (C/Y) —      +      + 1og RO +

                                                              —
              + 5(4taog Ej ÷i)* +              + j7 [(X/Y)        (I/Y)]
              +      (log Yj —   log   y') + jg].og Yj +   .10ilog Y.

              +                        +
                  10j,ll+ij,t—i            ii4+iR1t_i
              +
                                       E,+i_j)* + j9




(NlO)   No equation for pegged rate periods.
                                                                                      37




IDENTITIES

(Nil)        log         i + 42log              Yj   + (l—42)iog Y,t—i

                                    —                —
(N12P)       (B/Y) E     (X/Y)            (I/Y)          (CIY)

(N13)              log         —   (log   M.)*
          ul

(N14)        .3
                   (X/Y)
                           j   —
                                   (x/Y)3
                               — log
(N15P)       Z log                       P
(Nl6)        (4tlog Pt+i)*: Varies according to country. See Table 5 for

             a complete listing.


(Nl7)        (4log E.t+i)*: Varies according to country. See Table 6 for

             a complete listing.
                             8
(N18)
                  R_ 1       E W. log y. — basey.
             log y. = l—w.
                            i=l
                                   ij

                                    8
(N19)
                   R_= 1            E W(log P. — log E ) — baseP
             log         l—w.
                                   i=l        1                          j
                                   ij
ENDOGENOUS VARIABLES

log Yj log P.., u.,,       log            R.,   (X/Y) (I/Y).,    log P, (C/Y);

log y, (B/Y)., M., x, Z, (4log P. t+l)*, (4log E                             )*
                                                                    jt+l


PREDETERMINED VARIABLES

Exogenous Variables
                                                                             A    A
DF DF_1 log                    log E_1 log Ej2 log E. t—3'
                                                      3,   gj,

                                   log RO log P1, t
                                                                              38




 Expected Values Based on Prior Information

 (log       (X/Y)
 Lagged Endogenous Variables


 (4log E)* (4log E,t_i)*, (4log
                                        E,t_2)*, '1jl' log Mj,t_l.

Mj,t_2 Mj,t_3 log              log         log         log   p1
                                                                   log Pjt_2


R,t_i R,t_2 Rjt...3 (X/Y)...1 (X/Y)_2 j,t—1' j,t—2'

 (BIY),_1 (B/Y),_2 (B/Y)j,_3 (BIY),t_4 log j,t—l' log

                                     log j,t-2' log 't3' log

log jt5' log •t6 log jt—7' log                       Plus any other lagged


endogenous variables appearing in (N4.j).

                                                 4
Foreign Variables (endogenous in full model)

        R        R
log P, L1, log   y

gged Foreign Variables

        R                                   R
log
            1Lt—1' R1,_2, 11,t—3' log


NOTES:



1. The unemployment equation appears culy in the submodels for France and
    the United Kingdom.

2. For the submodels other than France and the United Kingdom, the unemploy-
    ment rate variables u are replaced with logarithmic
                                                        transitory income
    log y. — log yP

3. The variables in curled brackets
                                     appear only in the submodels for France
    and the United Kingdom; see note 1 above.

4. In estimating the submodels by
                                   principal—components 2SLS, we include in
    our instrument list fitted values for these
                                                foreign variables based on
    the forign countries' domestic predetermined variables.
                                                                                                              39




                                                 TABLE 4

                                Nonreserve Country Submodel
                              Floating Exchange Rate Periods
EQUATIONS
                                                                                                          3
                                                         P
 (Ni)                                 +                             + (a12) log 7j,t—l +
            log Y1                        a12 log y1,_
                              3                      3
                     + Zc117+11,...i + 1E0a, ÷jj,t—i + Lii


(N2)     log P =         log              + jl + j2           log            + j3 (log y — log           y)
                    +      R + j5[R
                                  1+                     (4log          E.        i)*] + j6 (log M,_i —       log
                          j4j
                     +    EM
                          3
                         i=O j,7+i j,t—i
                                            A
                                                         +C
                                                              j2


                                                 7
(N3)1   u       u                 +         +                2+i log y1,•_ + C13
                 i,t—l                •ii        i=O




(NA)2   slog M. =                     +          + n.3g. + n14(1 +
                                      A              A
                                                 +                  +                            — log
                     +                                                  .6(log

                     + 7[DF.(log                               — log


                     + n.8(log j,t—3 — log Pt_5) + .9[DF.(log j,t—3 — log 1'j,t—5)]

                     +                               +                        +                    +
                                 J,t—l
                           fljlOU.                       3, lluj,t2               flj,l2Uj,t_3

                     + n 14(B/Y). + it3,15[DF1(B/Y)1] + n1,i6[(B/Y)1,_i + (BfY)....2]
                                 3

                                                                    + (ElY)                                        + /YL 3,
                                                                                                                         t—4'
                         + n
                              j,17
                                          {DF [(B/Y)
                                             j           j ,t—l                   j,t
                                                                                        _21} +
                                                                                                 fj,lS
                         + rj,19{DF j[(B/Y) j ,t—3                  + (B/Y)
                                                                                  ,t—4
                                                                                          ]}   +   4
                                                                                                                40




 (N5)    R         6        + 6 t +6                                    )*+6 R                   +6
          j            ji           j2        j 3(4E1og                             j4               5(4log 1'j)*
                       3                                3                                 3
               +                                +     E6                           +      E6
                   1E06,o+IMj_I                      =o j,10i,_j                         =o                     j5

 (N6)                                 +         +
         (X/Y)                                              log            + 6j4(log          y — log y)
                                1                                          1
                       + Z8                                         + ZO                         R
                                      j5+i   (X/Y)
                                                                       1=0 j 7÷1lOg
                                1                                      1
                       + ZO log                      p            + z e 11+1 log R
                                                                      1=0
                             1                                          1
                       + Z8                   logEjlpt—i + ZO                                          E
                            1—0      j,13+i                                                             j,t—i        j6
                                                    A
(N7F)
                   j6
                            +
                                (I/Y)
                                    j6
                                                -
                                                     j6
                                                                               -
                                                                                   j6
                                                                                        log Yj


              —                                                        P
                  i=0
                            (log
                             j6
                                 y,_j                       — log



                  1=1
                           __ j —ti A
                           )t.j,6+i __ji
                                A.6   j6

(N8F)   log E — log                 Eji — — + —ilog                        P — —1ó.log
                                                U7           U7                    11j7
                                                                                               "L—1

                   —
                           iog
                           Ui7
                                          R0 — —1-Llog
                                                    U17
                                                                  R —
                                                                  i
                                                                           U17

                   —
                           .11og          R —
                                                p17
                                                                                                 41




                                      t+
(N9)     (dY). =
              j        ji +      j2             j3
                                                     log         +     R +
                                                                     j4 j .5(4L1og   E.t+i)*

                  + j6R] +j7                   [(X/Y)
                                                           —
                                                                (I/Y)1
                                                                         + j8 (log yj — log y)

                  +
                       j9
                       2
                            slog y +
                                      j         jlOiog R +
                                                            2
                                                                j 0j,      1i+t,t—i
                  +
                      1=0
                                          LR
                                ,14+i 1st—i
                                            +1=0E j,17+i(4MogEj,t+1—i)*+cj9
(N1OF)   (B/Y). =           +
             3         3        1S2(B/Y),_i + .3i1og E. + .4L1og Ej,t_l

                  + i.5(A1og P,—1 —                   1og Pi.i) +
                                                                           42




IDENTITIES

 (Nil)     log y                  + j2 log Yj +
                                                (i—q2)log

(N12F)                                   —           —
             (I/Y) E       (x/Y)             (B/Y)       (C/Y)

(N13)                log         —   (log N)*
           il



(N14)                (X/Y) —
                                     (X/Y)

(N15F)     log             log           + Z


(N16)      (4iog Pt+i)*: Varies according to country. See Table 5 for

          a complete listing.


(N17)      (4ilog Ejt+i)*: Varies according to country. See Table 6 for

          a complete listing.


                 R                   8
(N18)     log y. E                   E   W.log y — basey
                 J
                             ji=1
                                  ij


(N19)     log                      E W1(log P1 —          log E) — baseP
                             3    1=1
                                  ij


ENDOGENOUS VARIABLES



log Yj   log P, Uj log M1, R (X/Y) Z, log E. (CIY). (B/Y);

log y, (I/Y)., M., .,                log P, (4log Pj+i)*, (4log
                                                                E+i)*
                                                                                43




PREDETERNINED VARIABLES


Exogenous Variables

DF DF t-1' j'                                            log RO log P°1, t

Expected Values Based on Prior Information

 (log M.)*, (X/Y)


Lagged Endogenous Variables

log Ej,t_l log Ejt.2. log Ej,t_3 (4log E.)*, (4log
                                                               E,t_1)*

(4tlog E.2)*, (I/Y). ti' log
                   3,                            Mj,t_l Mj,t_2 Nj,t_3 log

log   j,t—2' log           log             log         log P'       R
                                                            j,t—2    j,t—l   R,t_2

Rj,t_3. (X/Y),_i. (X/Y),_2. (ELY).
                                3, t—l' (B/Y),_2. (B/Y),_3. (BIY),_4,

                                                 P
                          log              log


{u,t_i    log j,t—2' log j,t—3' log j,t—4' log j,t—5' log


log j,t—7' log         3; Plus any other lagged endogenous variables


appearing in (N4.j).


Foreign Variables (endogenous in full model)4

log P, R3, log y


Lagged Foreign Variables
                                                                         R
log l,t—1' log l,t—2' log
                                 3, t-l'   Rii, Rl,t_2, R1t3, log
                                                                           44




NOTES:

1. The unemployment equation appears only in the submodels for France and
    the United Kingdom.

2. For the submodels other than France and the United Kingdom, the unem-
    ployment rate variables u. are replaced with logarithmic transitory
    income log y. —   log   y..

3. The variables in curled brackets appear only in the submodels for
    France and the United Kingdom; see note 1 above.

4. In estimating the subniodels by principal—components 2SLS, we include
    in our instrument list fitted values for these foreign variables
    based on the foreign countries' domestic predetermined variables.
                                                                                                     45




                                           TABLE 5

                  Expected—Inflation Transfer Functions
                                                                                       I




(R16)     (slog                E —0.754        — 1.704
                                                       (log M1)* + 1.001 log Mi,t...i

                               + 0.850 log               — 0.063 slog

                               + 0.248 R — 0.038 R                + 0.008 [R2 — (4Alog
                                        1                 l,t—1                        E2t+i)*]
                               — 0.009 [R2...i —
                                                        (4log E2)*] + 0.158 log
                               — 0.279 log               +1711Ml,t—l +0.222Nl,t-2
                               + 0.020 Ml,t_3 + .160 C116                 — .230   c
                                                                   ,t—1                1,16,t—2

(R16.2)                            —0.09655 + 2.315 (log M2)* — 4.655
          (E1og P2,t+l)*                                                      log M2tl
                               + 2.382     log M2,....2 + 0.186 tlog y             +0.030R2
                                                                           2,t—l
                               + 0.146 R2,t...l + 0.043 [R1 +        (41og E2+i)*]
                               — .035 [Ri,t_i + (4Llog E2)*} +            0.385   log 1'2,t—l
                           •                                                          A
                               — 0.408 log 2,t—2 + 2.052 M2,...i — 0.407
                                           A                                                M2,_2
                               +   0.284 M2,t...3 —    0.238 £2 16 t—l + 0.416
                                                                                           E2,16,t...2


(Rl6.3)   (i1og P3t+l)* —0.060 — 1.002 (log M3)* + 1.053 log M3tl
                               — 0.008 log M3,t...2 + 0.065 1og 3,t—l + 0.301 R3

                               — 0.460
                                       R3,t_l + 0.012 [R1 + (4zlog E3+i)*1
                               — 0.033
                                       [Ri...i + (4iilog E3)*] + 0.433 log P3tl
                               — 0.459 log 3,t—2 + 0.434 M3,t_l — 0.162
                                                                                           M3,t_2
                               —   0.019   M33 —      0.618 C3,16,tl — 0.382
                                                                             £3 16 t—2
                                                                                                           46




 (R16.4)                                    —0.007 — 0.127 (log M4)* + 0.517 log M4,t_l
           (i.log p4,t+i
                                        — 0.393
                                                log N4,....2 — 0.004 tlog 4,t—l + 0.018 R4

                                        +   0.176 R4,t_l — 0.004
                                                                 [R1 + (4log E4,t+l )*J
                                    + 0.014                  + (4log E4)*] + 0.139 log
                                                                                                 4,t—l
                                        —   0.164 log 4,t—2 — 0.227
                                                                      F'
                                                                           M4,t_l
                                    — 0.038                 — 0.073           — 0.513
                                                                                         e4i61
                                    + 0.198 e416...2


(R16.5)    (slog P             )*           —0.064 — 0.021 (log N )* — 0.247 log
                     5,t+1                                       5
                                    + 0.281 log MS,t_2 + 0.166 Mog                        — 0.017
                                                                                                      R5
                                    + 0.044 RSt....l + 0.012 [R1 + (41og E                      )*]
                                                                                     5,t+1
                                    — 0.008
                                            [Ri..i + (4t1og E5)*] + 0.643 log P5,_1
                                    — 0.676 log 1'5,t—2 + 0.215                   + 0.080 M5,_2

                                    + 0.085 M5,_3 — 0.330 c5,16,_1 — 0.670
                                                                                            5,16,t—2

(R16.6)    (slog P             )*           1.858 — 75.036 (log M6)* + 85.887 log M6i
                     6, ti-i

                                    — 10.820
                                             log Mó,t_2 — 0.103 log 6,t—i + 0.069 R6

                                    + 0.154 R6,t_i — 0.031 [R1 + (4Mog E.                       )*1
                                                                                         ,t+1
                                    —       0.018   [Ri,....1 + (4E1og E6)*] —   0.218   log 1'6,t—1
                                    + 0.165 log 6,t—2 + 0.974 M6....i + 27.169

                                    + 8.456 M6t....3 + 0.133
                                                                      C6,16,_1 + 0.640 6,16,t—2

(R16.7)    (1og P
                 7, t+1
                               )* E         0.131 — 0.281 (log M7)* + 0.455 log
                                    —       0.180                   0.026 Lilog 7,t—1 + 1.658 R7
                                                    log 1'5,t—2 —

                                    — 2.219
                                            R7,t_i + 0.044 [R1 + (4log E7+i)*}

                                    + .004 [Ri,_i + (4iilog E7)*] + .092 log
                                                                                           7,t—i
                                    —       .060 log 1'7,t—2 + 0.107 17,t—l + 0.153

                                    + .034 M7,t_3 + 0.131
                                                                                         47




(1U6.8)       (1og 8,t+l )*        —0.221 + 0.017 (1og M8)* + 0.104 log

                               — 0.054 log M8,...2 + 0.237 Elog 8,t—1 — 0.032
                                                                              R8
                               + 0.186 R8,t_l — 0.034 [R1 + (4Llog E8÷i)*]

                               — 0.020                + (4ilog E8)*] — 0.261 log 8,t—l
                                                                                 I'

                               + 0.157 log 8,t—2 — 0.233               + 0.017

                               — 0.058 M8t...3 — 0.339 E8,16,t_1 + 0.292
                                                                         8,l6,t—2


NOTES:

1. These identities are for expected inflation rates per quarter, the
    rates per annum in the model are simply (4Alog P.)*  4(t1og
2. e
       j,16      (1og •+1 — (1og P+i)*
    l,16 e116 — .160           1,16,t—1 + .230 1,l6,t—2

                 e216 + .238                 — .416
                               C2 16 t—l              C2,16 t—2
    3,16 e316 + .618 3,16,t—1 ÷ .382

    £516 e516 + .330 C5,16,t1 + .670 £5 16 t—2

    £6,16 e616 — .133 6,l6,t—1 — .640
    £716         e716 — .131 C
                                  7,16,t—l
    £816 e816 +                                .292
                               £8 16 t1 —             8,l6,t—2
3. The fitted AREA error processes by country are:

   1     (0,2)        5   (0,2)
   2     (0,2)        6   (0,2)
   3     (0,2)        7   (0,1)
   4     (2,0)        8   (0,2)
                                                     TABLE 6

                                   Expected Exchange—Rate Growth

                                     (4Llog E.)*        E   4(Alog E.)*


                             Part A —   Floating Exchange Rate Periods

                (N17F) (Alog                                            +            RO +
                               Ej t+l)*         w1     w12log       P       w131og          W14log   y
                                          +                    +
                                                w15A(IIY)1         w16og     P + W17Alog    E1



The parameters (estimated by OLS) are:

Country
                     W       W13        (L)j4          W15           W16       W17           Floating Periods

2, UK      .00597   .80037 —.02808   1.20971 —2.03867              —.98978 —.20116 1971 111—1976 IV

3,   CA   —.00314   .05183 —.00683      .07509 —.30121              .18038    .31538 1956 1—62 III, 1970 11—76 IV

4,   FR    .06315   .13361 —.06955 —1.13931          1.42566 —3.15593 —.39385 1971 111—1976 IV

5, GE      .00064 —.95133   .05737   —.73465         2.98731       —.13434    .18685 1971 11—1976 IV

6,   IT    .02320 —.08897 —.02900       .76727        .15530       —.35833    .15115 1971 111—1976 IV

7,   JA    .00323 —.03233 —.03956    —.87177         3.92447       —.02198    .20401 1971 111—1976 IV

8,   NE   .02739    .11611 —.07818   —.66181         —.10364 —1.97462 —.35813 1971 11—1976 IV



*The first (Alog E )* defined as above is for the second
                                                         quarter in each floating period.                       The
 previous quarter 1value is defined by the pegged rate period.
                                                                                      49




                Part B — Pegged Exchange Rate Periods


(N17P.2)                        0.0014 — 0.5398 (B/Y)2 + 29.8764 [(BIY)21(B/Y)21]
           (1og E2 t+l)*
                            + 0.1369 (log E2 — log E2) + 0.5283 Mog E2
                            — 0.0197
                                        DR2

(N17P.3)   (log E3      )* E —.0001 — .4222 (B/Y)3 + 33.9022 [(B/Y)31(B/Y)31]

                            — .0089 (log E3 —        log    E3) + .3183 slog E3
                            —
                                C317

(N17P.4)   (Mog E4 t+l)*
                                0.0058 - 1.1289 (B/Y)4 + 131.5500
                                                                  [(B/Y)41(BIY)41]
                            + 0.6546 (log E4 —        log   E4) + .0.7406 Alog E4
                            — 0.0384                — .65             — .35
                                        DR4                                   C417   t—2


(N17P.5)                        -0.0026 + 0.9585 (B/Y)5 — 116.8350
           (log E5 t+l)*                                                    [(B/Y)5kB/Y)51]
                            —   0.2109 (log E5 —     log    E5) + 0.4755 ilog E5

                            + 0.0106 DRl5,_1 — 0.0086
                                                                DR2S,_i

(N17P.6)                        —0.0002 — 0.2118 (B/Y)6 + 17.6550
           (slog E6 t+1)*                                         [(B/Y)61 (B/Y)6J ]
                            — 0.1099 (log E6 —
                                                     log E6) + 0.3194 1og E6
                            —
                                6l7    t—l


(N17P.7)   (i1og E7 t+l)* E —.0013 + 1.9035 (B/Y)7 —            405.337
                                                                          [(B/Y)71(B/Y)71]
                            + .2366 (log E7 —       log    E7) + .2636 slog E7
                            —
                                   £7 17 t—l —       £7 17 t—2

(N17P.8)   (Edog E8    )*       —0.0014 — 0.1362
                                                 (B/Y)8 + 10.9493 [(B/Y)81(B/Y)811
                            — 0.2170 (log E8 —       log    E8) + 0.6339 log E8
                            + 0.0253 DR8
                                              t—l
                                                                         50




NOTES:

1. E is the official parity value. For France only this is set equal to
     E through 1958—IV when a fixed official parity value was established.

2. DR DR15, and
                DR25, are revaluation dummies with value of 1 in the
     indicated quarter and 0 otherwise:

                 1967 IV                      1961   I
     DR2                          DR].5
                 1969 III                     1969 IV
     DR1                          DR25
                                              1961 I
                                  DR8
3.
     e1 E (ilog E.÷i)       — (Lilog   E. t+l)* for all i

                        +
                 e317
     4,l7 e417 + .65 £4 17 t—l +             £4,l7,t2
     £617 E e617 + £6 17 t—l

     £717 - e717 + •5 £7           +
                            17             C7,l7,t_2
4. The fitted ARMA error processes by country are:

     3   (0,1)
     4   (0,2)
     6   (0,1)
     7   (0,2)
                                                                                  51




                                         TABLE 7

               Parameter Values for Foreign Real Income
  and Foreign Price Index Identities (RiB), (R19), (NiB), and (Nl9)


         Country           j      W           basey.         baseP.
         U.s.              1   0.531464       7.40946       —2.53058
         U.K.              2   0.063287       7.36068       —1.32478
         Canada            3   0.046296       7.26361       —1.24117

         France            4   0.077221       7.18014       —1.14182

         Germany           5   0.107001       7.20584       —1.17274

         Italy             6   0.048061       6.93985       —0.920318

         Japan             7   0.107898       6.64583       —0.617771

         Netherlands       8   0.018771       7.17908       —1.183800

Notes:   1.      Nominal income shares are computed        as follows where the
                 time summation is from 19551—l9761V:


                           E(Y/E).
                                  J,,t
                w=       t
                     ______________
                 j     8
                      £ (Y/E).
                     i=l



         2.     The values of basey. and baseP. are such that the mean
                                          3            3
                values of the logarithmic indices are 0 for our base year

                1970. This is equivalent to the 1970 geometric means being 1.
                                                                                                                                       52




                                                              TABLE 8

        Basic Instrument Lists for Computation of Principal Components


                                         Part A —             United      States


Domestic Instruments

                                                                               RO                   RO
g1,                                                                 log   P         ,   log —1' (X/Y),
                     1%            A
log    Mlt.l, Mi,_i, M1t.2, Nit...3,                                log P1,—1' (log P1,_1 — log
 (log P1,_3 —             log l,t—5' log
                                                                         Ri,_i, Rl,t_2, Rl,t_3, u11,
u1,_2 u13, u1,_4 (x/Y)i,_1, (X/Y)i,_2, xit_i,
log
                     Z1,_2
                                          2
Fitted Foreign Instruments
         R FIT                 R         FIT                        R FIT                       R          FIT               FIT
(log P1)         ,     (log                        ,       (log    y1)         ,   (log l,t—l                      '

           FIT                     FIT                            FIT
(R2,_i)                (R,_2)             (R2,_3)


                                   Part B — Nonreserve Countries


Domestic Instruments
                           3       A                   A            A                   A                       RO
[DF., DF                                                                                                                          RO
           b—l1 j'                                                                                       log   P       ,   log '—l'
                                                                          A                 A
(X/Y),                         log                                                                         log '•
                                                                                                                3' t—l'
                  —       log PJt_3)
(log                                          (log           jt...3 —         log       P5) log                 P'
                                                                                                                 j,t—l
Rlt2, Ri,_3, (x/Y)j,_1 (X/Y),_2, xjt_l                                                                     Xjt...3 (B/Y),_i
(B/Y) 2' [(B/Y).3,t—3 + (B/Y),_4J, log
                                                                                   j,t—l'
[u         ,u
     j,t—l  j,t—2' j t—3'                Ujt4]
                                          2
Fitted Foreign Instruments
      R FIT                              FIT                       R FIT                    R             FIT
                      (log                                                                                                  FIT
(log P.)    ,                                  ,           (log   y.)         ,    (log                         , (R1)
          FIT                      FIT                        FIT
                     (R1,_2)              (R1,_3)
                                                                             53




NOTES:

1. Certain variables listed as predetermined variables are not listed
    here because of extreme inulticollinearity with listed variables or
    because they are not predetermined generally for the whole sample
    period.

2. Fitted foreign instruments (indicated by superscript FIT) are obtained
    by fitting log y., log P , and R on the domestic instruments for
    country j for j      1, .   . . , 8.   The indices (log R)FIT and (log pR)FIT
    are obtained by applying identities (R18), (R19), (N18), and (Nl9)
    using the weights in Table 7.

3. The DF. variables are included only for estimates spanning the entire
    period; i.e., they are omitted in estimates made for only the pegged
    or floating period.

4. For nonreserve countries other than the United Kingdom and France,
    log y. —   log   y is substituted for u,.
                                                                          54




                    General Notes for Tables 9 through 18


1. Standard errors appear in parentheses below the estimated coefficients.

    The t-values appear below the standard errors. Unless otherwise noted,

    the period of estimation is 19571 — 19761V.

2. All estimations are based on the principal—components—2SLS method (see

    Section IV)    using   the TROLL system at M.I.T.

3. We generally report Durbin's h for equations with a lagged dependent

   variable. In those cases in which Durbin's h cannot be calculated

    (is imaginary), we report instead the (biased) Durbin—Watson statistic

    in brackets.
                                                                                            TABLE   9

                                                                             REAL INCOME EQUATIONS (El) AND (Ni)

                                                                                 Dependent Variable:       log
                                                                                                                 Yj
               Const.     bogybt_l         H1        Mj,_i         Mj,_2     Nj,t_3       g1                      1,_2       j,_3        j        j.tl        1J,t-2     X1_3
Country         01,1        °j,2           Oj,3                    0J,5      01,6       Oj,7                                                                                          2
                                                                                                    01,8      _j,9          01,10       0111       j,l2            •;_    01,14              S.E.E.   0—V
United          0.0079     0.0747        0.7784     0.5902    —0.0470       0.8172    —0.0345      0.1128      0.0547       0.0837
States                                                                                                                                  0.7428      0.4548    —0.0415    —0.9251    0.9982   0.0087   1.81
               (0.0010)   (0.0352)      (0.3116)   (0.2208)   (0.2305)     (0.2326)   (0.0545)    (0.057))    (0.0545)     (0.0563)    (0.4943)
                8.082      2.124         2.498      2.673                                                                                          (0.4148)   (0.4282)   (0.4255)
                                                              —0.204        3.513     —0.632       1.969       1.002        1.489       1.503       1.097     —0.097     —2.174
United      0.0056         0.2259      —0.1974      0.0404    —0.0262      —0.1269     0.1831     0.0274      0.1069      —0.0240      0.1897      0.4127     —0.2129     0.0069    0.9923   0.0140   1.91
Ktngton    (0.0016)       (0.0867)     (0.1418)    (0.1008)   (0.0954)     (0.0930)   (0.0540)   (0.0603)    (0.0575)     (0.0511)    (0.2348)    (0.1799)
            3.533          2.605       —1.392       0.401                                                                                                     (0.1886)   (0.1916)
                                                              —0.275       —1.365      3.395      0.454       1.860       —0.420       0.808       2.293      —1.129      0.036
Canada      0.0108         0.1376       0.3020      0.2068     0.1044       0.1943    —0.0049    —0.1641     —0.0283      —0.0135      0.6833      0.1648     —0.0287     0.5699    0.9982   0.0122 2.42
           (0.0014)       (0.0613)     (0.1644)    (0.1052)   (0.1057)     (0.1022)   (0.0554)   (0.0604)    (0.0536)     (0.0547)    (0.3606)
            7.845          2.245        1.837                                                                                                     (0.2401)    (0.2358)   (0.2495)
                                                    1.966      0.988        1.901     —0.088     —2.714      —0.528       —0.247       1.895       0.687      —0.122      2.284
France      0.0125         0.0833      —0.2651      0.0688     0.1001      —0.0552     0.0441     0.0075         0.0518    0.0164      0.3421     —0.7154      0.0153
           (0.0020)       (0.0695)                                                                                                                                        0.1215    0.9969   0.0180   2.13
                                       (0.3130)    (0.1848)   (0.1823)     (0.1776)   (0.0411)   (0.0415)    (0.0409)     (0.0403)    (0.4893)    (0.3847)    (0.3919)   (0.4069)
            6.219          1.198       —0.847       0.312      0.549       —0.311      1.089      0.180       1.265        0.408       0.700      —1.860       0.039      0.299
Genuany        0.0108      0.0451       0.3515      0.0694    —0.0173       0.0408    —0.0349     0.0286     —0.0076       0.0139      0.2780     —0.2451     —0.3293    —0.5084
           (0.0015)       (0.0425)                                                                                                                                                  0.9974   0.0133   1.94
                                       (0.1511)    (0.1107)   (0.1094)     (0.1105)   (0.0275)   (0.0276)
            7.233                                                                                            (0.0271)     (0.0273)    (0.2648)    (0.2215)    (0.2339)   (0.2268)
                           1.076        .238        0.621     —0.158        0.369     —1.273      1.033      —0.281        0.510       1.050      —1.107      —1.408     —2.242
Italy       0.0140        —0.0354      —0.0641      0.0330     0.2744       0.0022    —0.0023    —0.0125      0.0018       0.0142     —0.7477
           (0.0027)                                                                                                                                0.1041      0.2737    —0.1605    0.9953   0.0189 1.03
                          (0.0671)      (0.2027)   (0.1428)   (0.1480)     (0.1531)   (0.0150)   (0.0150)    (0.0145)     (0.0145)    (0.2752)    (0.2913)    (0.2683)
            5.094         —0.523       —0.316       0.231      1.854        0.014                                                                                        (0.2418)
                                                                                      —0.155     —0.829       0.123        0.974      —2.717       0.357       1.020     —0.663
Japan       0.0204        —0.0178       0.1427      0.1083     0.1856       0.0884     0.0443    —0.0196      0.0450      —0.0393     —2.0920      0.3499     —1.7648    —0.7337    0.9992   0.0155   1.97
           (0.0017)       (0.0351)     (0.1725)    (0.1148)   (0.1141)     (0.1140)   (0.0362)   (0.0371)    (0.0361)      (0.0366)   (1.0645)    (0.9034)
           11.710         —0.508        0.827       0.944                                                                                                     (0.9331)   (0.9308)
                                                               1.621       0.775       1.223     —0.527       1.247       —1.074      —1.965       0.387      —1.891     —0.788
Nether—     0.0100         0.0756       0.3078      0.1988     0.0352       0.0237     0.0352    —0.0586     —0.0014       0.0180
lands                                                                                                                                 —0.1159     —0.1186      0.0943    —0.1334    0.9977   0.0134   1.71
           (0.0015)       (0.0541)     (0.1496)    (0.1231)   (0.1221)     (0.1115)   (0.0)66)   (0.0385)    (0.0373)     (0.0378)
            6.591          1.381        2.058                                                                                         (0.1312)    (0.0961)    (0.0884)   (0.0847)
                                                    1.607      0.288        0.212      0.962     —1.520      —0.036        0.477      —0.884      —1.235       1.066     —1.575
 Note:    a.           appears as                    +
                0)2                  012 log                       log
                                                         (l_012)
See   aleo General Note..
                                                                               56




                                        TABLE 9A

F-STATISTICS FOR GROUPS OF DEMAND SHOCK VARIABLES FOR ESTIMATES IN TABLE 9


Country                                     F(4/66) Statistics

                          M variables          g variables       x variables
United States                7.128                 1.820            2.188
United Kingdom               1.164                 3.531            1.763
Canada                       2.315                 3.191            1.858
France                       0.341                 0.783            1.006

Germany                      1.473                 0.748            2.353

Italy                        0.899                 0.517            3.426
Japan                        1.152                 1.141            1.660
Netherlands                  1.530                 1.137            1.675



NOTES: 1. The reported F-statistics are appropriate for testing the
           joint hypothesis that all four of the demand shock variables
           of the type indicated have a coefficient of zero. Such a
           test is conditional upon the other variables entering in the
              equation.

          2. For F(4/66), the 10 percent significance level is 2.04, the
              5 percent significance level is 2.52, and the 1 percent
              significance level is 3.63.
                                                                                  TABLE   10

                                                                   PRICE LEVEL EQUATIONS (R2) AND (N2)

                                                                       DEPENDENT VARIABLE:      log
                                                                                                      P
                               p                   p              R+
                Const.     logy                                   1
                                     logyj—logyj          R          E                                        M3       M,1_1      Mj,_2
                                                                    °,+1                                                                                                   h
                                                                                                                                                            2
Country                                                                                                                                                 R       S.E.E.   [D—w)
                             J2           j3              j4           j5                 8j6                 8j7        J8         BJ9
United          0.0851    —0.0224     —0.0915           0.3489     —0.0011           —0.9907               —0.7145    —0.3961     0.1655     0.0164    0.9997 0.0035     1.69
 States        (0.1067)   (0.0058)     (0.0199)        (0.0685)     (0.0117)         (0.0248)              (0.1503)   (0.0924)   (0.0914)   (0.1028)
                0.798     —3.863      —4.601            5.094      —0.097           —39.974                —4.754     —4.288      1.810      0.160

United        —0.2409     —0.0313      —0.3687          0.4405      0.0815          —0.8571                —0.7401     0.0374    —0.1519    —0.1675    0.9983 0.0147     0.66
 Kingdom       (0.1361)   (0.0282)     (0.1490)        (0.1694)     (0.0355)         (0.0548)              (0.1734)   (0.1065)   (0.1009)   (0.0996)
              —1.770      —1.113      —2.476            2.601       2.295           —15.646                —4.269      0.351     —1.506     —1.681

Canada          0.1175    —0.2196     —0.1519           0.2487     —0.0209           —0.6260               —1.0824    —0.2690    —0.2761    —0.6435    0.9978 0.0116 —1.64
               (0.0421)   (0.0368)     (0.0678)        (0.1372)    (0.0981)          (0.0606)              (0.1504)   (0.1080)   (0.1046)   (0.1051)
                2.789     —5.967      —2.242            1.813      —0.213           —10.329                —7.199     —2.491     —2.641     —6.121

France         0.0692     —0.0247     —0.0189           0.4813      0.0239          —0.9918                —0.7633    —0.2414     0.0248     0.0494    0.9987 0.0105      3.57
               (0.0554)   (0.0250)     (0.0576)        (0.0852)     (0.0196)         (0.0203)              (0.1927)   (0.1111)   (0.1059)   (0.1045)
                1.248     —0.987      —0.328            5.647        1.216          —48.824                —3.962     —2.172      0.234      0.473

Germ_any       0.0818     —0.0662     —0.0062           0.0227     —0.0089          —0.9335                —1.0874    —0.1448    —0.3170    —0.3196    0.9993 0.0063      2.85
               (0.0517)   (0.0228)     (0.0255)        (0.0448)    (0.0168)          (0.0200)              (0.0774)   (0.0518)   (0.0521)   (0.0571)
                1.583     —2.900      —0.245            0.506      —0.527           —46.760               —14.049     —2.798     —6.084     —5.601

Italy          0.2650     —0.0816       0.0301          0.2616     —0.0249          —0.9411                —1.1978    —0.1885    —0.3956    —0.1806    0.9988 0.0116      2.05
               (0.2706)   (0.0482)     (0.0750)        (0.1851)     (0.0398)         (0.0254)              (0.1255)   (0.0895)   (0.0924)   (0.0927)
               0.979      —1.695        0.402           1.413      —0.626           —37.032               —9.544      —2.107     —4.281     —1.948

Japan          0.4466     —0.2017     —0.0621          0.9316       0.0873          —0.8273               —1.0066     —0.3656    —0.3207    —0.3017    0.9987 0.0119      2.67
               (0.1109)   (0.0363)     (0.0421)        (0.4464)    (0.0376)          (0.0296)              (0.1165)   (0.0839)   (0.0849)   (0.0876)
               4.026      —5.562      —1.474           2,087        2.322          —27,963                —8.640      —4,358     —3,779     —3.445

Netherlands   —0.0057     —0.0796       0.0938         0.0227      —0.0397          —0.8941               —1.0174     —0.4761    —0.6534    —0.2813    0.9989 0.0109      1.92
              (0.0417)    (0.0332)     (0.0526)        (0.0945)     (0.0288)         (0.0347)              (0.1271)   (0.0866)   (0.0889)   (0.0868)
              —0.136      —2.397        1.785          0.241       —1.380           —25.750               —8.008      —5.497     —7.352     —3.243


Note:   a. For the United States, the foreign interest rate is
                                                               R2—(41ogE2 t+l
                                                                         1
See aleo General Notes.
                                                                         TABLE 11

                                                                 —— RATE
                                                       UNEMPLOYMENT      EQUATIONS (R3) AND (N3)

                                                               DEPENDENT VARIABLE:   Eu

              Conat.
                         Mogy1     lo8Y,_     lORYJ,t_2      1°'J,t—3    tdoY1,_4
Country                                                                               lO8Yj,t_5      lO8Yj,t_6   lOY11_7
                          'rj,2      'rJ,3      Yj,4            'rj,5      'rj,6            'rJ,7                                    S.E.E.    D—W
                                                                                                       'rj,8       YJ9
United       0.0046     —0.1952    —0.1876    —0.0528        —0.0624       0.0529          0.0177    -0.0349
 States      (0.0004)   (0.0277)                                                                                 —0.0602    0.8089   0.0019   1.36
                                   (0.0241)   (0.0235)       (0.0232)     (0.0234)
            11.183      —7.055                                                            (0.0237)   (0.0244)    (0.0226)
                                   —7.802     —2.248         —2.691        2.257           0.746     —1.431      —2.668
United       0.0023     —0.0849    —0.0327    —0.0660        -0.0556     —0.0415          —0.0165    —0.0057
 KIngdom     (0.0003)                                                                                             0.0004    0.4428   0.0016   1.26
                        (0.0162)   (0.0125)   (0.0122)       (0.0125)
              7.031                                                      (0.0126)         (0.0126)   (0.0129)    (0.0126)
                        —5.252     —2.616     —5.407         —4.437      —3.300           —1.311     —0.444       0.028
France       0.0019     —0.0339    —0.0360    —0.0240       —0.0125      —0.0037          —0.0116
            (0.0003)                                                                                  0.0005      0.0074    0.4492   0.0009
                        (0.0077)   (0.0058)   (0.0060)       (0.0059)
                                                                                                                                              1.40
             6.648                                                       (0.0059)         (0.0060)   (0.0060)    (0.0058)
                        —4.385     —6.202     —4.010        —2.116       —0.628           —1.944      0.079       1.285

See General Notes.




                                                                                                                                                     /1
                                                                 TABLE        12

                                                                PART      A
                                       RESERVE-COUNTRY          NOMINAL—MONEY EQUATION (R4)




A log      =    0.4612 A log                  —    0.2295       A log                  +    0.0044      +       0.0003     t
      M1                     Ml,t_l                                       Mi2
               (0.1158)                           (0.1159)                                 (0.0028)             (0.0000)
                3.984                             —1.981                                    1.587               5.057


           +   0.0040             +   0.0016                +                   +      0.0293               +
                                                  1t—l          1,_2)               (0.0200)'
                                                                                                                lt—4
               (0.0286)               (0.0205)
                0.141                 0.076                                          1.465


           —                              —                      —       0.2372                     —                          —   0.1167
                0.0576     (log                                                     (log                log                                   u1,_1
                                  P1,_        log l,t—3                                    l,t—3              'l,t—5               (0.1930)
               (0.0905)                                                  (0.0996)
               —0.636                                                 —2.381                                                       —0.604


           +    0.5393                —    0.4316 u                  —        0.0546
                                                      1,t—3
               (0.3627)                   (0.3670)                         (0.1950)
                1.487                     —1.176                          —0.280


                   =    0.5624,        S.E.E. =   0.0046,            [D—w =    2.051


See General Notes.


                                                                                                                                                      0Ui
0
                      (891    (0(0 06L1— 9919 (690             6690
                            (L661o) (Iuro) ((ono) (Ut,-!) (6(000)
                                                                                                 69r0—    96E1—     0691    (1(0    09(0     19(0     (((1
                                                                                              (octo) (90160) (1,16o) (61vo) (16Uo) (06910) (61910) (0(910) ((1(00)   Olrl—        l6l                99r1—     (961      1516       ((Cl
    ill             ((1660)
        0910o ocuo 61160— 6160o 11111— lt6(O looLo 01690                                        16200— 996(0—     tlno     9(100 66900 99600 029(0 06U0             16100
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (10(00) (60,00) (10000) (0100-0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    66(00- I9'900 (000-0 L600•O 'PIiqlSU
                      ,911—   1916     09t(—   966(    11t0 ocei                                 o96i     6160—     oro—    t,oo 99o0 9901— oLE! tio-t— ,i,-o                                        00(0    996-0—  6,ro— 96E8
                    (((910) (lIlt 0) (00000) (91190) (99611) (00111)                          ((,610) (96110) (169r0) (OlIrO) CUll 0) (06110) (IlIro) (lllIo) (99(00)                              (92000) ((6,00) (10000) (I,ooo)
    (El csioo o91y0 ce6— 60191 0(166— 00(11 oico— 01662                                         ((0(0 9(9U0-      l1600—   66000   69100   looro—   91090   16960—  69(00                           ((CEO 6I600— 0000'O— 00(00
                      0060    60(0—    611o—   19(8    0(6 11(6—                                 (Cr1—    0(O       1690—   6660    1(10—    l001    9610    6190—   6601—                           6911—   9810—  1110    6011
                    (6660!) (60010) ((toE!) (06101) (10(06) (915(2)                           (Uuo (01110) (6(060)        (91(ro) (cIoro) (0666-0) (((cr0) (09160) (616o0)                         (60600) (U8oo) (6oooo) (6110-0)
    918 06600 60190— 10160 10(rO— 90660- 1(9(0 116(9 •669•S—                                    (((('0— (6110 (16I0        99110   IPOrO— 969r0     1(900 62(80- LZ(00—                             96(00- 19100- coooo 16100               (1.11
                      0100    9061     6990    66(0    Uoo     9016                              (690     C011—     9090    9It0- 1991 (((1— (El— (6(0 (640—                                         19E0—     (Sri      9660—      16e1
                    (090E0) (0,11o) (06900) (lItre) (91110) (691co                            (16(ro) (otIro) (00910) (1(110) (1909-0) (11610) (9161-0) (0106-0) (l2(Eo)                           (8120-0) (60(0-0) (1000-0) (o6ooo)
    0(1 ((lEO S910 64(00 66060 l6(10 9(600 96100 61991                                          09000    6?6V0—   0(010    09600- ((990    06090-   910E0—  11600   66(00-                          69100- (9600      10000- 09100
                      2T10    SIll 6(20- (660 9600 (lEO—                                         9002—    19((     (961—    (990    0060—   1(E0—    L661    59E0—   1910—                           106'!   6)10        116(—   9(E9
    111 51100 919t0 (,1000) (15610) (0(900) (09210) (10011) (10990)                           (Soar!) (960(1) (699rC) ((1(9-1) (6(00-0) (6l600) (066(0) (6060-0) (1280-n)                          (16600) (Ps2oo)     (1000-0)(16000)
                     60900   01610    ((Cr0- tt!(0 1(010 09090-                                C6606— 06611       69t09— 66561     66960- ((cEo- 59160      66600— p1100—                           10(00   0(000       (0000- 96(00
                          16r1    6690       9991—      5111        6(01         9000            902'0-   0S10-    96!0-    1990    (000-   1110     0100    0((0- 06E0-                            SIE(       1661      ICE!       1908
                        (91,11) (9(01-0)    (NIrl)    (01600) (018(6) ColOr!)                 ftOoro)   ((6)8-0) (69821) (65181) (1696-0) (66091) (19660) (660r0) (66901)                          ((1900)   (09101)   (60001)    600o)
    S11 (9100   09610    990I    691r0      69661—     66(50   l(0(( s,oro—                    (1900—    11101—   90(00- 50(91 91001— C(110— 609(1 61611- 6(001—                                    69910     96110     60001      10101    'P3
                          (090—    (651      9(01—     0166         616(    (lEo-   (092—   6616    (01—    6191                               91r0—    9(91
                                                                                                                                                     6010    99(0    8690                    1911     (((1              1000-      1960-
                        (59(00)   (01081)   (ftno (6ur0)          (99001) (9(9(0) (612(1) (99(61) (660(1) (IOIEI)                             12180)   (96(811 (91(61)    (10)6-0) (19901) (8960-0) (9690-0)           (6000-0)   ((0901)
    661 01100 599(0      60080—   60((0     l1(60-     96990       16611   66100— ,slr,—   01101   96(01— (lIE!                               50101—    19610   80(01      11100    66800   o9cl'o   91901             00000-     56000—
                 (I               .ii       i1r       ,t1          ctI           PV1          (1'(u    l1•lu       11I           01l           6l       51       11                         u                           t1         11ü
                                                             ((0-11(5/9)   4 (_1'8(1/1)l1ga)
                                                                                        61'Iü+            l''1uiu         +   (h1(A/I)I 9116 + (((11(5/9) , 11't(1/I)IlAO) 11Ij
                                                     + 1—2    1(1/1)1   9116    i I'uiu1o1      (116    1, 911             ,—V10     C1I              L—11 Irr6 1—11 o11 +
                                                                                                                                              (1l, (11ü
                                                                   ((6_I   .I   •1   —
                                                                                         till   101,r101r6     (cS1l      SoT   —   (—I1   101)     + ((611 5o   —    1i1     101)1101 116    +
                                                                        ((11j 001        —   1111 °1) 9I       (9—11! +       11!)    cr, +   (6—119   1—11,) 016 •   1   u   +   1(111   + 11 —   0o
                                                                                                 (91)1901191161 U9(1I-'IVMINON £V.llE-1A11l91Nl1I
                                                                                                                       I lVl
                                                                                                                  U 1liv&
                                                      TABLE 12A

                      Interpretation of (B/Y). Coefficients in Table 12, Part B



                           Pegged Period                               Floating Period

                  Impact                 Cumulative             Impact              Cumulative                Mean Value
                                                                                                              of (H/Y)
Country        Money Effecta            Money Effectb       Money Effecta          Money Effectb

United
Kingdom           —0.058                      0.125              0.181                 0.201                       0.1122

Canada            —0.007                      0.138              0.210                 0.125                       0.0652

France            —0.057                      0.235             —0.042                 0.229                       0.1394

Germany            0.158                      0.280              0.160                 0.353                       0.0957

Italy             —0.882                   —0.185                0.152                 0.862                       0.1617

Japan              0.165                      0.656              0.123                —0.035                       0.0734

Nether-
lands              0.045                      0.150              0.121                —0.223                       0.1076



Notes:    a.   This is the fraction of the current effect of the balance of payments on nominal
                                                                                               1og       H.
               money which is not sterilized by the central bank; computed as                                      fcoeffi—
                                                                                                 '


               dent   of                x [mean value of             where     is high—powered money.
                                                                                                         ,
                           (B/Y)1]                         (H/Y)1]
          b.   This is the total effect including lagged adjustments by the central bank;                           corn-
                           alog    M4
               puted as        ,           [ coefficients    of (B/Y).         x   [mean value of (u/Y).].
                            aB/H).                                     J,tLJ                                   3
                                            -I-



          c.
                                   '
               Sample mean for 19571—1976IV.
                                                                                                                              I-..




                                                                                                     S
N
                                    OUT       6960       (901       g(1•1     (190    oIZO            1(00—         6600    19V0             1611         061I—     6000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S100   10     I
                                  1009oo)   ((6,00)    10(900)    (00900)    U9(00) t,6w0)          (01100)       (99(00) (60900)                                              9(90       6610!      11(1—      6661        69L1
         991    t4000    tocro     0,100     P(100      flLO•0     06610                                                                   (604o0)     (06600)    (61110)    (90100)    (0(100)    (9690o)     (1000-0)   (0600-0)
                                                                              19100      6906)0      90000-        01000   0(!00            c(1l•0      1910-      1(100      £0600      696L0      16110—     (0000       19000       •ptIS91•l
                                    6100      9000       6cr o—     oOto       icro       66(0       ,ort          OU•O            £(1t      0(L9         ZO(—                 O6I
                                  (llcoo)   ((160-0)   (60coo)    (60100)    (0(000)    (c(oOo)     (Uoo0)        (Uoo0)      (11000)
                                                                                                                                                                    9960—                 09000      0191       (sr—        1060—
         1(1    4000•O   (0160     ((00•0    £(ZO•o     16(00—     01000      90001      60001                                             (0100o)     (9000o)    (10100)    (91000)    (60(01)    (10101)    (00001)     (10901)
                                                                                                    6(000         60001        06101—       09101       91(01-     00101—     (((O•O     (0001      (6(00      10000—      4l00•0-
                                    6001—
                                  (66(01)
                                              0991—   0900          (60        609.0-     (101       61(1—         OLO1         0101         L96•1       boo—       0161—      çi—          OIl      (406
         911                                (((901) (00901)       (10101)    (96001)    (00000)    (0c000)       (6(001)      (69(01)      (*9(01) (99(01)                                                      1001        06(1—
    .           0,001    £0560     41000—    11901—  (9101         60601      ((001—                              1(000-                                          (((601)    (69(01)    (Clooo)    ((0600)    (10001)     (09001)
                                    0960—     6141       11,1—
                                                                                         £000.0     9(001—                     (0600        01601       61601—     69(01-     11(01'     (9901      (1(00      0000'O      16001-           £lI
                                  091610)
                                                                   (600—       996'O     ,oro—   01,0              6160-        016'l        0961        0911       0900       6106—      60('O
         191                                ((6610)    (1161-0)   096010)    (16(00) (C(100) (09(00)             (90(00)      (69600)      (99601)                                                   6961       9(L•1       $900
                (1100                                                                                                                                  (1(60'O)   (00610)
                         6101'O    £0110—
                                   (1(0
                                             £IST'o
                                              19(1
                                                        0(900—
                                                        6(61
                                                                   ILLO'O—
                                                                    (011
                                                                              19101
                                                                               196•o—

                                                                                       6(000
                                                                                         (990-
                                                                                                (1100
                                                                                                 0190
                                                                                                                  6(100-
                                                                                                                   6061—
                                                                                                                               (6061
                                                                                                                                   6090
                                                                                                                                            10611       (coro      9000'O
                                                                                                                                                                             (66401) (,6I0'O)
                                                                                                                                                                              909I0- I660'O
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (06010)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    90110
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (10000)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               10001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ((000'O)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0001          D0
                                  (((tOo)   (oIo('o)                                                                                         6061—       066'l—     ll0'(—     64(0      9009        1161       961'Z
         09t                                           (061(0)    (0609-0)   (oI(o'o) (l((o'o) (11(01)           (11(01)      ((lorD)      (Il0t'O)                                                                         0691
                0600'O   09100    £IS0'O
                                   90(0—
                                             (cOrn
                                              II1'0-
                                                       1(11'O
                                                         6600
                                                                   9(110
                                                                    0900-
                                                                              91T00-
                                                                               1901
                                                                                         I610'0-
                                                                                          IIVI
                                                                                                    (010,0        oto-o—      ootoo         (160'O-•
                                                                                                                                                       (66601)
                                                                                                                                                        ecoro—
                                                                                                                                                                  ((161'o)
                                                                                                                                                                  1,6(00—
                                                                                                                                                                             (6190'o)
                                                                                                                                                                              (0001
                                                                                                                                                                                        (6660'O)
                                                                                                                                                                                        91090
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (6110-0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    01111
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (1000'O)
                                                                                                                                                                                                               l000'0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (((00'o)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           19001          •'1
                                  (0(100)   ((6111)    ((9110)    ((1,(U0)   ((910'0)   (9609'O)
                                                                                                     (900-
                                                                                                   (O09o'o)
                                                                                                                   091'l—  106(              (((1        1(10       10l'O      91(0       l6O'TT     (966       6661—      ((91
        991     00001    966E0    (((01'                                                                         (09100) (9090'o)          09L90'O)    169901)    (,S0V0)    161(0-0)   (OcorO)               (l000'0)
                                            00101—     (1(01       61001-     10(0.0     96600      0L00'0-       01900- 00010              1691'O      ((l0'O
                                                                                                                                                                                                   *0(10-0)               (09001)
                                   £0I'l
                                                                                                                                                                  (9101—      09001      66660      60600      1000'0-     1(001          '993
                                              1(0'0-     (tOO       660't     9000       (91'0       (0L'O         11,91—      LZ61         6(91
                                  (9111o)   (61(10)    (09610)    ((0910)    (96(0-0)   (1090'S)                                                         19r0      ((p1—      9(11     1999          190'O      6061       (9(1
        I(611   01000              (9600                                                           (6090'O)      (60100)     (16600)       (9960'o)               (99600)
                         60160               6(000-    9910'0     698I'O      1100'O     £0100      6Z(0'0        9(600-
                                                                                                                                                       ((690'O)              (1090'O)(11U0)        (6990'0)   (10001)     (t900'0)
                                                                                                                              tcloo        69(01        flL00     6(0(1—     (Ll0'0- 191E0         61000       (0001      96000
                                    9160-    I(11       9((1       1091       6061        1610       ((91          9690-   69(1             0(10        11(1       0661—
                                  (66(00)   (606(0)    (6*900)    ((09(0)    ((o(00)    (91101)                                                                               06(1—       4991      1I0L        660'S      9661
         L0-    91001    (9(60    L(I(0-    60060      100(•0
                                                                                                   (0090-0)      (06100) (9016-0)          (9091'o)    (,((I'o)   (I(OrO)    (69601)    (16601)    (09000)    (000rrO)    (09001)         .1I)9
                                                                  0(691      06101       61(0'0     6610'O        60(01- 0(961              11601      160(0      0(1(0-     90060-     11SL'O      690('O     00001      4600'0          991006
        t—
         '                 o      11'1      911
                                            (3'f-
                                                       ci'I,      oi'F       ci'1       zi'1,      ti•1          01'1          619          919         11         919        sI,                   (1         rI,         ii            £3103
                                  6—1r
                                       -               1—1'1
                                                            —
                                                                    1,
                                                                     -              -   6q1-       t_i' -
                                                                                                                   II-        (-'t-        g—ar6
                                                                                                                                                  —
                                                                                                                                                                    1N
                                                                                                                                                                     -          (1
                                                                                                                                                                                         019
                                                                                                                                                                                        i—or9      •(1+lIJ                .)..O
                                                                                                                                                                             loivo)                 10190)
                                                                                                                            .lq.l.A 1fl•99d,0
                                                                                                              (ci) 099   (69) 690169001 3&v9—6sm6i
                                                                                                                              (1   31991
                                                                                                                                                                                      "l°N IV1U   S
                   ttioo o90— 99co— 6i1 S11— L0E 0960                      ,orz— 6O1—     69c 690
                  (ctoo) (o1oo) (cctvo) (zt6oo) (zc6o) (cBo) (06vo) (Icoro) (9scro) (u9ro) (Tro) (oc1o) (69vo)  98V1            6001—  U61
                                                                                                                              (9zooo) (oro)
                                                                                                                                                08
(6r116T00 B9crO Z0000 fl000— tc9oo— ZttUO 6t10— 0LL90 991O ctco— o6r0— UL90                      61900   ctro 1(6V0 (ocloo)
                                                                                                                       utoo 9W00— ozro —iq
                    c980—   'L9O     LO— 911        c9rt—  Z691    911— cro        18Z    OVZ—    00(T    c19   616Z—   9BO— 9190— 80—
                  (c000o) (oooo)   (91100) (9oO0) (oo) (c9oo) (tsoo) (9too) (o0o) (coo) (c6ouo) (9o1o) (6uoo) (ooo) ftoooo) (o8oo)
 cco— 1ooo 19u0 0ooO—      t0000    6U00— 0S00     t8O0— L1900    0EE00— iuoo     61V0   1960 0—                                     uro
                                                                                                          atro cooo— ooo— wooo— c6(oo— uedç
                   1t000—   L(1      (S(     0690—  (€91   tSE—    9c01—   090     91( 1Z91— 6Ct 961 9cc0— tc61 0990— 1Z—
                  (ciooo) (clooo) (ztcoo) (96oo) (toro) (69!ro) (oz6oo) (ooovo) (Lttro) (z8ro) (9',cFo) (oro) (c89oo) (c9ooo) (lIooo) (uRro)
(6911 61000 cc960 00000— 00O0       09810   itO0— 9Z8O cLr.o— 1160 0— 09i00       L61O ZLZO— 8UO 09610 19t00— 99100            60OO0— 9B80—
                    9cc0    T90—     p9(0    0C1    90c0   8,91 09t1— tcco— PJZO— lIFT            (8F0    (0 T01 9tF 8c60— 660
                  (tcooo) (Tcooo) (zzzoo) (cooo) (189oo) (O1Vo) (9zivo) (cvo) (868oo) (99o1o) (cro) (911o) (9eoo) (ccooo) (T1000) (ucoo)
(cFTI 9c000 96960 1t000    £1000—   66000   8O00   900 cteto 6t6V0— c99Fo— 1IO0— U6T0 110 689C0 ccoo 960O 01000— 160V0 £uuuj
                    TIn— L6T0—
                  (cooo)
                                             ctcc 6cc,cc   6U0 6FO— uro— 9zco             9LZ     8BZ     8111                  06F,—  c911
                                   (8coo) (861oo) (l8oo) (attoo) (oc9oo) (68900) (oono) (tovo) (196oo) (6ITVO) (Boo) (6o00) (11000) (Lc9oo)
                                                                                                                                                                   99
9—          c9960 cooo— (cooo)
        ocooo              1000 0—  0t900   LS900  cL810  0100    6tc00— STZOO—          8((Z'0                 coo
                                                                                                 9OZ0 6961'0 11100     6tT00 zcooo— Tt8VO
                            c6nI—
                        (zotoo)
                                       ocni
                                      (Ttoo)
                                                  t8T
                                                 (096Fo)
                                                            1991—     190—       t90          9i90—
                                                           (T6oo) (o68oo) (o',6oo) (9oo) (99oo) (Icino)
                                                                                                        cri     8I1         8c0T
                                                                                                                           (oono)
                                                                                                                                      ,tz
                                                                                                                                     (9Tno)
                                                                                                                                                tcz
                                                                                                                                               (uno)
                                                                                                                                                         itro—
                                                                                                                                                        (o6Loo)
                                                                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                                                                  (uooo)
                                                                                                                                                                             t9FT—
                                                                                                                                                                            (EIooo)
                                                                                                                                                                                        98
                                                                                                                                                                                      (o8oo)
Ico1 19000 ooc6o scsoo—               coo        cz,vo      6zcno— zccoo—  1cO0     9T00—  ccBoo  Lt0                       060V0    T',Tro     9t90    88900—     6800o    cooo—      L6'?0   peun
                          L',LT        66L0—       ct
                                                 (oo)        9oc1   icnc    oert     pirT—  Z961—  6L(1                     8800—     9660      96C1     tcco—               iict—      819L
                        (6600o)       (99oiro)             (oeoO) (cc6oo) (coma) (9z1oo) (too) (slmno)                     (cIvo) (coro)       (9ano)   (c6goo)   (9ooo)    (oloFo)   (cOsoo)moput
196T1   69000   L960 (1100            69000—      Z(V0      ucoo   6OOO    cc9no    zc6oo— ccro—  9V0                      1010o—    izoro     etro     8(OO—     st0o      ccooo—     l(190   plun
                                                                     tzro—       T60           LZ(0   nzo   ccco            18F1      TLFO               ccrt      crc        9ct—     69V
                                        —
                                                                    (Iozoo)    (Lozoo)       (8oo)  (coo) (too)            (zitoo)   (ltaro)   (61ro)   (191oo)   (9z000)   (tooiro) (6Btoo)   BeS
(90•)   t000    66160           —                                   c8000—      O1O0          TToo   tBOOa 8t00            99c00     (ZL00     9z(c0     66Z00    8(100     Too0—      9L600    piu
  q
        •2s       H         91'r0     ct19       ,rc0      uf0       zTc9       mtc0         ot'c0      61o     910         110                 cr0                cr0       z10
                        t                                          131d SOT                                   T31A
                                                                                                                                     F(A) Tl(A L
                            1a SOT.     SOT.                 SOj                  Soj             Soj   Soj          SOj     SOJ                          SOT—
                            I                                                                                                                              SOT
                                                                                (A/X)    :9lqeJ1
                                                                              (9k) ONY   (9H) sNoIivnb AHOdX
                                                                                         T   S'IaV.L
                                                                                                                        I




                                                                               TABLE 15

                                                                              PART A

                                                               Import Equations (R7) and (Ni?)
                                                                Dependent Variable:
                                                                                            (I/Y)
                                                     log         log
                 Const.
                                                           Y
                           (I/Y)j,_i      log Yj     —log Yj     —log j,t—i
 COUNTRY                                                                                                    Z,_2                    2                  h
                _______                    1j3      _______            AJ5       _J6                                               R       S.E.E.
                                                                                               _______    _______                                    ID—Wi
 United         —0.1034      0.6667      0.0178      0.0808       —0.0644         0.0366        0.0545    —0.0753      0.0044    0.9746
  States        (0.0388)    (0.1128)                                                                                                      0.0027
                                        (0.0066)    (0.0421)      (0.0368)       (0.0188)      (0.0349)                                              11.971
                —2.662       5.910                                                                        (0.0401)    (0.0230)
                                         2.714       1.92.1       —1.751          1.953         1.562     —1.877      0.191
 United         —0.3300      0.3540      0.1358     —0.1075        0.0348         0.1425        0.0890    —0.0320     0.0145
  Kingdom       (0.0935)                                                                                                         0.8174   0.0070
                            (0.1405)    (0.0339)    (0.1141)      (0.1026)       (0.0583)                                                           11.831
                —3.529                                                                         (0.0628)   (0.0617)   (0.0471)
                             2.520       4.004     —0.942          0.339          2.446         1.416     —0.518      0.308
 Canada         —0.3403      0.2796      0.1164    —0.0179         0.1806         0.1882       —0.0756    —0.0556     0.0661     0.8977   0.0045
                (0.2160)    (0.2134)    (0.0483)    (0.1643)      (0.1252)                                                                          11.751
                —1.576                                                           (0.1146)      (0.1167)   (0.1158)   (0.0910)
                             1.310      2.409      —0.109          1.442          1.643        —0.647     —0.481      0.726
 France         —0.0497      0.8132     0.0114      0.0710        —0.0677         0.0500       —0.0189    —0.0481     0.0181     0.9383   0.0033
                (0.0506)    (0.0918)   (0.0089)    (0.0347)       (0.0306)-                                                                         —1.08
                                                                                 (0.0234)      (0.0253)   (0.0239)   (0.0166)
                —0.982       8.858      1.281       2.045         —2.216         2.135         —0.747     —2.016      0.976
Germany         —0.3324     0.3815      0.0708      0.0634         0.0146        —0.0077        0.0336     0.0536    —0.0289     0.9082
                (0.1296)    (0.1505)                                                                                                      0.0047    [1.881
                                       (0.0235)    (0.0765)       (0.0653)       (0.0570)      (0.0660)
                —2.566      2.535                                                                         (0.0705)   (0.0485)
                                        3.015       0.828          0.224         —0.135         0.510      0.760     —0.595
Italy          —0.3728      0.7786      0.0378      0.1526        —0.05R0       —0.0252         0.1456    —0.1012     0.0088     0.8894
                (0.2681)    (0.0919)                                                                                                      0.0076      .92
                                       (0.0254)    (0.1098)       (0.1067)      (0.0697)       (0.0834)
               —1.391        8.471                                                                        (0.0889)   (0.0620)
                                        1.488       1.390        —0.543         —0.362          1.746     —1.139      0.142
Japan          —0.0296      0.7148      0.0035      0.0137        0.0003          0.0101        0.0438    —0.0001    —0.0412     0.8612   0.0017
                (0.0421)    (0.0945)   (0.0039)    (0.0221)                                                                                         1.80
                                                                  (0.0202)       (0.0204)      (0.0250)   (0.0225)   (0.0161)
               —0.703        7.561      0.880       0.619         0.016           0.497         1.754     —0.004     —2.556
Netherlands    —0.9957      0.3908      0.2773      0.1427        0.0428         0.5824        —0.1574    —0.0741    —0.0417
               (0.7004)                                                                                                          0.7034   0.0143
                           (0.1504)    (0.1600)    (0.2757)      (0.2168)       (0.1957)                                                            11.96)
               —1.622                                                                          (0.1955)   (0.1670)   (0.1344)
                            2.598       1.734       0.518         0.197          2.975        —0.805      —0.444     —0.310
Note:  These regressions are for the pegged periods
                                                    only for non—reserve countries (excludes floating periods listed in Part A of Table
based for those countries on a correspondingly shortened instrument list.                                                               6) and are

See also General Notes.
                                                                                                                                                              0'
                            4        I
                                                                                                                                          sa]O4        OSJ   S
            SBTI UUI1LZBU 13U31O49 4CTUTPUOd51103     uo   paseq       pu      aqj   jo   y   ij UT   PSTT spoiiad DT1UOU    ati3 1OJ    BUOTBSa1a1       :wo
                            6tO            ocFo—           T691         LBT—             61Vt             ZOO       99O—                     9cco—
                           (TTco)        (o89co)      (8ELo)           (9691o)          (zizvT)          (LT6To)   (6lcro)     (iLTco)     (szLoT)
(66t    L6Z00    81880      08900         zccoo—       6T9O                                              LOOO      1Z6Z0—       619t1       L96co—    P"1'4N
                                           96C0—           9EZ1                          60c0—            9U0—      ZO(0—        996Z
                           (61czo)       (ooEo)       (coLo)           (co8o)        (1c101)          (69ora)      (arc)       (ttoct)     (coz)
I6ZJ    tOOO     9TL6'O    O9OO           691F0—       tBcO            TL0E0—           9TcO—            'c9oo—    9t6c1—       6LLcTT      soo
                            c9oo                        9ZZ                              60c0—            tcoo—     9LO—         zzZt        1C00
                           (6Lcto)       (E6zo)       (zt'co)          (6LcT)        (z116o)          UE891)       (c6rT)                  (996zoz)
(uzJ    99OO     91Z60     IZOO           T8TO—        Z0E90           OLLEO            699O—            69600—    L9(60—       E8R6        cR9O
                            6TO            Z9L0—        c9Ez            1100—            Loco          CcLo         TOT—         9101        9980—
(vzI    6OO      tc2o
                           (TLcro)
                           tTtO
                                         (99zEo)
                                          6O—         (o69co)          (c6c9o)       (T9zT)           (9Eco)       (Tzur)      (corz)      (9Lr)
                                                      6ZL80            96000—           co%'90           96OO                   ZLL?Z
                            1660                        cLot            61E0             BTO              06L1—      0LE0—                   B9T
                           (cio)         (9Eo)       (czLvo)           (c9co)        (zooT)           (z6ro)       (6o9tT)     (cozri)     (ic)
        czzoo   0LS60      SZ1Z0          LZTO        EçBVO            OORVO            RTO              ccoLo—    6ZO—                     ZT60'/
                            9c9o—          ZZ90—
                                         (ot8vo)
                                                        cc              cci—             ZLFO—            6(C—      Z8O—         c9Z
                           (zczro)                   (t9cvo)           (zczo)        (Ecbzo)          (6'too)      (R6oco)     (Looco)     (o66oo)
[ozzj   gioo    Ec6o       Too—                       otcso                             8ocoo—           iozvo—    ooo—                     soTco
                            9LO            9060—      LLZZ              89Zt—                                       6ZO—                    0010—
                           (cccro)       (B8czo)     (zRLo)            (99o)         (669o)           (9c9zo)      (9L9o)      (Turo)      (cToT)      wopurx
EocIJ   98100   c9960      cscoo         9CO—         cEc9o            TC9EO—           (cTTo—         68t'OO      L69V0—       61061       96010—       PTUfl
  —     as
                           Ic-
                                                                   —'c
                                                                                        c                            c
                                                      T—cz                                                                    (A/I)         BUO3
                                                                                              oL
                                                       OT    —
                                                                                 jqIeA        iuapudaU
                                                   (.LLN) SNOLLV11)3   S1OdHI—dO-3Id-1ttI1V13H
                                                                                 J1Vd
                                                                                  1VL
                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                  TABLE 16

                                                                                  PART A

                                                               IMPORT-PRICE EQUATIONS (R8) AND (N8P)

                                                                   Dependent Variable:         log
                          Const.   i1og p'         hlog   R0        /1og
                                              ti                           y -'
                                                                                           t(I/Y)1-'    Mog   P-'       tiog E4
 COUNTRY                                                                                                                                    —2                           h
                                        j2          _______                                  j5                                                R        S.E.E.
                                                                       j4                               _______            11j7                                     (n-wi
 United               —0.0017         0.6420         0.0717          0.1522                1.9255        0.1424            ——
  States                                                                                                                                    .9964       0.0129
                      (0.0038)       (0.0850)       (0.0160)                                                                                                            -.4.48
                                                                    (0.2428)            (0.9474)        (0.1420)
                      —0.446          7.557          4.483           0.627               2.032           1.003
United                —0.0151        —0.0020        —0.0403          0.6483                0.1900        1.3714         0.5061
 Kingdoio             (0.0016)                                                                                                            0.9734        0.0159     —23.57
                                     (0.1319)       (0.0901)        (0.4400)            (0.3909)
                      —1.993                                                                            (0.5919)        (0.1568)
                                     —0.015         —0.448           1.473                 0.486         2.317          3.229
Canada                —0.0030        —0.0538        —0.2454          0.2795                0.7223        0.2029         0.0214
                      (0.0083)                                                                                                            0.9347        0.0084
                                     (0.2077)       (0.5708)        (0.4498)           (0.3940)                                                                     (1.861
                                                                                                        (0.8294)       (0.5412)
                     —0.357          —0.259         —0.430           0.621              1.833            0.245          0.040
France               —0.0070        —0.0994         0.0522          —0.0267                1.9406        1.2349         0.6364            0.9468        0.0197
                      (0.0105)       (0.1115)       (0.1115)        (0.5936)                                                                                        —i.os
                                                                                       (1.0139)         (0.7141)       (0.1086)
                     —0.673         —0.891          0.468           —0.045                 1.914         1.729          5.861
Germany              —0.0101         0.2422         0.0070           0.2902            —0.3779           1.2003         0.6684            0.9108        0.0106
                     (0.0045)        (0.1150)       (0.0613)                                                                                                        —0.22
                                                                    (0.2723)           (0.3335)         (0.3822)       (0.1312)
                     —2.380           2.107         0.113            1.066             —1.133            3.140          3.570
Italy                —0.0047         0.0856         0.1749         —0.2518             —0.0766           1.0871        —1.2293            0.9215
                     (0.0089)       (0.1587)                                                                                                           0.0168       (2.071
                                                   (0.1012)        (0.4443)            (0.4553)         (0.7293)
                     —0.523          0.539                                                                             (1.2901)
                                                    1.729          —0.567              —0.168            1.491         —0.952
Japan                —0.0193         0.1248        —0.0717          0.8201              3.0762          1.3652          0.6959            0.9410
                     (0.0057)                                                                                                                          0.0117       (2.101
                                    (0.1422)       (0.0655)        (0.3479)            (1.2324)         (0.4252)
                     —3.392                                                                                            (0.6067)
                                     0.877         —1.095           2.358               2.496           3.211           1.147
Netherlands          —0.0012         0.2289         0.0999         —0.2553              0.1692          0.8842          0.8225            0.9135
                     (0.0057)                                                                                                                          0.0110       0.59
                                    (0.1196)       (0.0644)        (0.3150)            (0.1091)
                     —0.208                                                                             (0.4491)       (0.2579)
                                     1.914          1.550          —0.810               1.550            1.969         3.189
Note:  These regressions are for the
                                     pegged periods only for non—reserve countries         (excludes floating periods listed in
for those countries on a                                                                                                           Part A of   Table 6) and are based
                         correspondinglyshortened instrument list.
See also General Notes.


                                                                                                                                                                             0'
                                                                               TABLE 16

                                                                               PART B

                                                                  EXCUANGE—RATEEQUATIONS         (N8F)

                                                                   Dependent Variable:       tlog
                        Const.         Alog         Alog            Alog RO               taog                       Alog
                                              P                                                  y        A(I/Y)             P
                                         1                                                                            -J              -2
                                                                                                                                      R                    D—W
COUNTRY                                  p7                li]7                                                                                  S.E.E.
                       ________                                     ________          ________               p]7
United                  0.0490         0.3454         0.2291        —0.0018              0.9776          —1.3030    —2.8498         0.1213       0.0443   2.76
 Kingdom               (0.0368)       (0.8276)       (0.4163)       (0.0582)            (1.3640)         (1.3132)   (0.9892)
                        1.333          0.417          0.550         —0.032               0.717           —0.992     —2.881
Canada                 —0.0040         0.2732         0.0273        —0.0202              0.2732          —0.3851    —0.0676         0.0007       0.0135   1.38
                       (0.0055)       (0.2211)       (0.1829)       (0.0144)            (0.3320)         (0.4451)   (0.2367)
                       —0.727          1.236          0.149         —1.401               0.823           —0.865     —0.286
France                  0.0507        —0.0635         0.2030         0.0518           —0.9932             1.7303    —2.9759         0.6551       0.0291   2.45
                       (0.0257)       (0.5233)       (0.2485)       (0.0493)            (1.2940)         (2.1846)   (0.8646)
                        1.976         —0.121          0.817          1.050            —0.768              0.792     —3.442

Germany                 0.0174         0.3949        —0.6752        —0.0775           —1.4449             4.7085    —1.4430         0.1563       0.0493   2.40
                       (0.0363)       (0.5426)       (0.3770)       (0.0651)            (1.3021)         (3.6567)   (1.4249)
                        0.480          0.728         —1.791         —1.190            —1.110              1.288     —1.013

Italy                   0.0325         0.5080        —0.1346         0.0178               0.4327         —0.7952    —1.7873         0.3624       0.0365   2.05
                       (0.0251)       (0.2164)       (0.1470)       (0.0421)            (0.9307)         (0.9088)   (0.9523)
                        1.294          2.347         —0.916          0.424               0.465           —0.875     —1.877

Japan                   0.0508         0.1140        —0.2069        —0.0078           —2.8944             7.0538    —1.9986         0.3304       0.0283   2.04
                       (0.0212)       (0.2468)       (0.1554)       (0.0332)            (0.8975)         (4.9008)   (0.6666)
                        2.393          0.462         —1.331         —0.236            —3.225              1.439     —2.998

Netherlands             0.0162         0.3805        —0.2598         0.0367           —0.2758            —0.5083    —1.6610         0.5852       0.0275   1.94
                       (0.0202)       (0.4575)       (0.2703)       (0.0406)            (0.6667)         (0.4632)   (0.6668)
                        0.803          0.832         —0.961          0.903            —0.414             —1.097     —2.491


Note:    These regressions are for the floating periods listed in Part A of Table    6 and are based on correspondingly shortened   instrument lists.
See also General Notes.

                                                                                                                                                                 0'
                                                                                                             TAILE   17
                                                                                            CAPITAL—flaIS    EQUATIONS    (09)   *100   (89)

                                                                                                  D.p.o.I.nt Vortablo:
                                                                                                                             (C/T)
                                                      (461..             ((X/Y)     (Io                                                                                               A(4â1o    S(4A.1o    A(461o
              Coo.t.       I        1o ,00                                          —log       6105         61o
                                                      Ej+)*        P.1   —(1/Y)I                                    1
                                                                                       7)                                  A0t                  66J12             68i._i    88i,I—2 13,141)0       Nj)0    Ej,_i)•
CONIIITT
                          (33        ())       (J4       j5       j6        ()7       J8         (39         JO                         J.12                                                                             I2     5.0.1.    DV
                                                                                                                                                 j.l)     J.14    j.13       j.16       1.17       ¶i.ie
0611.6        0.0077   0.0006 -0.0013 —0.1007     0.OY.S  -0.2098   0.1666 —0.0533 -0.1069     0.0530  -0.2997   0.3414  -0.6649   0.0076 0.0345                            0.2319   0.0033  -0.0040   0.0019 0.1961            0.0072   1.17
 stat..      (0.0033) (0.0001) (0.0062) (0.1149) (0.0534) (0.1602) (0.2368) (0.0611) (0.1890) (0.1612) (0.4298) (0.2492) (0.3729) (0.1693) (0.1114)
              1.455    3.142 —0.164 —0.345        0.631 —1.496      2.916                                                                                                  (0.1300) (0.0604) (0.0119) (0.0116)
                                                                            —0.786   —0.566    0.341   —0.697    1.394   —1.783    0.045    0.262                           0.838    0.062   —0.332    0.161
06A           0.0188 -0.000) -0.0160 0.7325 0.4443 —0.9278 -0.8730 -0.4390            0.4491 0.0804 0.7571 -0.8290 -0.8227         0.3171 —0.3770                           0.9616 -0.3424 -0.0765    -0.0117         -0.0945   0.0291
 1I.6o.      (0.0206) (0.0004) (0.0269) (0.1326) (0.1535) (0.6380) (0.4839) (0.3237) (0.3905) (0.8828) (0.6444) (0.5917) (0.56*8) (1.37181 (0.9802)                                                                                      1.98
              0.963   -0.716   —2.820    1.362                                                                                                                             (1.0101) (0.1224) (0.0601) (0.0342)
                                                  2.895 —1.410 —1.804       —1.3*8    1.150    0.091     1.173  —1.401   —1.451    0.231 —0.389                             0.952 —2.797 —1.261        0.215
C.ds         .0.0211 —0.0001    0.0075 —0.2095 0.3993 0.3253 0.7222 0.1017 —0.44%              0.8661 —0.5176 —0.2964 0.1650 0.1848 0.2139                                 —0.1944    —0.3006   —0.0462    —0.0617 0.2611 0.0133 1.89
             (0.0121) (0.0002) (0.0090) (0.2158) (0.2398) (0.3300) (0.2698) (0.1219) (0.2863) (0.4604) (0.4238) (0.3144) (0.3765) (0.3837) (0.4590)                        (0.4392)   (0.2497) (0.0860)    (0.0880)
             —1.642   -0474     0.840 —0.819      1.663    0.499    2.677    0.833   —1.370    1.881   —1.221   —0.842    0.440    0.317    0.466                          —0.443     —1.204    —0.361     —0.781
Prs          —0.0138  -0.0001 0.0134 -0.6406 0.1171              1.0231   0.7770   0.0609 —0.2606 0.1)36 0.6364 0.2588 0.9083                           -0.6345 -0.9947    0.3867  -0.002)   0.0007 —0.0073 0.1908 0.0149 1.72
             (0.0114) (0.0002) (0.0124) (0.2298) (0.0493)       (0.3)79) (0.3074) (0.1693) (0.2020) (0.4806) (0.3094) (0.2394) (0.2729)                 (0.78*9) (0.4386) (0.4544) (0.0389) (0.0231) (0.0211)
             —1.396   -.0.472   1.063 —2.788      2.373          2.859    2.328    0.360 —1.291      1.136    2.037    0.998    3.530                   —0.837 —2.169      0.851   —0.038    0.029   —0.798

Qsv7          0.0006 —0.0000 0.0044 -.0.3022      0.897*         0.2431 0.3)34 —0.0654      0.3244  —1.0229 0.0932    —0.422)   0.4033                   1.6290 0.1326     0.5469   0.0029   0.0489 0.0516 L1368 0.0228 2.30
             (0.0221) (0.0004) (0.0123) (0.3641) (0.1476)       (0.6019) (0.5223) (0.1639) (0.6093) (0.7941) (0.5435) (0.3424) (0.4166)                 (0.9686) (0.1422) (0.6142) (0.1142) (0.0448) (0.0435)
              0.034 —0.010      0.330 —0.630      0.637          0.404    1.025   —0.399    0.792   —1.288    0.114   —1.234    0.973                    1.682    0.119    0.891    0.023    1.049    1.134
It.dp         0.0236 0.0002 0.0016           0.64S7     0.876) 0.1349 L5393        0.0402 —0.0540 -0.1)19     1.8846   0.2386 0.2997                    -0.1910 —0.3032 -0.0352 —0.0182 0.0636 0.0726 0.3171 0.0140 1.22
             (0.0240) (0.0003) (0.0*01)      (0.4*33) (0.1164) (0.311)) (0.1424) (0.1)21) (0.1591) (0.5153) (0.9794) (0.6850) (0.7374)                  (0.6089) (0.4169) (0.4051) (0.0731) (0.0443) (0.0)92)
              0.887    0.889 —0.163          —1.562     0.456    0.384    3.930 —0.264     —0.359   -0.295    1.924    0.548    0.406                   -0.514 —0.727 —0.136       —0.243    1.4)4    1.85)
3             0 *931 —0.0003 0.0514          —2.4533    0.064) 0.3620 —0.2033 0.044* —0.3306 0.0)48 —0.6003 —1.1426 —0.3466                             —0.8260 -0.0908 —0.2326     0.0)63   0.0330   0.0236 —0.1932 0.0153 1.85
             (01136) (0.000)) (0.0301)        (1.387*) (0.0676) (0.3413) (0.6098) (0.1487) (0.0824) (0.4483) (3.1056) (2.3290) (2.0206)                 (0.6708) (0.1850) (0.63*1) (0.0808) (0.0)06) (0.0481)
              1.700 —1.134     1.042 —1.110            0.736    1.060    —0.34)     0.296    —0.8*4         0.078       —0.197      —0.491     —0.112   —0.2)0   —0.238   —0.560    0.474    0.640    0.485
06Ib.r1o      0.0009 0.0004 0.0182 —0.3028 0.0196 -0.0984                 0.7699     0.2249 -0.0454   -0.4544            0.6962 -0.6873    0.3636 0.9836 0.17*8 0.9198 -0.0866                  -0.0115    0.0461 0.4587 0.0189 1.84
             (0.0149) (0.0002) (0.0099) (0.3246) (0.1070) (0.4612)       (0.1968)   (0.1612) (0.3349) (0.1418)          (0.4190) (0.3728) (0.4710) (0.7686) (0.3909) (0.6156) (0.0867)          (0.0)70)   (0.0349)
              0.060    1.747    1.636   —1.349    2.236   —0.213          3.911      1.39)   —0.128   —0.612             1.661   —1.844    0.762    1.200    0.291    1.392 —0.999              —1.392      1.341
06t.o Iro   lb. 0.6. .q.iotoo oo1   (or 0105
                                             1° rOod "log 12° sod for "12' road "Is" (os• •qu.010o (89)) lo lbs co1 bs.dlug. abo...
8.. .1..   r.1 060...




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Co
                                                                      TABLE     18

                                                      BALANCE OF PAYMENTS EQUATIONS         (N1OF)

                                                            Dependent Variable:
                                                                                          (B/Y)
                                                                                                  slog
                       Const.                            t1og
                                      (B/Y)j,_i                 E           t1og Ej,t_i           —tdog P1,_1
                                                                                                                                                h
COUNTRY                                                                                                            2           S.E.E.
                          "ii            j2               'j3              _________              __________                                  ID—WI

United                 0.0002           0.4170           0.0191                —0.0346               —0.1007     0.1710        0.0074         0.05
 Kingdom              (0.0023)         (0.1889)         (0.0518)               (0.0371)              (0.0896)
                       0.095            2.208            0.368                 —0.931                —1.125

Canada                0.0003            0.2975         —0.0927                  0.0403               —0.0109     0.0943        0.0018         [1.891
                      (0.0003)         (.1704)         (0.0328)                (0.0223)              (0.0147)
                       1.005            1.746          —2.824                   1.802                —0.738

France                 0.0004           0.1640         —0.0304                  0.0124               0.0332     —0.1965        0.0047         11.821
                      (0.0015)         (0.2494)        (0.0333)                (0.0220)              (0.2015)
                      0.241             0.658          —0.912                   0.564                0.165

Germany               0.0052          —0.0723          —0.1020                  0.0025               0.0766      0.0606        0.0053         (1.981
                      (0.0021)         (0.2621)         (0.0332)               (0.0267)              (0.1649)
                       2.471          —0.276           —3.073                   0.094                 0.464

Italy                 —0.0020          0.1847          —0.0436                 —0.0247               0.0259      0.1712        0.0046         I1.52j
                      (0.0016)         (0.2354)        (0.0257)                (0.0268)              (0.0932)
                      —1.264           0.785           —1.696                  —0.923                 0.278

Japan                 0.0007           0.7929           0.0397                  0.0244            —0.0193        0.4109        0.0038         1.01
                      (0.0010)         (0.2136)        (0.0392)                (0.0276)              (0.0633)
                      0.652            3.712            1.014                   0.883             —0.305

Netherlands           0.0021          —0.2072          —0.0078                 —0.0295               0.0196     —0.1179        0.0063         12.091
                      (0.0019)        (0.2557)         (0.0529)                (0.0333)              (0.1303)
                       1.144          —0.810           —0.147                  —0.885                0.150


Note:    These regressions are for the floating periods listed in   Part   A   of Table 6 and are based on correspondingly shortened instrument lists.
See also General Notes.


                                                                                                                                                         a.'
