                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         RESOLVING NUISANCE DISPUTES: THE SIMPLE
        ECONOMICS OF INJUNCTIVE AND DAMAGE REMEDIES



                   A. Mitchell Polinsky


                  Working Paper No. i63




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138


                        March 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's program
in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper 463
                                                                       March, 1980




         Resolving Nuisance Disputes: The Simple Economics
                 of Injunctive and Damage Remedies



                             ABSTRACT



     In nuisance—type cases, legal commentators generally recommend —

and the courts seem to increasingly use —   the   award of damages rather than

the granting of an injunction of the harmed party. This essay compares

the economic consequences of injunctive and damage remedies under a variety

of circumstances. The discussion focuses on the ability of the remedies

to deal with the strategic behavior of the ],tigants, the cost of redistri—

butlng income among the litigants (or classes of litigants), and the im-

perfect information of the courts. In ideal circumstances —        cooperative
behavior, costless redistribution, and perfect information —       injunctive
and damage remedies are equivalent. The presence of strategic behavior

alone does not change this conclusion. However, if it is also costly to

redistribute income, the remedies are no longer equivalent. When there

are a small number of 1,itigants in these circumstances, neither remedy is

generally more effective. When there are a large number of litigants, the

damage remedy is superior. Finally, and most realistically, if the courts

also have imperfect information, neither remedy dominates the other. Thus,

the general presumption in favor of damage remedies is not supported..


                                                  A, Mitchell Polinsky
                                                  Stanford Law School
                                                          —or—
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Stanford University
                                                  Stanford, CA 94305

                                                  (415) 497—0886
    Stanford Law Review,
    forthcoming.



            RESOLVING NUISANCE DISPUTES: THE SIMPLE ECONOMICS

                       OF INJUNCTIVE AND DAMAGE REMEDIES



                              A.   Mitchell Po1inskyi


                  I. Introduction
                 II. The Goals: Efficiency and
                            Distributional Equity
                III. The Instruments: Entitlements and
                            Remedies for Their Protection

                 IV. The Best of All Possible Worlds

                  V.     Strategic Behavior
                 VI. Costly Redistribution
                VII. Imperfect Information, I:
                           Assymetrical   Information

               VIII. Imperfect Information, II:

                           Understated Damages

                 IX. Many Victims

                  X.     Conclusion
a
                                       —2—


                                  I. INTRODUCTION


       This essay compares the use of two private remedies——injunctions and

damages—to resolve what will be referred to as a "nuisance dispute."!' By

a nuisance dispute I mean any situation in which some injurer (or group of

injurers) harms some victim (or group of victims) in a continuing, non—

accidental way.! Nearly all instances of pollution fit this description,

as do many other types of land use conflict. Some specific examples are

emissions from a factory falling upon a neighboring property, bright lights or

noise disturbing a person's sleep, or an unsightly building constructed in an

attractive residential neighborhood.

       Because of litigation and other administrative costs, the use of private

remedies to resolve nuisance disputes makes most sense when there are very few

parties involved, or when a large number of parties can be represented cheaply

and effectively by a single individual...! Accordingly, the focus of this

essay is on the so—called "small number" case described by these conditions.

However, the "large number" case also will be discussed.

       The problem of resolving nuisance disputes may, following Calabresi and

Melamed,Y be usefully thought of as involving two steps. An initial determina-

tion   must be made regarding who is entitled to prevail in the dispute. Should
the polluter be given the right to pollute, or the pollutees the right to be
free   from pollution? Then, in the language of Calabresi and Melamed, a decision

must be made whether to protect the entitlement by a "property rule" or a

"liability rule." The former grants the holder of the entitlement an injunction

while the latter awards him damages, determined by some collective authority

such as a court. Thus, they explain, there are four possibilities, depending

on who is given the entitlement and how it is protected.
                                      —3—

       Most recent legal commentaries on nuisance law have strongly recommended

the use of damage remedies—-liability rules——rather than injunctive remedies——

property rules./ Whether court decisions also favor damage remedies is

unclear, although many commentators believe there is a trend in this direction.fi

Essentially three reasons have been suggested for this preference. These

will   be referred to as the extortion, strategic behavior, and "bonus payment
arguments .1/
       The first argument against injunctive remedies is that theysupposedly

allow the plaintiff to "extort" the defendant. This possibility arises whenever

the potential cost imposed on the defendant by enforcement of the injunction

exceeds the plaintiff's damages. For example, a pollutee may suffer $1,000

damages while the lost profits to the polluter if his plant is shut down by

the injunction may be $10,000. Because the defendant may be willing to pay up

to his potential cost to prevent enforcement, the plaintiff can obtain com-

pensation (possibly far) in excess of his actual damages. Since under a damage

remedy damages are set by the court——presumably at $1,000 in this example——

there is apparently no scope for extortion. This argument for damage remedi

is distributionally oriented since successful extortion is consistent with the

efficient resolution of the conflict. In other words, the plaintiff's ability

to obtain a large share of the joint benefits from the efficient resolution of

the dispute does not imply that the dispute will not be resolved efficiently.

       The strategic behavior argument for damage remedies concerns the efficiency

consequences of unsuccessful extortion. The efficient result may require not

enforcing the injunction, but when extortion is possible, the plaintiff may

hold out for more than the defendant is willing to pay. In other words,

strategic behavior may lead to enforcement of the injunction when enforcement

would not be efficient. In the previous example, the plaintiff may hold out
                                      —4—


for $8,000 while the defendant may refuse to pay anything over $5,000. As a

result, the plaintiff may enforce the injunction and have the defendant's

plant shut down (at least for some period). In contrast, it is argued that

the award of damages would overcome strategic behavior problems because the

defendant would be induced to decide unilaterally how to behave. In the example,

any damage award under $10,000 presumably would lead the defendant to choose

to keep his plant in operation.

     The third argument for damage remedies is usually treated as subsidiary

to the other two. Once it has been decided to use a damage remedy for either

of the other reasons, it is possible to pursue additional distributional goals

by increasing ("bonus payments') or reducing the monetary payment relative

to actual damages. In the example, suppose the plaintiff is poorer than the

defendant and a more equal distribution of income is desired. The damage

award apparently can be finely tuned to achieve the precise amount of redis-

tribution preferred. This may be beneficial since redistribution by other

means——such as the income tax system——may be costlier (in an efficiency sense).

In contrast, distributional outcomes under the injunctive remedy are indeterminate

because of extortion and strategic behavior possibilities. For example, extor-

tion may lead the defendant to pay the plaintiff any amount between $1,000 and

$10,000; or, if the injunction is enforced, extortion may lead to the defendant

shutting down, losing $10,000, and to the plaintiff suffering no damages.

     The three arguments, taken together, amount to the proposition that damage

remedies are better able to achieve the efficient outcome (the strategic behavior

argument) and to promote collectively desired distributional results (the

extortion and bonus payment arguinents)../ The pursuit of these goals——efficiency

and distributional equity—will be the standard by which injunctive and damage

remedies will be evaluated in this essay .2.!
                                     —5—



     However, it will be shown that in realistic circumstances the preference

for damage remedies is not generally supportable. In terms of efficiency,

this is because damage remedies are just as susceptible to strategic behavior

problems as injunctive remedies when, realistically, damages are not correctly

estimated by the court. And in terms of distributional equity, this is because

damage remedies are not nearly as flexible distributionally as Is usually

presumed. Damage remedies still may be preferable in some circumstances, but

injunctive remedies may be superior in other circumstances. By systematically

exploring the relative merits of the remedies in different situations, I hope

to provide a better understanding of when each should be used.

     The essay is organized as follows. In Section II the two goals of effi-

ciency and distributional equity are discussed in more detail. In Section III,

the "instruments" for achieving these goals——entitlements and the remedies for

their protection——are also discussed in more detail. Then, in Sections IV

through VIII, the remedies are analyzed under different assumptions about the

bargaining behavior of the litigants, the cost of redistributing income among

the litigants (or classes of litigants) by means other than the remedies, and

the information available to the court. In each of these sections it is assumed

that there is one injurer and one victim. Section IV begins with the best of

all possible worlds——the parties bargain cooperatively, income can be -redis-

tributed costlessly among the litigants, and the courts have perfect information.

Sections V through VIII then add complications, one at a time, In the following

order: the strategic behavior of the litigants, the cost of redistributing

income among the litigants, and the Imperfect Information of the courts (of

two varieties). In Section IX the remedies are discussed when there is one

injurer and many victims. Finally, Section X reexamines the three arguments
                                     —6—


for damage remedies discussed in the introduction. (It may be helpful to

read Section X before the others.)

     The basic conclusions of this essay can be briefly stated as follows. In

the best of all possible worlds——cooperative behavior, costless redistribution,

and perfect information——injunctive and damage remedies are equally desirable.

The presence of strategic behavior alone does not change this conclusion.

However, if it is also costly to redistribute income, the remedies are no

longer equivalent. When there are a small number of litigants in these

circumstances, neither remedy is generally preferable. When there are a large

number of litigants, the damage remedy is superior. Finally, and most realis-

tically, if the courts also have imperfect information, neither remedy Is

generally preferable. Depending on what information is available, the injuctive

or the damage remedy may be more desirable. Thus, the general presumption

in favor of damage remedies Is not supported.
                                      —7—



             II. THE COALS: EFFICIENCY AND DISTRIBUTIONAL EQUITY


     The arguments against injunctive remedies discussed in the introduction

were based on the desirability of attaining two goals——one relating to the

efficient allocation of resources, the other relating to the desired distri-

bution of income among individuals. Before examining in detail how injunctive

and damage remedies can be used to pursue efficiency and distributional equity,

it will be useful to examine these goals more precisely.

     The efficient resolution of the dispute mightinvolve the parties co-

existing, but adjusting their behavior. For example, in many pollution

conflicts the efficient resolution is for the pollutees to remain at their

present locations, and for the polluter to reduce——but not eliminate——his

pollution. This is, in fact, the "textbook case" in most discussions by

economists of externality problems i2i

     Alternatively,   the efficient solution might involve one of the parties

shutting down or moving away. For example, the efficient solution might

require that the polluter remain and the pollutees relocate, or vice versaiJ]

     For the purposes of this essay, it will be assumed that the efficient

solution is of the first type——the parties coexist bu.t one should accommodate.i

Specifically, the discussion will be in terms of a polluting factory next to

a group of residents, who for now will be assumed to be represented by a

single party (sometimes referred to as "the resident")Ji To further simplify

the situation, it will be assumed that each unit of the factory's output

causes the same amount of damage (and that the residents cannot affect the

level of damages by their behavior). These assumptions are unrealistic in

many respects, but the basic points to be developed will apply as well to

more complicated situations. It is also assumed that at low levels of the
                                    —8—


factory's output each unit of output increases the factory's profits more

than it increases the residents' damages and that at high levels of the

factory's output, the reverse is true. The efficient solution Is to have

the factory pollute as long as the factory's extra profit from the last unit

of production (the marginal profit) exceeds the residents' Increase in damages

from that unit of production (the marginal damage); any smaller output

would involve losses to the factory greater than the gains to the residents,

and any greater output would impose losses on the residents greater than

the gains to the factory.!i

    A simple numerical example, which will be used throughout this essay,

may serve to illustrate the nuisance dispute. The basic data are provided

In Table 1. If the factory produces nothing, It earns nothing and causes no

damage.!J Thus, the joint profits of the parties——total profits less

total damages——are also zero. The first unit of output by the factory results

in $17,000 profits to itself and causes $7,000 damage to the residents.

                                             —   $7,000).
Thus, joint profits are $10,000 (= $17,000                  The change in joint

profits from the previous level of output is also $10,000 (       $10,000 — $0).
This change will be referred to as the marginal "gains from trade" (the

motivation for this terminology will become c1ear—!i). The second unit of out-

put leads to an additional $13,000 profits to the factory and an additional

$7,000 damages to the residents, resulting in total profits to the factory

of $30,000 and total daniages to the residents of $14,000. At this level of

output, he joint profits of the parties are $16,000 (        $30,000 — $14,000)
and the marginal gains from trade are $6,000 (= $16,000 —      $10,000).   The results

for the remaining output are interpeted similarly. Note that eventually——at

the sixth unit of output——the factory actually loses money by producing more

(for example, because its marginal production costs are rising steeply).
                                   —9—




                                 TABLE 1




                                                        Total
          Marginal Marginal     Total      Total        Profits   Marginal
Output    Profits   Damages     Profits    Damages      less      "Gains"
   of       of          of        of            of      Total     from
Factory   Factory   Residents   Factory    Residents    Damages   Trade"


   O        ——           ——
                                  $0             $0       $0
                                                                    ——

   1      $17,000   $   7,000   $17,000    $    7,000   $10,000   $10,000

   2       13,000       7,000    30,000        14,000    16,000     6,000

   3        9,000       7,000    39,000        21,000    18,000     2,000

   4        5,000       7,000    44,000        28,000    16,000    —2,000

   5        1,000       7,000    45,000        35,000    10,000    —6,000

   6       —3,000       7,000    42,000        42,000      0      —10,000

   7       —7,000       7,000    35,000        49,000   —14,000   —14,000
                                      —10—


        In the numerical example the joint profits of the parties are maximized

at $18,000 when the factory produces three units of output. This output

will    be referred to as the "efficient" output.2L/ A useful way of viewing
the    joint profit maximizing or efficient output   is in terms of the marginal
gains    from trade. At every output except the third unit, there are marginal

gains from trade, i.e., joint profits can be increased by changing the level

of output. If output is less than three units, joint profits can be increased

by increasing output, while if output is greater than three units, joint

profits can be increased by reducing output. Only at an output of three

units will any change result in smaller joint profits. For this reason, it

will be said that at the efficient or joint profit maximizing output, all of

the gains from trade have been "exploited."

        The second potentially important component of any nuisance dispute

involves distributional considerations.' For example, even if the efficient

solution were achieved, it must still be decided who is to bear the remaining

damages and who is to reap the gains from trade of getting to the efficient

solution. In the numerical example, at the efficient output the residents

suffer $21,000 in damages and the total gains from trade are, starting from

zero output, $18,000. It is not necessary for purposes of this essay to

discuss how these distributional choices should be made. The question

answered here is a simpler one: how do injunctive and damage remedies compare

in their ability to achieve distributional goals, regardless of the specifics

of those goals?

        Although two of the three traditional arguments used to evaluate nuisance

remedies were based on distributional considerations (the extortion and bonus

payment arguments), it might be argued that such considerations should not

affect the choice of the remedy since distributional goals can be better handled
                                      —11—


by other means, like the income tax system. While it is undoubtedly true that

broad distributional goals can be better promoted through the tax system, this

does not imply that distributional considerations should be totally ignored in

the choice of nuisance remedies. First of all, many versions of both injunctive

and damage remedies may be able to reach the efficient outcome (e.g., In the

case of the damage remedy, there may be many liability schedules which are

efficieniJ2i). Since redistribution through the tax system (or by other means)

is.   costly,1 It makes sense to use the distributional goal to break efficiency
ties. Secondly, even when the efficiency goal points toward one remedy, It
may be desirable to allow distributional considerations to have some weight.

Again, this is because redistribution by means other than the remedies is

costly. To see the relevance of the distributional goal, consider the

following extreme example. Suppose the distributional goal strongly favors

redistribution to the poor and that the degree of progessivity of the income

tax necessary to achieve this would lead individuals to work and earn very

little. In other words, redistribution through the tax system may not be

very effective and may cause substantial distortions in work effort. On the

other hand, suppose most poor persons live near polluting factories and that

these factories are owned primarily by much richer persons. Then the remedy

chosen to resolve the nuisance dispute may also be a useful instrument for

improving the distribution of Income. Even if there is a remedy which is

efficient, it may be desirable to choose an inefficient alternative if it can

achieve the desired redistribution without too much sacrifice in efficiency..±i

         Obviously, the ability to redistribute through the choice of nuisance

remedies depends on how closely the plaintiffs and defendants in typical

nuisance disputes correspond to the groups between which redistribution Is

desired. In practice, I would expect there to be some correspondence between
                                   —12—



these categories (for example, nuisance plaintiffs probably are poorer than

nuisance defendants), but often not a very large one. For this reason, the

reader should keep in mind the possibly limited role for the remedies with

respect to redistribution. However, because the distributional goal is

central to at least one of the traditional arguments for damage remedies

(the bonus payment argument) and because there are undoubtedly many nuisance

disputes where it does play an important role in addition to the efficiency

goal, it's relevance to the choice of nuisance remedies is seriously considered

in this essay.

     It will often be convenient to subsume the goals of efficiency and distri-

butional equity within a more general concept of "social welfare". Social wel-

fare can he thought of as a weighted average of the two underlying goals, with

the weights assigned according to their relative importance. Social welfare

thus provides a single measure for comparing injunctive and damage remedies.
                                     —13—


                  III. THE INSTRUMENTS: ENTITLEMENTS AND

                          REMEDIES FOR THEIR PROTECTION


    Entitlements are sometimes thought of as absolute: either the residents

are entitled to be free of all pollution, or the factory is entitled to pollute

any amount desired (presumably the amount which would maximize its profits).i

     If entitlements are absolute, there is no ambiguity about the distinction

between injunctive and damage remedies. If the entitlement is given to the

residents, then the only question is whether the factory must buy their

permission to pollute——an injunctive remedy——or must pay court—determined

damages. Similarly, if the entitlement goes to the factory, then the only

question is whether the residents must "bribe" the factory to reduce pollution

an injunctive remedy——or must pay the company "damages" (presumably reduced

profits), again determined by a collective authority like a court. This

last possibility is unconventional, although it has been used.i It will

be referred to here as a reverse damage remedy or liability rule.?i

     There is no logical reason, however, to view entitlements as absolute.

They might also be intermediate. For example, the factory might be entitiid

 to pollute up to some point and the residents would be entitled to be free

of pollution beyond this point.! Any level of the factory's output could

 serve as the basis for defining an intermediate entitlement.

      Once entitlements are treated as intermediate, there is a certain

 ambiguity in the use of injunctive and damage remedies. Unlike the situation

 when entitlements are absolute, there are two directions in which output

 might be changed. Given an intermediate entitlement, the factory might want

 to increase its output, or the residents might want to decrease the factory's

 output. The types of remedies governing these two changes could be the

 same, but they do not have to be.
                                    —14-t


                                                                  the injunctive
      When intermediate entitlements are discussed In this essay,

and damage remedies will be defined in the following manner. Under an injunc-

tive remedy, each party can enjoin deviations from the entitlement point.

Under the normal version of the damage remedy, the factory can increase Its

output beyond the entitlement point if It pays the residents the court

determined damages; If the residents want the factory's output lowered they

would be required to "bribe" the factory.   Under the "reverse" damage remedy,

the residents could reduce the factory's output upon payment to the factory

of "damages"; if the factory wants to increase output it would be required to

bribe the residents. These definitions of injunctive and damage remedies are

the   ones generally used by legal ccinmentators.ZJ
                                        —15—


                         IV. THE BEST OF ALL POSSIBLE WORLDS


     Imagine a world, admittedly unrealistic, in which parties to a nuisance

dispute bargain cooperatively (in the sense that they exploit all gains from

trade), income can be redistributed costlessly, and courts have perfect

information.L'      It   will be useful to analyze injunctive and damage remedie

in this idealized setting before examining them in more realistic contexts.

     In the present setting injunctive remedies are efficient regardless of

the entitlement point chosen. Consider, for example, an absolute entitlement

given to the resident—victim. Starting from zero output, the factory would

gain $17,000 in profits if it could produce one unit. Since the victim

would only suffer $7,000 in damages, they could strike a deal in which the

factory pays the resident at least $7,000 and no more than $17,000 in order

to produce one unit. Assuming cooperative behavior, such a deal would be

struck. How much is actually paid by the factory to the resident is inde-

terminate without further assumptions and might be said to depend on the

relative bargaining strengths of the two parties. As long as the factory's

marginal profits exceed the resident's marginal damages, similar deals can

and will be made. Thus, the parties will bargain to three units, the

efficient output.

     The same reasoning applies to any other entitlement point, whether an

absolute one to the factory, or an intermediate one. If the entitlement

is an intermediate one, there are potentially two directions in which the

parties can bargain. However, it is always the case that deals can be struck

only in one direction——toward the efficient outcome. For example, consider

an entitlement point corresponding to four units of output. An increase in

output by one unit will increase the factory's profits by $1,000, but will

increase the resident's damages by $7,000. There is no way the factory can
                                  —16—


buy off the resident. However, a reduction in output by one unit will reduce

the factory's profits by $5,000 and the resident's damages by $7,000. Thus,

the resident would pay the factory something between $5,000 and $7,000 to

reduce output by one unit to the efficient output of three units. Once the

parties are at the efficient output, no deals can be made in either direction.

     When an injunctive remedy is used, the distribution of income between

the parties will, of course, be affected by the choice of the entitlement

point. Everything else equal, the closer an intermediate entitlement comes

to being an absolute entitlement to one of the parties, the better off that

party is and the worse off the other party is. However, the distributional

effects of any given entitlement are indeterminate. The source of this

indeterminacy is that there are many possible mutually beneficial agreements

that will mov the parties from the entitlement point towards the efficient

solution to the dispute; each agreement involves a different division of the

gains from trade between the parties. Each party will obtain some portion

of the gains from trade, but this fraction may range from close to zero to

close to one, depending on the relative bargaining strengths of the parties.

Thus, one of the key features of injunctive remedies is their distributional

indeterminateness.

     Since it is assumed that redistribution by means other than the remedies

is costless, the distributional indeterminacy of the injunctive remedy is not

of any consequence. No matter what distributional outcome results from the

bargaining process, it can be modified in any way desired by lump—sum

transfers. For example, suppose an absolute entitlement to the victim is

used and that the parties are equally good bargainers in the sense that they

split the gains from trade in half. Thus, the factory would pay the resident

$12,000 in order to produce the first unit ($7,000 for damages plus $5,000
                                      —17—


for half of the gains from trade), leaving the factory with marginal profits

of $5,000 (= $17,000 —   $12,000).   Similarly, the factory would pay $10,000

and $8,000 for the second and third units, leaving it with marginal profits

of $3,000 and $1,000 for those units. The factory's total profits would

therefore be $9,000 (    $5,000 + $3,000 + $1,000), and the resident would be
compensated $9,000 in excess of actual damages. This result simply reflects

the fact that the total gains from trade, starting at zero output, are $18,000,

and that these gains are split in half. Suppose, however, that social welfare

is maximized when two—thirds of the gains from trade go to the victim. In

other words, the ideal distribution of income is for the resident to have

$12,000 and for the factory to get $6,000. A $3,000 lump—sum tax on the

factory transferred to the resident will achieve this, given the actual

bargaining outcome. Obviously, the same result can be achieved no matter

what the relative bargaining strengths of the parties are.

     In the present setting, damage remedies will also be efficient regard-

less of the entitlement point chosen. Consider again an absolute entitlement

to the resident—victim. Suppose also that the factory is liable to the

resident for actual damages suffered——$7,000 per unit of output. Starting

from zero output, the factory would gain $17,000 in profits before damage

payments if it produced one unit of output. Clearly it will choose to do

so. Moreover, there is no incentive for the resident to attempt to pay the

factory not to increase output since he is fully compensated. Similarly,

the factory will choose to produce the second and third units, and the resi-

dent will not find it worthwhile to try to stop this. Since liability

exceeds marginal profits beyond the third unit, the factory will remain at

that output, the efficient one.
                                    —18—


     The same reasoning applies to any other entitlement. For example,

consider the intermediate entitlement corresponding to foUr units of output.

In this case the damage remedy would take the "reverse" form——the resident

would have the right to choose the factory's output upon payment to the

factory of its "damages" (reduced profits) from the entitlement potht.

Thus, the resident would clearly choose to have the factory decrease output

from four to three units since the resident's damages are reduced by $7,000,

but the factory only has to be compensated $5,000. The residentwould have

no further incentive to decrease the factory's output since the factory's

reduction in profits would exceed the resident's reduction in damages.

Again, the efficient output is arrived at.

     Thus far, the damage remedy has been analyzed on the assumption that

the schedule of liability corresponds to the actual damages suffered. However,

assuming cooperative behavior, any schedule of liability would also lead to

the efficient solution. Take, for example, an absolute entitlement to the

victim with liability of $4,000 per unit of output. Since the factory's

marginal profits exceed $4,000 for the first four units of output, the factory

will initially produce four units, "overshooting" the efficient output.

However, the resident then has an incentive to strike a deal with the factory

to reduce output one unit. This is because the resident will he $3,000

better off (the $7,000 savings in damages offset by a $4,000 liability payment

not received), while the factory will only he $1,000 worse off (a $5,000

reduction in profits offset by not having to make a $4,000 liability payment).

Thus, the resident would pay the factory something between $1,000 and $3,000

to reduce output by one unit to the efficient output of three units. Once

at this output, there are no further bargains which can be struck.
                                   —19—



    When a damage remedy is used, the distribution of income between the

parties is clearly affected by the choice of the entitlement point.

Everything else equal, each party is best off by having the entitlement

point as close to an absolute entitlement to him as possible. The main

difference from the injunctive remedy is that the distribution of income

can be, depending on the schedule of liability used, completely determinate

and independent of the relative bargaining strengths of the parties. This

was illustrated, for example, in the case of an absolute entitlement to the

victim with liability equal to actual damages. The victim was compensated

for his actual damages and the factory obtained all of the gains from trade.

There was no scope for bargaining since at no ouput could the resident

bribe the factory not to increase output.

     However, the distributional outcome under the damage remedy is not

always determinate and independent of the parties' bargaining strengths.

This was seen in the case of an absolute entitlement to the victim with

liability of $4,000 per unit of output. In this case it was shown that the

factory would initially "overshoot" the efficient output and the resident

would offer between $1,000 and $3,000 to have the factory produce at the

efficient output. The actual settlement depends on the relative bargaining

strengths of the parties.

     Again, since it is assumed that income can be redistributed costlessly

by lump—sum transfers, the distributional outcome of the damage remedy——

whether determinate or not——is of no consequence. While it may be possible

to structure the damage remedy so that it can simultaneously reach the effi-

cient outcome and the distributionally equitable outcome, if this is not

possible, the remedy should be designed only to reach the efficient outcome
                                  —20—


(e.g., by making liability equal to actual damages). The distributional

goal can be handled separately by lump—sum transfers.

    Thus, in the best of all possible worlds, either an injunctive remedy or

a damage remedy can be used to achieve the social welfare maximum. In each

case, the cooperative behavior of the parties guarantees that the remedy will

be efficient and the availability of costless redistritution assures that

distributional equity will not be sacrificed by the pursuit of efficiency.

The fact that the court has perfect information is irrelevant.
                                      —21—


                               V. STRATEGIC BEHAVIOR


      Parties to a dispute can hardly be counted on to always act in a cooper-

ative manner. The fact that unions strike and nations go to war suggests
                                              would be unrealistic in a
that an assumption of cooperative behavior

nonlegal setting. And the fact that parties frequently go to court rather

than settle more cheaply out of court suggests that this assumption is often
                                                          it will now be
unrealistic in a legal setting.i For these reasons,

assumed that the parties to the nuisance dispute behave strategically in the

sense that they do not exploit
                                  all of the gains from trade. This kind of

behavior might result from the desire of each party to hold out for a large

share of the gains from trade. If both parties are "stubborn"——becaUSe each

wants to establish himself as a tough bargainer——then they may fail to reach

an agreement.2i It will still be assumed for now that income can be costlessly

redistributed between the parties and that the courts have perfect information.
                                                        no longer efficient
       In the present setting injunctive remedies are

regardless of the entitlement point chosen. Consider, for example, an absolute

 entitlement to the resident. Although the factory would gain $17,000 from

 producing the first unit of output and the resident would suffer only $7,000

 in damages, the resident might hold out for an unacceptably large "bribe"
                                        the injunction would be fully enforced
 from the factory. If this happens,
                                     inefficiently, out of business. Even if
 and the factory would be driven,

 the parties agree on how to split the gains from trade of $10,000 (= $17,000

 —   $7,000),   the bargaining problem arises again over the next unit of output.

 Assuming strategic behavior, the parties may agree to move somewhat towards

 the efficient output, but they will not get there. This problem arises

 whenever the entitlement point differs from the efficient output since there

 are then potential gains from trade over which the parties must bargain.
                                   —22—


    This discussion suggests a simple way to overcome the inefficiency of

strategic behavior under the injunctive remedy——start with an entitlement

point which coincides with the efficient output. This works because there

are no remaining gains from trade over which the parties can possibly bargain

and therefore no scope for strategic behavior. Thus, the parties will stay

at the efficient output.

     In general, the distribution of income under the Injunctive remedy is

indeterminate because it depends on the parties' relative barganing strengths

and on the extent of the bargaining failure due to strategic behavior.

However, if the entitlement point is the efficient output, the distribution

of income is completely determined since there are no gains from trade over

which the parties bargain and therefore no scope for bargaining failure. In

the numerical example, the total profits of the factory at the efficient out-

put of three units would be $37,000 and the total damages of the resident would

be $21,000. Although there is no reason in general why the particular distri-

bution of income which results from choosing the efficient output as the

entitlement point is the most equitable one, this distribution can be modified

in any way desired since it is still assumed that costless redistribution is

possible. Thus, despite strategic behavior, the injunctive remedy can be

used to achieve the efficient and the distributionally equitable outcome.

     In the present setting the damage remedy is no longer efficient regardless

of the liability schedule. In particular, if liability ever exceeds actual

damages, a situation is created in which the parties have an Incentive to

bargain over (at least some of) the gains from trade. For example, suppose

there is an absolute entitlement to the resident and that the liability

schedule is constant at $9,000. In considering whether to produce one unit

of output the factory will realize that while it will gain $8,000 (= $17,000
                                            —23—



—
    $9,000),   the resident will also gain $2,000 (      $9,000 — $7,000,   i.e.,

liability      payments less actual damages). By not producing the first unit of
output, the factory can deny this gain to the resident. If the factory
believes   that it is a better bargainer than the resident, it may threaten to

deny this gain unless the resident pays some specified amount up to his full

gain of $2,000. If the resident believes that he is the better bargainer,

he may not give in to this demand. As a result, the factory may end up

carrying out its threat in order to make future threats credible. Even if

the parties get past this first hurdle, the same problem arises with respect

to the second unit of output. Assuming strategic behavior, the parties'

bargaining will break down at some output short of the efficient output.

       The kind of "extortion" just described cannot occur under the damage

remedy if liability is equal to actual damages. To see this, suppose that

the factory is liable for the $7,000 actual damages imposed on the resident

starting at the entitlement of zero output. Since the resident is not over—

compensated, there is no incentive for the factory to threaten to not produ:

the first unit of output. Moreover, it is not possible for the resident

bribe the factory not to produce the first unit of output. The factory

would have to be paid its after—liability marginal profits of $10,000

                —
(=   $17,000        $7,000),   but the resident would not be willing to offer anything

since, with full compensation, he is indifferent whether the first unit is

produced or not. The resident is also indifferent with respect to every

other level of output. Thus, the factory will maximize its after—liability

profits by producing at the efficient output of three units.

       It is also the case that extortion cannot occur if liability is less

than actual damages up to the efficient output (and greater than actual
                                     —24—


damages beyond the efficient output)..2i Suppose, for example, that the

factory's liability is $5,000 for the first unit of output, $6,000 for the

second unit, and $7,000 for each subsequent unit. If the first unit is

                                                 — $5,000) and the resident
produced, the factory gains $12,000 (= $17,000

loses $2,000 (   $7,000 — $5,000).   Since the resident would only be willing

to pay up to $2,000 to prevent the factory from producing the first unit,

there is no way the resident could bribe the factory to not produce the

first unit. The same analysis applies to the second and all subsequent

units. Thus, the factory will again maximize its after—liability profits by

producing at the efficient output.

     When a damage remedy is used, the distribution of income is completely

determinate and independent of the relative bargaining strengths of the

parties if liability is less than or equal to actual damages up to the effi-

cient output (and greater than or equal to actual damages beyond the efficient

output). This was illustrated in the two preceding examples in which, respec-

tively, liability was equal to and less than actual damages. In both cases

the victim suffered his actual damages less liability payments and the factory

obtained its full profits less liability payments. There was no scope for

bargaining in either case. Note that in both cases the factory obtained all

of the gains from trade. By choosing the entitlement point and the particular

schedule of liability——less than or equal to actual damages——between the

entitlement point and the efficient output, it is possible to achieve a wide

range of distributional outcomes under the damage remedy. However, for

reasons discussed in the next section, not all possible income distributions

can be achieved in this way. But since it is still assumed that costless

redistribution Is possible, this limitation of the damage remedy does not

matter at this point. If the desired distribution of income cannot be achieved
                                     —25—


directly by the damage remedy, lump—sum transfers can be used to achieve it.

Thus, despite strategic behavior, if the liability schedule is chosen appro-

priately, the damage remedy can be used to reach the efficient and the

distributionally equitable result.

     Thus, despite the presence of strategic behavior, either an injunctive

remedy or a damage remedy can be used to reach the social welfare maximum,

provided redistribution is costless and the court has perfect information.

Strategic behavior can be overcome under the injunctive remedy by the appro-

priate choice of the entitlement point——coinciding with the efficient output.

And strategic behavior can be overcome under the damage remedy by the appro-

priate choice of the liability schedule——for example, coinciding with the

victim's actual damage schedule. Given perfect information, these choices

are feasible, and in each case they lead to the efficient outcome. The

availibility of costless redistribution again assures that distributional

equity will not be sacrificed by the pursuit of efficiency.
                                       —26—


                              VI. COSTLY REDISTRIBUTION


       The assumption thus far that income could be costlessly redistributed

by lump—sum transfers has been a convenient fiction. In general, income

redistribution is costly in the sense that the methods of redistribution

inevitably create "distortions" in individuals' behavior.J] For example, the

major distorting effect of an income tax is to lower the effective price of

leisure (which is the after—tax wage rate) relative to purchasable commodities,

thereby causing persons to work less hard, everything else equal. To emphasize

the implications of costly redistribution, it will now be assumed that redis-

tribution by means other than through the design of injunctive and damage

remedies is impossible. The assumption of strategic behavior will be maintained

from the previous section and it will still be assumed for now that the

courts have perfect information..?!

      In the present setting injunctive remedies are no longer able in general

to simultaneously achieve the efficient and the distributionally equitable

solution. In order to reach the efficient result, it was seen in the previous

section that it   is   necessary because of strategic behavior to choose the

efficient    output as the entitlement point. It was also seen that this choice
implied a particular distribution of income. Only by coincidence would this
distribution be the equitable one. Now, since lump—sum transfers are not
available,   the only way to change the distribution of income is   by changing
the   entitlement point. But if the entitlement point does not coincide with

the efficient solution, then efficiency will not be achieved because of

strategic behavior. Thus, in the present setting, there is a fundamental

conflict between efficiency and distributional equity under the injunctive

remedy.
                                      —27—


    It will be useful to consider how well the injunctive remedy can do when
                                      distributional equity rather than efficiency,
social welfare depends primarily on
                                             favors the resident—victim relative
and when the distributional goal strongly
                                                 remedy, the best off the resident
to the factory—injurer. Under the injunctive
                                     entitlement assigned to him. He is thereby
can be made is to have an absolute

guaranteed not to have to suffer any damages.     Moreover, the resident will

obtain some share of the gains from trade if the parties can agree on how to

share these gains. Since the parties are assumed to bargain strategically,
                                                                     first two
suppose they are able to reach an agreement only with respect to the
                                         efficient output of three units. The
units of output, stopping short of the

gains from trade in moving from zero
                                       output to two units is $16,000. Thus,

the resident will end up with some amount between $1 and $15,999 (assuming

dollars are not divisible), depending on the relative bargaining strengths

of the parties.
                                             that in order for the damage remedy
      It was seen in the previous section
                                               behavior, it is necessary that
 to avoid the problems created by strategic
                                      actual damages up to the efficient output
 liability be less than or equal to
                                                 beyond the efficient output). It
 (and greater than or equal to actual damages
                                               that there is no advantage in terms
 will now be shown in the following example
                                              setting liability less than actual
 of efficiency or distributional equity to

 damages.

      Suppose there is an absolute entitlement to the resident and that the

 factory's liability is $2,500 for the first unit of output, $4,500 for the
                                                unit. Thus, liability is less
 second unit, and $7,000 for each subsequent

 than actual damages for the first two units. Since the resident cannot bribe

                                              will produce at the output which
 the factory to reduce output, the factory
                                                      of three units. The resident
 maximizes its after—liability profits——an output
                                          —28—


suffers a marginal loss (after receiving the liability payment) of $4,500 from

the first unit (    $7,000 — $2,500), $2,500 from the second unit, and nothing

 from all subsequent units. Thus, at the efficient output the resident suffers

total losses of $7,000 (       $4,500 + $2,500). Similarly, the factory's marginal

profits (after making the liability payments) are $14,500 from the first unit

(=   $17,000 — $2,500), $8,500 from the second unit, and $2,000 from the third

unit. Thus, the factory's total after—liability profits are $25,000. Now

suppose that the entitlement is changed from an absolute entitlement to the

resident to an entitlement corresponding to one unit of output and, at the

same time, liability (beyond the entitlement point) is set equal to actual

damages. Again, the factory will end up producing at the efficient output of

three units. Since the resident's marginal damages are now $7,000 for the

first unit and zero for all subsequent units, the resident's total damages are

$7,000, the same as before. And since the factory's marginal profits are now

$17,000 for the first unit (since there is no liability), $6,000 for the second

unit (= $13,000 —   $7,000),   and $2,000 for the third unit, the factory's total

profits are $25,000, the same as before. Thus, both with respect to efficiency

and distributional equity, the outcome is unaffected.

      This example illustrates something which Is true in general: any distribu-

tional outcome achievable by choosing some entitlement point with liability

less than actual damages can be duplicated by starting from a different entitle-

ment point with liability equal to actual damages.! Put another way, there is

no advantage with respect to distributional equity to setting liability less

than actual damages.

      The discussion thus far suggests that the schedule of liability under the

damage remedy should coincide with the schedule of actual damages. Liability

schedules which overcompensate are subject to strategic behavior problems.
                                    —29—


Liability schedules which undercompensate provide no advantages. Assuming

that liability equals actual damages, the damage remedy will be efficient

regardless of the entitlement point since the factory will maximize its after—

liability profits at the efficient output. Although there may be an argument,

discussed below, for setting liability in excess of actual damages despite the

strategic behavior problems, it will be assumed for now that liability is set

equal to actual damages.

     Since setting liability equal to actual damages leads to theefficient

output regardless of the entitlement point, the choice of the entitlement

point can be based solely on distributional considerations. Each entitlement

corresponds to a particular distribution of income. For example, setting the

entitlement at two units of output implies that the factory's profits will be

$32,000 (= $17,000 + $13,000 + $2,000) and the resident's losses will be $14,000

(a loss of $7,000 from each of the first two units of output). If this is the

desired distributional outcome, then it can be reached under the damage remedy

(without sacrificing efficiency).

     Suppose, however, that the distributional goal strongly favors the resident

relative to the factory. The best off the resident can be made is to be given

an absolute entitlement. Assuming liability equals actual damages, this implies

that the resident will suffer no damages and the factory will make total profits

of $18,000 (   $10,000 + $6,000 + $2,000). Note that all of the gains from
trade resulting from the move from zero output to the efficient output of

three units——which amounts to $l8,000——go to the factory.

     The preceding discussion indicates a possible advantage of the Injunctive

remedy over the damage remedy In the present setting. Although the damage

remedy with liability equal to actual damages can achieve the efficient outcome,

it will In general be distributionally inferior to the Injunctive remedy
                                     —30—

when the distributional goal strongly favors the resident—victim relative to

the factory—injurer. Under the damage remedy with an absolute entitlement to

the resident, the resident suffers no damages but all of the gains from trade

go to the factory. Under the injunctive remedy with the same entitlement, it

was seen above that the resident is guaranteed not to have to suffer any damages,

but also in general obtains some fraction of the gains from trade even though

the parties do not reach the efficient output because of strategic behavior.

Thus, the resident is always at least as well off, and in general is better

off, under the injunctive remedy. If social welfare depends primarily on

distributional equity rather than efficiency and if the distributional goal

strongly favors the resident—victim relative to the factory—injurer, then the

injunctive remedy would be socially preferable to the damage remedy. However,

if efficiency is sufficiently important or If the distributional goal does not

strongly favor one party, then the damage remedy would be socially preferable.

     One final possibility needs to be considered. Thus far, it has been

assumed that under the damage remedy liability was set equal to actual damages

to avoid the problems of strategic behavior. It was shown that the injuricLive

remedy might be preferable to this version of the damage remedy on distributional

grounds. When distributional equity is the basis for prefering the Injunctive

remedy, it makes sense to consider the damage remedy with liability greater

than actual damages. Although this version of the damage remedy is, like the

injunctive remedy, generally inefficient, the question is whether the distribu-

tional effects of the damage remedy might now be preferable to those of the

injunctive remedy.

     It was seen in the previous section that If the resident is overcompensated

under the damage remedy, the difference between the liability payment and the

resident's actual damages Is subject to negotiation because the factory can
                                     —31—


deny this gain to the resident by not producing that unit of output. At best,

the resident is able to retain all of the excess compensation, and at worst,

the resident foregoes all of the excess compensation, leaving the resident

just fully compensated for actual damages.   Under the injunctive remedy, at

best, the resident can obtain all of the gains from trade, and at worst, the

resident is fully compensated for actual damages. If the resident is the

superior bargainer and comes close to his best outcome, then the resident

would be better off under the injunctive remedy unless the liability schedule

under the damage remedy coincides with the factory's marginal profit schedule.

If liability equals the factory's profits——a type of restitution remedy——then

all of the gains from trade are subject to negotiation under the damage remedy,

so the resident could still obtain all of the gains from trade if he is the

much superior bargainer.L'

       It may appear, therefore, that the injunctive remedy and the damage remedy

with liability equal to the factory's profits are equivalent since they both

lead the parties to bargain over all of the gains from trade. However, there

is one potentially important remaining difference. Under the injunctive remedy,

the resident—victim plays the role of the "hold out" and threatens the other

party. Under the damage remedy with overcompensation, the factory—injurer

adopts   this role. Thus, depending on which party is thought to be more stubborn,
it may be preferable to use one remedy or the other.
     Thus, when the parties bargain strategically and redistribution
                                                                     is costly,

neither remedy is always preferable. However, if the distributional goal does

 not   favor one party too strongly, then the damage remedy is superior to the

 injunctive remedy and can maximize social welfare. In this case, liability

 can be set equal to the victim's actual damages, thereby reaching the efficient
 output, and the entitlement point can be chosen to achieve the distributional
                                     —32—


goal. If the distributional goal is strongly weighted toward one party, then

the Injunctive remedy may be preferable. For example, if the victim's welfare

matters most, an absolute entitlement to the victim protected by an injunctive

remedy allows the victim to share in the gains from trade, unlike a damage

remedy with liability equal to actual damages. Although setting liability In

excess of actual damages also allows (at least some of) the gains from trade

to be bargained over, the Injunctive remedy may still be preferable if the

injurer is thought to be the more stubborn "hold out."
                                     —33—

                         VII. IMPERFECT INFORMATION, I:

                              ASSYMETRICAL INFORMATION


    The assumption thus far that courts have perfect information may be a

useful approximation in some circumstances but is probably not very realistic

in general. It will now be assumed that the courts have imperfect information

of the following sort. They know the resident—victim's schedule of damages

but do not know anything about the factory—injurer's schedule of profits. For

example, it is quite plausible that a court may have relatively good information

about the damages from pollution but not know much about the cost to the polluter

of abating pollution.! (Alternatively, it might be assumed that the court

knows the factory's profit schedule but not the resident's damage schedule..!

This case is not discussed since it is analogous to the present one.) The

assumptions of strategic behavior and costly redistribution will be maintained

from the earlier sections.

     In the present setting the injunctive remedy cannot achieve the efficient

outcome. The reason is simple. To reach the efficient outcome under the

injunctive remedy, it is necessary, because of strategic behavior, to choose

the entitlement point to coincide with the efficient output. But to determine

the efficient output the court must know when the marginal profits of the

factory from further production just fall below the marginal damages to the

resident. Knowledge of the damage schedule alone is obviously not sufficient

to determine this level of output. Although the court could "guess" what the

efficient output is, if the court makes a mistake,which it will in general,

the parties will not end up bargaining back to the efficient output because of

strategic behavior.

     It will be useful to consider again how well the injunctive remedy can do

when social welfare depends primarily on distributional equity rather than
                                      —34—


efficiency, and when the distributional goal strongly favors the resident—victim

relative to the factory—injurer. As it turns out, the discussion of this

issue in the previous section applies here as well. It is still best to assign

an absolute entitlement to the resident. And the resident will in general

still obtain some of the gains from trade——how much depends on the relative

bargaining strengths of the parties and on the extent to which they stop short

of the efficient output because of strategic behavior.

        In the present setting the damage remedy can reach the effiient outcome

despite the court's imperfect information. This can be guaranteed, however,

only by assigning an absolute entitlement to the resident—victim and setting

liability equal to actual damages——a type of strict liability solution. Any

other   entitlement point might lead to the efficient outcome but cannot be
guaranteed to. For example, suppose an entitlement point corresponding to
four   units of output is chosen. Since liability for producing the fifth unit

is $7,000 (the resident's damages) and the marginal profits of the factory are

only $1,000, the factory will choose to remain at an output of four units. At

this output, the resident will have an incentive to "bribe" the factory to

reduce output to three units, but because of strategic behavior, the parties

in general will not reach that output. On the other hand, if the court chooses

an entitlement point corresponding to one, two, or three units of output and

sets liability equal to actual damages, the damage remedy will lead the factory

to produce at the efficient output. Assuming liability is set equal to actual

damages, this shows that the damage remedy leads to the efficient outcome only

if the entitlement point is "below" the efficient output. However, since the

court cannot determine the efficient output from its limited information, the

only way to guarantee the efficient result is to choose the lowest possible

entitlement point——an absolute entitlement to the resident.
                                     —35—


       Obviously, if the liability schedule does not coincide with the damage

schedule, there is no reason to believe that the efficient output will be

reached regardless of which entitlement point is chosen. For the reasons

discussed in the preceding two sections, to avoid strategic behavior problems,

liability must be less than or equal to actual damages up to the efficient

output (and greater than or equal to actual damages thereafter). Since the

court does not have enough information to determine the efficient output, the

only liability schedule which will definitely satisfy this requirement is one

coinciding with the actual damage schedule.

       issuming that liability equals actual damages, the distributional goal

can be promoted by choosing an appropriate entitlement point. However, as

seen   above, if the entitlement point chosen is "beyond" the efficient output——
which the court cannot know——then the outcome will be inefficient because of
strategic behavior. Thus, there is a tradeoff between efficiency and
distributional   equity.

       Suppose the distributional goal strongly favors the resident relative to

the factory. The corresponding discussion of injunctive and damage remedies

in the previous section applies to the present setting essentially without

change. Under the damage remedy, if the resident is given an absolute entitle-

ment with liability equal to actual damages, the resident will not suffer any

damages but all of the gains from trade will go to the factory.    Under the

injunctive remedy, at least some of the gains from trade, and possibly most of

the gains, go to the resident. Thus, if social welfare depends primarily on

distributional equity and if the resident is strongly favored relative to the

factory, then the injunctive remedy would be socially preferable to the damage

remedy. However, if it is believed that the factory—injurer rather than the
                                    —36—


resident—victim is the less stubborn bargainer, then it may make sense to use

the damage remedy with liability in excess of actual damages in order to reverse

the role of who has the right to "hold out."

    Thus, the comparison between injunctive and damage remedies is quite

similar to the discussion in the previous section. On balance, however, if

the court has assymetrical information, the damage remedy becomes less attrac-

tive relative to the injunctive remedy. When the court had perfect information,

the damage remedy could both reach the efficient output and achieve the distribu—

tionally equitable result if the distributional goal does not strongly favor

one party. Now, however, there is frequently a tradeoff between efficiency

and distributional equity under the damage remedy even when one party is not

strongly favored. Any entitlement choice other than an absolute one to the

resident may lead to an inefficient outcome.
                                   —37—

                       VIII. IMPERFECT INFORMATION, II:

                              UNDERSTATED DAMAGES


    The assumption in the previous section that the court knows the victim's

damages (but not the injurer's profits) may be unrealistic in many contexts.

It will now be assumed that the court systematically underestimates the victim's

damages. This would seem to be a plausible assumption because in practice the

victim's compensation for damages is limited to "objective" damages, excluding

any "subjective" (or "idiosyncratic") element. Since the damage's actually

suffered by the victim include the subjective component, the damage award will

not fully compensate the victim...7i Thus, it will now be assumed in the numerical

example that the court sets liability at $4,000 per unit of output even though

the victim's actual damages are $7,000. The assumptions of strategic behavior

and costly redistribution will be maintained from the earlier sections.

     The discussion of the injunctive remedy in the previous section applies

to the present setting as well. The court cannot achieve the efficient outcome

because it does not have enough information to determine the efficient output.

And when social welfare depends primarily on the victim's welfare, an absolute

entitlement to the victim guarantees not only that the victim will not suffer

any damages but also that he will obtain some share of the gains from trade.

      In the present setting, the damage remedy can no longer in general reach

 the efficient outcome. Consider, for example, what happens when the court

 uses an absolute entitlement to the resident—victim.   It was seen in the previous

 section that, given this entitlement point, the damage remedy leads to the

 efficient output when liability is set equal to actual damages. Now, however,

 if liability is set equal to the court's estimate of damages, the damage remedy

 will lead the factory—injurer initially to "overshoot" the efficient output
                                    —38—


since liability is too low. In the numerical example, the factory would produce

four units of output since marginal profits exceed the marginal liability

payments of $4,000 up to and including the fourth unit. Thus, the factory

will produce one unit too many. This is not In general the final outcome for

the reasons now discussed.

     Since the initial production decision of the factory is an Inefficient

one, there are potential gains from trade. Starting at an output of four

units, the resident would gain $3,000 if output were reduced byone unit; his

actual damages would fall by $7,000 but he would lose a liability payment of

$4,000. The factory would lose only $1,000 by this change; its profits would

fall by $5,000 but it would not have to make a liability payment of $4,000 to

the resident. Thus, there is an incentive for the resident to pay the factory

some amount between $1,000 and $3,000 for the factory to reduce output by

one unit. Assuming strategic behavior, such a deal will in general not occur.

     There is another reason why the parties may not remain at the output of

four units initially chosen by the factory. Suppose the factory increased its

output to five units. The resident would suffer additional damages of $7,000

and would receive only $4,000 In liability payments, so he would be worse off

by $3,000. The factory would make additional profits of $1,000 but would have

to make a $4,000 liability payment, so It would also be worse off by $3,000.

Thus, the factory is in a position to threaten to increase output to five

units unless the resident pays some amount up to $3,000. If the factory believes

it is the better bargainer, such a threat might be made. But if the resident

believes he is the better bargainer, he might refuse to pay what the factory

demands. As a result, the factory may carry out the threat in order to establish

credibility in the next round of negotiations. If the threat is carried out,

so the factory increases output to five units, the same kind of situation
                                        —39—


arises at five units. At worst, this process could lead the factory to produce

seven units.

     It will now be useful to compare the injunctive and damage remedies when

an absolute entitlement is assigned to the victim for distributional reasons

and, in both cases, strategic behavior leads to the worst possible outcome.

     Under the injunctive remedy, the worst outcome is for the parties to remain

at the entitlement point. At this outcome, the factory earns no profits and

the resident suffers no damages, whereas at the efficient output, of three

units, total profits exceed total damages by $18,000. Thus, there is $18,000

which the parties could split between themselves if they could agree on how to

share it. This amount will be referred to as the "efficiency loss."

     Under the damage remedy, the worst outcome is for the parties to end up

at an output of seven units as a result of the factory having carried out its

threats..' At this output, the factory's total profits are $35,000 and

its total liability payments are $28,000 ($4,000 per unit of output), so its

after—liability profits are $7,000. The resident's total damages are $49,000

but he receives $28,000 in liability payments, so his damages after compensation

are $21,000. Thus, between the parties, there is a net loss of $14,000

(   $21,000 — $7,000)..2i    At the efficient output of three units there is a

net gain of $18,000. Thus, relative to the efficient outcome the parties are

worse off by $32,000 (      $14,000 + $18,000). This is the efficiency loss under

the damage remedy.

      In terms of efficiency, the preceding discussion shows that when the

parties bargain strategically and the court underestimates the resident—victim's

damages, the injunctive remedy may be preferable to the damage remedy. In the

example, the efficiency loss under the damage remedy was $32,000, whereas it

was only $18,000 under the injunctive remedy. In general, either remedy could
                                     —40—


be the more efficient one, depending on the degree of strategic behavior and

on the extent to which the court underestimates damages.

     The Injunctive remedy may also be preferable to the damage remedy in

terms of distributional equity. Suppose the distributional goal strongly

favors the resident—victim enough so that he is given an absolute entitlement

(regardless of which remedy is used). The preceding discussion showed that

when the worst outcome occurs because of strategic behavior, the resident

suffered no damages under the injunctive remedy and uncompensated damages of

$21,000 under the damage remedy. Similarly, the factory obtained no profits

under the injunctive remedy and after—liability profits of $7,000 under the

damage remedy. Thus, the resident—victim is much better off and the factory—

injurer is only somewhat worse off under the Injunctive remedy. Since it is

assumed that the distributional goal strongly favors the resident, it is

likely that the injunctive remedy would be preferred. In general, either

remedy could be the more equitable one, depending on the specific outcomes

under the two remedies and on the relative distributional preferences regarding

the two parties.

     Thus, when the parties bargain strategically, when income redistribution

is costly, and when courts underestimate the victim's damages, neither remedy

is generally preferable. This is true regardless of whether the distributional

goal strongly favors one party (recall that when the court was assumed to have

perfect information, the damage remedy was preferred if the distributional

goal did not favor one party too strongly). Once the courts base liability on

an underestimate of the victim's damages, the damage remedy is subject to

the same kind of strategic behavior problem as the injunctive remedy. This

accounts for why, depending on the extent to which the parties bargain

strategically and the extent to which the court understates damages, either

remedy   could be more desirable In terms of efficiency and distributional equity.
                                   —41—


                                IX. MANY VICTIMS


     In a nuisance dispute in which there is more than one victim, it is often

not practical to have the class of victims represented by a single party.

(The same statement applies to injurers, but for simplicity it will continue

to be assumed that there is only one injurer.) For concreteness, now suppose

there are 1,000 resident—victims, each suffering $7 in damages for each unit

of the factory's output. Thus, the data in Table 1 still apply, but in the

case of the residents, refer to their aggregate damages. In these circumstances,

social welfare will be assumed to depend on the victims' aggregate damages.

Much, but not all, of the previous comparison of injunctive and damage remedies

carries over to the present setting.

     In the best of all possible worlds——cooperative behavior, costless redis-

tribution, and perfect information——injunctive and damage remedies are equally

desirable for the reasons discussed earlier. (However, the assumption of

cooperative behavior is especially unrealistic when there are many victims

because of the cost of their getting together to negotiate with the factory.)

The efficient outcome can be reached by setting the entitlement point equal to

the efficient output under the injunctive remedy and by setting liability

equal to actual damages under the damage remedy. The equitable distribution

of income can be achieved in both cases by lump—sum transfers.

     Also as before, the presence of strategic behavior does not change matters

by itself, although strategic behavior now operates in a different way because

of the large number of victims involved. Under the injunctive remedy, if the

entitlement point corresponds to an output less than the efficient output of

three units, each of the 1,000 victims has the power to block the factory's

desired increase in output. In order to obtain as much of the gains from

trade as possible, each resident would attempt to be the "hold out"——the final
                                  —42—


resident whose consent has to be obtained. The likely outcome is that the

aggregate demands of the residents will exceed the maximum willingness to pay

of the factory, so the parties will remain at the initial entitlement. If the

entitlement point exceeds the efficient output, then the factory must be paid

to reduce output. But then each resident will attempt to take a "free ride"

on the others' contribution. As a result, the parties will remain at the

entitlement point. Efficiency can still be achieved, however, by choosing an

entitlement point which coincides with the efficient outcome. Aid distributional

equity can be achieved by lump—sum transfers. Under the damage remedy, the

efficient result can be reached if the entitlement point corresponds to an

output below the efficient output and liability is equal to actual damages.

Each resident is then compensated for his actual damages and there is no scope

for strategic behavior. The distributionally equitable outcome can be achieved

through lump—sum transfers.

     Unlike in the case of one injurer and one victim, if costly redistribution

is also a problem, the damage remedy is superior to the injunctive remedy.

(Recall that in the case of one injurer and one victim the injunctive remedy

could be superior if social welfare depended to a sufficient extent on one

party's welfare.) Under the injunctive remedy, the parties remain at the

entitlement point either because of "hold out" or "free rider" behavior.

Thus, choosing the entitlement point generally Involves a tradeoff between

efficiency and distributional equity. Whatever entitlement point is chosen, a

better result can be achieved under the damage remedy. For example, suppose

social welfare depends primarily on distributional equity and the distributional

goal strongly favors the resident—victims. Under the injunctive remedy, an

absolute entitlement to the residents guarantees that they will not suffer any

uncompensated damages, but the hold out problem prevents them or the factory
                                       —43—

from obtaining any of the gains from trade. Under the damage remedy with the

same entitlement point and liability equal to actual damages, the residents

are no better or no worse off, but the factory is induced to produce at the

efficient output and is better off by the gains from trade. Thus, social

welfare is improved..i It may even be possible now to share the gains from

trade under the damage remedy by overcompensating the resident—victims without

running into the "extortion" problem discussed earlier (see Section

In any event, the damage remedy is preferable to the injunctive remedy in

these circumstances.

       The same argument in favor of the damage remedy applies when the court

also   has imperfect information of the asymmetrical sort——complete knowledge
of the resident—victims' damage schedules but no knowledge of the factory—
injurer's   profit (or, equivalently, cost of abatement) schedule. Under the

injunctive remedy, the parties remain at the entitlement point, whereas tinder

the damage remedy the factory may be   induced to produce at the efficient output
at   no sacrifice of the welfare of the residents.

       Finally, if the court has imperfect information which leads it to under-

state the victims' damages, then, as in the case of one injurer and one victim,

there is no clear preference for injunctive or damage remedies. The reason

for this conclusion is similar to the earlier discussion and can be illustrated

by a simple example. Suppose, on distributional grounds, an entitlement is

chosen corresponding to two units of output. Under the injunctive remedy,

this will be the final outcome because of "hold out" behavior. The efficiency

loss is $2,000 (the gains from trade from two units to the efficient output of

three units). Under the damage remedy, the outcome depends on the court—imposed

schedule of liability. Suppose the court's estimate of damages is $4 per unit

of output for each of the 1,000 residents. Given liability of $4,000 per
                                     —44—


unit of output starting with the third unit, the factory will maximize its

profits by producing at four units (see Table 1), overshooting the efficient

output by one unit. Because of free rider behavior, the residents will not

bribe the factory to reduce output. Similarly, any extortion threat by the

factory to increase output will be met by inaction; each resident will let the

others pay. Thus, unlike the case of one injurer and one victim, the initial

profit   maximizing output of the factory will be the final output. At this
output (four units), there is an efficiency loss of $2,000, the same as for
the injunctive remedy in this example. But the distributional outcome may be
worse under the damage   remedy since the resident—victims are worse off than

they   would be if they were at the entitlement point (because they are under—
compensated for the third and fourth units of production). Moreover, if the
residents'   damages were understated by an even greater degree, the efficiency

loss under the damage remedy would exceed that of the injunctive remedy.

       Thus, if there are many victims, the same basic conclusion applies under

the most realistic set of assumptions: neither remedy is generally prefer-

able when the parties bargain strategically, when income redistribution is

costly, and when the courts underestimate the victims' damages.

       It should be pointed out, however, that the analysis of injunctive and

damage remedies when there are many victims may be of limited relevance for

two reasons. First, there are numerous ways in which the interests of the

parties can be aggregated. A class action is the most common way. Once

this occurs, the analysis of the case of one injurer and one victim is more

relevant.! Second, if the victims' interests cannot be aggregated, publicly

enforced remedies are probably preferable to either of the privately enforced

remedies   discussed here.±.i Regulations or fines are two common examples. For
these reasons, the emphasis in this essay has been on the case of one injurer
and one victim.
                                                     —45—


                                                 X. CONCLUSION


       It will now be useful to reconsider the three traditional arguments for

damage remedies over injunctive remedies discussed in the introduction. This

will be done only within the case of one injurer and one victim. The assumptions

which seem most realistic——strategic behavior, costly redistribution and

understated damages——will be emphasized.

       The first argument against injunctive remedies was that they allowed tle

plaintiff to "extort" the defendant, that is, to obtain compensaiion (possibly

far) in excess of the plaintiff's actual damages.! It is now clear that

"excess" compensation simply means that the plaintiff is sharing the gains

from trade with the defendant. Within the present framework, neither party is

"entitled" to these gains in the first place. Thus, as has been seen, the

desirability       of these extortion benefits depends on the distributional goal
which is     being    promoted. If the distributional goal strongly favors the plain-
tiff and     redistribution by other means is costly, then the excess compensation

may   be desirable.
       To the extent that this argument against injunctive remedies is valid

because the extortion subverts the distributional goal, the argument may also

apply equally forcefully to damage remedies. If the court has imperfect infor-

mation and understates the plaintiff—victim's damages, then the defendant—injurer

is    put in a position to "extort" the plaintiff in two ways. Since the defendant's
output    will initially exceed the efficient output when damages are understated,

the plaintiff will have an incentive to bribe the defendant to reduce output.

But the defendant can hold out for more than his lost profits, thereby extorting

the plaintiff (in the same sense as under the injunctive remedy). Moreover,

the defendant can threaten to increase output beyond his profit maximizing

output, extorting the plaintiff in this way. Thus, the extortion argument
                                    —46—


against the injunctive remedy may be misguided even on Its own terms if,

realistically, the court underestimates the plaintiff's damages.

     The second argument for damage remedies concerned the efficiency conse-

quences of unsuccessful extortion. According to this argument, strategic

behavior under the injunctive remedy might lead to the enforcement of the

injunction when it was not efficient to enforce it. Given strategic behavior,

this criticism Is valid whenever the entitlement point does not coincide with

the efficient outcome. However, the same type of criticism applies at least

as forcefully to the damage remedy when, realistically, courts are assumed to

underestimate the plaintiff's damages. As noted in the previous paragraph,

when damages are understated, the defendant is put in a position to extort the

plaintiff In two ways. Strategic behavior might lead to the defendant's rejec-

tion of the "bribe" from the plaintiff to reduce output. Or strategic behavior

may lead the defendant to carry out threats to increase output. Either way,

the efficiency loss from strategic behavior under the damage remedy could be

larger than the efficiency loss under the injunctive remedy.

     The third argument favoring damage remedies was based on the apparent

distributional flexibility and fine tuning inherent in the liability schedule——

the schedule can allow for any amount of overcompensation ("bonus payments")

or undercompertsation. In contrast, it was noted, the distributional outcome

under the injunctive remedy is indeterminate because of strategic behavior.

However, the potential distributional superiority of damage remedies requires

that the courts have perfect information about the plaintiff's damage schedule.

Even then, it has been shown that there is never an advantage to using a liability

schedule which undercompensates the victim. Moreover, it has been shown that

liability schedules which overcompensate the victim are subject to the same

kinds of strategic behavior problems which arise under the injunctive remedy,
                                   —47—


thereby destroying the fine tuning advantage. And when, more realistically,

courts understate damages, the distributional advantages of the damage remedy

may disappear altogether.

     The preceding discussion should not be interpreted as stating a case for

the use of injunctive remedies. Rather, the goal here has been to examine

systematically whether the conventional arguments favoring damage remedies are

logically coherent. They are not. Under no set of consistent assumptions is

there an unambiguous case for damage remedies (except, possibly, when there

are many victims). And under the most realistic set of assumptions——strategic

behavior, costly redistribution, and understated damages——the argument could

easily go either way.i

     Despite the indeterminacy of the optimal remedy in theory, what the

best remedy is in practice may turn out to be clear. For example, if it seems

that the parties would act very strategically and that the court has relatively

good information about damages, then a strong case for a damage remedy can be

made. On the other hand, if the parties are likely to bargain cooperatively

and the court has bad information about damages, an injunctive remedy may be

preferred. The arguments developed in this essay may be helpful in clarifying

the goals in resolving nuisance disputes and, given the goals, the principles

relevant to choosing the best remedy.
                                     —48—


                                     NOTES



        Law School and Economics Department, Stanford University; and National

Bureau of Economic Research. Research on this paper was supported by the

National Science Foundation through a grant (SOC 78—20159) to the Law and

Economics Program of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any opinions

expressed are those of the author and not those of the NBER. Helpful

comments were provided by Paul Goldstein, James Krier, Frank MLchelman,

Steven Shavell, and Henry Steiner.

        Many of the ideas in this article were developed primarily for an

economics audience in more technical form in Polinsky, Controlling

Externalities and Protecting Entitlements: Property Right, Liability Rule,

and Tax—Subsidy Approaches, 8 J. Legal Studies 1 (1979) [hereinafter cited

as Controlling Externalities] and Polinsky, On the Choice Between Property

Rules and Liability Pules, 18 Econ. Inquiry ——— (1980) [hereinafter cited as

On the Choice]. The present article, besides being non—technical and oriented

primarily towards a legal audience, organizes the material quite differently.

        It is also assumed that the injurer and the victim are not in any

kind of contractual relationship.

    The traditional common law doctrines of intentional private nuisance

and intentional trespass probably come closest to representing what I mean

by a nuisance dispute (although I do not necessarily mean to limit nuisance

disputes to cases which fall within these doctrines). See, e.g., Restatement

(Second) of Torts § 157—164 (intentional trespass), 821D, 825 (intentional

private nuisance) (1965).

        See notes 42—43 infra and accompanying text.
                                        —49—

         Calabresi & Melamed, Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability:

One View of the Cathedral, 85 Harv. L. Rev. 1089 (1972).

         The following comments are indicative:

           Nuisance law would function better if, in general, a plaintiff

       in a nuisance case were limited to choosing between the remedies of

       rule two (damages) and rule four...[reverse damages].

Ellickson, Alternatives to Zoning: Covenants, Nuisance Rules, and

Fines as Land Use Controls, 40 U. Chi. L. Rev. 681, 738 (1973).

            Heavier reliance by courts upon...[damage remedies] would...

       benefit not only...the immediate parties to nuisance actions, but

       also society at large.

Rabin, Nuisance Law: Rethinking Fundamental Assumptions, 63 Virginia L.

Rev. 1299, 1300 (1977).

            The Comment concludes that the ideals of flexibility and efficient

       cost allocation embodied in Boomer [a classic damage remedy case]

       should be followed in all nuisance cases.

Comment, Internalizing Externalities: Nuisance Law and Economic Efficiency

53 New York Univ. L. Rev. 219, 220 (1978).

       Calabresi & Melamed, supra note 4, present arguments for both injunctive

and damage remedies. Their discussion, id. at 1118—19, 1127, seems to imply

that injunctions are more efficient when there is only one victim and one

injurer. It       should   be pointed out,   however,   that this argument has been

disputed——correctly        in my opinion——by Ellickson, supra, at 743—47; see
note   8 infra.     Calabresi and Melamed are more explicit, id. at 1106—10,
1119—21, that damage remedies tend to be more efficient when there are many

victims. More recently, Calabresi has come out more strongly in favor of

damage   remedies:
                                   —50—


          [The damage remedy is] a device for promoting clearly collective

     goals..., while still permitting a wide degree of atomistic choice and

     determination...[T]he next century will be the century not of contracts

     nor of criminal law.. .but of torts and of the [use of damage remedies].

Calabresi, Torts——The Law of the Mixed Society, in American Law: The Third

Century 103, 112—13 (B. Schwartz ed. 1976) (footnote omitted).

     R. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (2d ed. 1977), argues that damag€

remedies should be used when "transaction costs" are high and Vhat injunctive

remedies should be used when such costs are low. Id. at 51. He notes that

transaction costs are highest when there is one injurer and many victims,

but that transaction costs "may be quite high" even when there is just one

injurer and one victim (because of strategic behavior). Id at 45.

     Michelman, Pollution as a Tort: A Non—Accidental Perspective on

Calabresi's Costs, 80 Yale L. J. 647, 669—73 (1971), concludes that when

there is one injurer and many victims, damage remedies should probably be

used unless the efficient outcome is for the injurer's activity to be

enjoined (that Is, when the injurer is the "cheapest cost avoider"). Id. at

672. He does not consider the case of one injurer and one victim.

     There are some recent commentators who seem to prefer (or are at least

much more sympathetic towards) the injunctive remedy. See, e.g., Note, In-

junction Negotiations: An Economic, Moral, and Legal Analysis, 27 Stanford

L. Rev. 1563, 1567—68, 1569 n.24 (1975) (arguing that injunctions are more

efficient than damages when the measure of damages understates the plaintiff's

true damages and the efficient outcome is for the defendant's activity to he

enjoined) [hereinafter cited as Note, Injunction Negotiations], and 0. Fiss,

The Civil Rights Injuction 74-80 (1978). See also Comment, Equity and the

Eco—System: Can Injunctions Clear the Air?, 68 Mich. L. Rev. 1254 (1970).
                                   —51—


        Since historically both injunctive and damage remedies have been

available in nuisance cases, Restatement (Second) of Torts § 821D (Comment

a) (1965), it is not possible to generalize accurately about trends without

an empirical investigation of the decisions over many years. However, most

commentators believe that damage remedies are being used increasingly by

American courts. The following "capsule history" of judicial practices in

nuisance cases is representative of this view:

          At common law, courts traditionally granted injunctiye relief

     (rather than damages) upon a showing that the defendant interferred

     unreasonably with the plaintiff's enjoyment of his or her own land...

     Courts gradually became aware that the costs to society of enforcing

     injunctions might exceed the true costs of the harms they remedied;

     but rather than shift to a damage remedy, courts responded by refusing

     to find nuisances at all when the harm resulted from activities that

     were socially beneficial. More recently, however, courts have begun

     to recognize the appropriateness of damage remedies...

Note, Efficient Land Use and the Internalization of Beneficial Spillovers:

An Economic and Legal Analysis, 31 Stanford L. Rev. 457, 464—65 (1979)

(footnotes omitted).

     See also Rabin, supra note 5, at 1300 n,4 (referring to "...the trend

toward awarding damages rather than an injunction in nuisance cases..."),

and Note, Injunction Negotations, supra note 5, at 1566 n.13 (mentioning

 "[tjhe preference of today's court system for damages over injunctive

 relief...").

     The leading modern American cases illustrating the use of damage

 remedies are Boomer v. Atlantic Cement Co., 26 N.Y.2d 219, 257 N.E.2d 870,

 309 N.Y.S.2d 312 (1970), and Spur Indus., Inc. v. Del E. Webb Dev. Co., 108
                                      —52—


Ariz. 178, 494 P.2d 700 (1972). The precedential value of the Boomer

decision is in some doubt as a result of Copart Industries, Inc. v.

Consolidated Edison Co., 41 N.Y.2d 564, 362 N.E.2d 968, 394 N.Y.S2d 169

(1977).

     In England, there is apparently a stronger preference for injunctions

relative to damages. See Ogus & Richardson, Economics and the Environment:

A Study of Private Nuisance, 36 Cambridge L. J. 284, 309 (referring to "   th
clear English judicial preference for [injunctions] over [damages]").

Recently, however, there may have been "[s]ome easing in the judicial

attitude" with regard to this preference. Id. at 310, citing Miller v.

Jackson and Another, [1977] 3 W.L.R. 20.

     ii These three arguments have not to my knowledge been stated in any

one place, although each has been made explicitly. See note 8 infra.

          The preference by recent legal commentators for damage remedies,

supra note 5, is based primarily on the strategic behavior argument and

secondarily on the bonus payment argument. For examples of the former

argument, see Calabresi & Melamed, supra note 4, at 1106—07, 1119 (discussing

"holdout" and "freeloader" problems when there is one injurer and many

victims), and Ellickson, supra note 5, at 742—47 (dfscussing the same

problems when there is one or many victims). Although Calabresi and Melamed

seem to believe that strategic behavior problems only arise when there are

many victims (or many injurers), Ellickson has pointed out that strategic

behavior problems can also arise when there is only one injurer and one

victim. This point has also been emphasized, for example, by Regan, The

Problem of Social Cost Revisited, 15 J. Law & Econ. 427, 428—32 (1972), and

by Cooter, The Cost of Believing Coase's Theorem, Working Paper No. 76,

Dept. of Econ., Univ. of Calif. at Berkeley, Nov. 1976. See also R. Posner,

supra note 5, at 45. For an example of the bonus payment argument, see
                                   —53—

Calabresi & Melamed, supra note 4, at 1110, 1121. The term    "bonus   payment"

is due to Ellickson, supra note 5, at 735—37, although he uses the term

somewhat differently than here. As Ellickson uses it, a bonus payment is

to be added to an "objective" market value measure of damages in order to

more closely approximate the actual "subjective" damages suffered by the

plaintiff. In his view, these payments "could be defined through 1egisled

schedules, perhaps as specific percentages of the market value award," i&

at 736. Thus, if one wanted to pursue a distributional goal through the

damage award, one could use a smaller or larger percentage.

     Some earlier legal commentators who preferred the damage remedy based

their case primarily on the extortion argument. See, e.g., Keeton & Morris,

Notes on "Balancing the Equities," 18 Texas L. Rev. 412 (1940).

     The increasing judicial preference for damage remedies, to the extent

that there is a trend, supra note 6, seems to be based on the extortion and

strategic behavior arguments. The former argument is embodied in the

equitable hardship doctrine, which states that if there is scope for

substantial extortion under the injunctive remedy, it should not be used

(even if alternative remedies result in too little compensation). See

Note, Injunction Negotiations, supra note 5, at 1577 ("Virtually every

United States legal jurisdiction has turned to the equitable hardship

doctrine as a cure for the "extortion" problem, and its use is still

growing;" footnote omitted). The strategic behavior argument is illustrated,

for example, in Boomer v. Atlantic Cement Co., 26 N.Y.2d 219, 257 N.E.2d

870, 309 N.Y.S.2d 312 (1970). The court explicitly assumed that if an

injunction were granted to the plaintiffs, they would not settle the case

despite the fact that their damages were $185,000 and the defendant's

investment in his plant was $45,000,000. Id. at 225, 257, N.E.2d at 873, 309
                                    —54—



N.Y.S.2d at 316—17. The strategic behavior argument is also implicit in

the defense to an injunction that the plaintiff acted in bad faith or for

the purpose of a "vexatious lawsuit." See W. Prosser, Handbook of the Law

of Torts 611 (4th ed. 1971), citing Edwards v. Allovez Mining Co., 38 Mich.

46 (1879) and Abdella v. Smith, 34 Wis. 2d 393, 149 N.W.2d 537 (1967).

    2! These are the same goals adopted by Calabresi & Melamed, supra note

4, at 1093—1101. Although they also discuss "other justice reasons," id.

at 1102—05, they "admit that it is hard to know what content can be poured

into that term, at least given the very broad definitions of economic

efficiency and distributional goals that we have used," Id. at 1102. For

an interesting discussion of nuisance law based on principles of "corrective

justice" ("rendering to each person whatever redress is required because of

the violation of his rights by others"), see Epstein, Nuisance Law: Corrective

Justice. and Its Utilitarian Constraints, 8 J. Legal Studies 49, 50 (1979).

See also Ogus & Richardson, supra note 6, at 317—23, and see generally R.

Stewart & J. Krier, Environmental Law and Policy: Readings, Materials and

Notes 168—97 (2d ed. 1978).

     12! See, e.g., R. Musgrave & P. Musgrave, Public Finance in Theory and

Practice 691—94 (1973).

     IL' See, e.g., Note, An Economic Analysis of Land Use Conflicts, 21

Stanford L. Rev. 293 (1969), and Starrett & Zeckhauser, Treating External

Diseconomies——Markets or Taxes?, In Statistical and Mathematical Aspects of

Pollution Problems 65, 72—82 (J. Pratt ed. 1974),.

     1] In   order to justify this assumption, it is necessary to assume that

the parties have special reasons for wanting to be at their present locations

(for example, due to specialized production advantages or locational
                                    —55—

amenities) and that they therefore are willing to pay the most to be there

regardless of how the nuisance dispute is resolved. Otherwise, it would be

necessary to consider the possibility of "entry" of other parties or of

"exit" of the existing parties, thereby greatly complicating the discussion.

For analyses of injunctions and damages when the efficient solution involves

entry or exit, see Frech, The Extended Coase Theorem and Long Run Equilibrium:

The Nonequivalence of Liability Rules and Property Rights, 17 Econ. Inquii

254 (1979) (entry and exit of both injurers and victims when t1ie parties do

not bargain with each other), and Polinsky, Controlling Externalities,

supra note 1 (exit of the victim when the parties do bargain with each other).

          In many realistic situations of this sort, there are other non—

represented "parties" such as nearby communities dependent on the factory's

employment. See, e.g., Nichelman, supra note 5, at 681—83, and R. Stewart

& J. Krier, supra note 9, at 230, 245. The issues raised by the existence

of such parties are not discussed in this essay.

          For expositional reasons, I will refer to this output as the

efficient one even though this may not be strictly correct. See note 18

in fra.

          This, of course, assumes that the factory has no fixed costs and

that there are no fixed damages.

          See text at notes 17—18 infra.

     171 See note 14 supra.

     11 For expositional simplicity, I will treat the distributional issues

as distinct from the efficiency issues even though this is strictly correct

only if income can be costlessly redistributed between the parties. See,

e.g., Polinsky, Economic Analysis as a Potentially Defective Product: A

Buyer's Guide to Posner's Economic Analysis of Law, 87 Rarv. L. Rev. 1655,

1665—69, 1676—80 (1974)
                                      —56—


       2i   See, e.g., Section VI infra.

            See note 31 infra and accompanying text.

            Under circumstances different from the ones assumed here, it may

not be desirable to sacrifice efficiency to promote distributional goals

through the choice of a legal rule. See Shavell, A Note on Efficiency vs.

Equity in Legal Rulemaking: Should Equity Matter Given Optimal Income

Taxation?, unpublished manuscript, Dept. of Econ., Harvard Univ., Aug.

1979. But see Kronman, Distributive Justice, Libertarianism and the Law

of   Contracts, unpublished manuscript, Yale Law School, Sept. 1979.

            See, e.g., Calabresi & Melamed, supra note 4, and Ellickson, supra

note 5, at 738—48.

            Spur. Indus., Inc. v. Del E. Webb Dev. Co., 108 Arlz. 178, 494 P.2d

700 (1972).

            What I am referring to is called "rule four' by Calabresi & Melamed,

supra note 4, at 1116, a "compensated injunction" by Ellickson, supra note

5, at 738 n.202, and a "conditional injunction" by Rabin, supra note 5,

at 1300. Despite Ellickson's and Rabin's inclusion of the word "injunction"

in their terminology, their definition of the remedy clearly makes it a

form of damage remedy.

            This seems to be the position of the Restatement (Second) of Torts

(1965). The "reasonableness" standard in intentional private nuisances

limits the circumstances in which liability for harm is imposed. Id. at

§826, Comment b. R. Stewart & J. Krier, supra note 9, suggest that the

reasonableness standard might be interpreted as (in my terminology) defining

an entitlement corresponding to the efficient output. Id. at 225—26. For

an example of an Intermediate entitlement in practice, see Smith v. Staso

Milling Co., 18 F.2d 736 (2d CIr. 1927) (allowing a limited amount of

dust from defendant's slate crushing mill).
                                   —57—



         See generally Calabresi & Melamed, supra note 4, Ellickson, supra

note 5, at 738—48, and Rabin, supra note 5.

     There is also a fourth possibility that has not been referred to in

the text——a damage remedy working in both directions. To my knowledge,

this remedy has not been considered by courts or legal commentators. Since

it turns out in most of the situations considered in this essay not to be

helpful, I will ignore it.

         This setting essentially corresponds to that assumed by the "Coase

Theorem" with zero transaction costs. Coase, The Problem of Social Cost, 3

J. Law & Econ. 1 (1960). See also Calabresi, Transaction Costs, Resource

Allocation and Liability Rules——A Comment, 11 J. Law & Econ. 67 (1968).

         Litigation may be explained by other factors besides strategic

behavior, such as different expectations about winning the case.

    ?21 To make the points I want to make, it is only necessary to assume

that they fail to reach an agreement at the earliest possible opportunity.

The delay due to strategic behavior is a permanent loss even if the parties

eventually resolve the dispute efficiently.

         If liability were less than actual damages beyond the efficient

output, the factory would have an incentive to threaten to produce beyond

its after—liability profit maximizing output (which in turn would be beyond

the efficient output)

    JI See, e.g., the discussion in Polinsky, supra note 18, at 1676—78,

and the references cited.

        Since, with perfect information, the court could base transfers on

criteria over which the parties have no control, it may seem peculiar to

assume that the court cannot use lump—sum transfers. The assumptions made
                                    —58—

 in this section are useful pedagogically because they allow the effects of

 costly redistribution to be understood most simply. Moreover, as an

 institutional matter, courts are not allowed to engage explicitly in

 general redistribution.

         This is demonstrated formally in Polinsky, On the Choice, supra

note 1, at

     2!! The same would be true if liability were to exceed the factory's

     profits.

         See Calabresi & Melamed, supra note 4, at 1119—21.

         See Calabresi & Melamed, supra note 4, at 1120—21, and I. Stewart

& J. Krier, supra note 9, at 252.

     21/ See, e.g., R. Stewart & J. Krier, supra note 9, at 201, 243, 283.

See also 1 J. Bonbright, The Valuation of Property 14—16, 40—97, 269—97

(1937). It is, of course, possible that a court's estimate of the "objective"

damages could be too high, leading to overcompensation.

         If, as assumed, the factory cannot produce more than seven units,

then It would probably not carry out Its last threat to produce the seventh

unit since it loses by doing this and gains nothing In credibility regarding

threats to produce additional units. However, imagine that the factory

could produce eight or more units, but that the parties end up with seven

being produced.

         This net loss can also be determined by subtracting the factory's

pre—liablilty profits of $35,000 from the resident's pre—compensatlon

damages of $49,000. The liability payments do not affect the net loss

since what one party gains the other loses.

         The validity of this statement presumes an "individualistic" social

welfare function, that is, one in which social welfare increases If any one
                                            —59—



individual's welfare improves and no one else is made worse off. This kind

of social welfare function is frequently assumed by economists.

           This argument is developed in Polinsky, On the Choice, supra note

1, at ———.

           The case of one injurer and one victim may also be relevant if th

interests of the victims are aggregated through a public official, as in a

parens patrlae proceeding. The official, rather than a private representative,

is then In a bargaining situation with the injurer (or injurers' representative).

The terms of an out—of—court settlement would correspond to the private

bargaining outcome discussed in this essay.

           See, e.g., Ellickson, supra note 5, at 761—79; Michelman, supra note

5, at 666—80, and R. Stewart & J. Krier, supra note 9, at 255—324. But

see Comment, Equity and the Eco—System: Can Injunctions Clear The Air?,

supra note 5, at 1259—62.

      When the victims' interests cannot he aggregated, the analysis of one

victim and one injurer may still be relevant to some extent. For example,

even when actions are brought by public officials for public nuisances,

private individuals who suffer harms of a different kind may bring private

actions. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 821C (1965).

           If   the   entitlement Is   to   the right of the efficient output,   It is
the   defendant who does the extorting. He may obtain compensation (possibly
far) in   excess   of his actual reduction In       profits.

          Regardless of whether there is one or many vIctims, this general
conclusion   would be true even If efficiency were the only goal. See Sections
Vill—IX supra.
