NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE POSSIBILITY ON AN INVERSE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TAX RATES

AND GOVERNMENT REVENUES

Don Fullerton

Working Paper No. I6T

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

April 1980

I

am indebted to my colleagues A. Thomas King, John B.
Shoven, and John Whalley with whom I developed the general
equilibrium taxation model used in this paper. I am also
grateful to the Treasury Department's Office of Tax
Analysis For Financial Assistance. This revised version
of the paper incorporates changes suggested by David
Bradford, Shantayanan Devarajan, Donald E. Grieson, Harvey
Rosen, Nicholas Stern, and John Whalley. However, I
retain full responsibility for errors and for the views
expressed. This research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 467
April, 1980

On the Possibility of an Inverse Relationship
Between Tax Rates and Government Revenues

ABSTRACT

When Arthur Laffer or other "supply side advocates" plot total tax revenue
as a function of a particular tax rate, he draws an upward sloping segment called
the normal range, followed by a downward sloping segment called the prohibitive range.
Since a given revenue can be obtained with either of two tax rates, government would

minimize total burden by choosing the lower rate of the normal range. A brief
literature review indicates that tax rates on the prohibitive range in theoretical
and empirical models have been the result of particularly high tax rates, high

elasticity parameters, or both. Looking at labor tax rates and total revenue, for
example, the tax rate which maximizes revenue will depend on the assumed labor
supply elasticity. This paper introduces a new curve which sunimarizes the tax rate
and elasticity combinations that result in maximum revenues, separating the "normal

area" from the "prohibitive area." A general—purpose empirical U.S. general equilibrium model is used to plot the Laffer curve for several elasticities, and to plot

the newly introduced curve using the labor tax example. Results indicate that the
U.S. could conceivably be operating in the prohibitive area, but that the tax wedge
and/or labor supply elasticity would have to be much higher than most estimates
would suggest.

Don Fullerton
Woodrow Wilson School of Public
and International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
(609) 452—4811

1. Introduction
Ever since Arthur B. Laffer first drew his famous curve on a napkin in
a Washington restaurant five years ago, there has been considerable public
debate about the possibility of an inverse relationship between tax rates

and government revenue. Pictured in Figure 1, the curve plots total revenue
against the tax rate and claims to show that there are two rates at which a

given revenue can be collected. The upward sloping portion of the curve is

called the "nol" range and the downward sloping segment is the "prohibitive" range. No rational government would knowingly operate on the latter
range in the long run, but with adjustment lags and a high discount rate such

tax rates might be used in the short run. The prohibitive range is said to
exist because the high tax rates stifle economic activity, force agents to

barter, and encourage leisure pursuits. It is also made plausible by remembering that, excess burden varies with the square of the tax rate)'

figure 1

Revenue

Tax rate

—2—

The debate has been conducted mostly in the spheres of pQlitics and
journalism, and it includes a wide variety of unsupported claims and opinions.
These range all the way from the assertion that the prohibitive range does
not exist to the claim that "we are well within this range at present."--'

Simple theoretical models can show that the prohibitive range does indeed
exist, but the U. S. position on the curve Is clearly an empirical matter.
Despite the obvious importance of this issue for fiscal policy, there has been
no serious estimation of the curve using an economic model.-' This paper
attempts to correct this deficiency by using a general equilibrium taxation

model to address two questions. First, what is the position of the U. S.
on the curve today? Second, what is the relationship between the location
of the curve itself and critical parameters like the appropriate factor sup-

ply elasticity?!
The next section offers a brief review of some salient points from the

debate. A common aspect of previous studies is that a prohibitive range for
some local or non—U. S. economy is always associated with particularly high

tax rates, high factor supply elasticities, or both. The third section sets
out the conditions under which a lower tax rate could result in higher revenues.
These conditions are summarized in a new curve, plotting the appropriate factor

supply elasticity against the tax rate. The fourth section describes the
general equilibrium model used to simulate the effects of various tax rates.
These estimations are performed in section five, and the two curves are plot-

ted for an example with a labor tax and labor supply elasticity. Section six
provides Some evidence on the value of the critical labor supply elasticity,
and the last section concludes that to operate in the prohibitive range, the
tax

wedge must be very high or the factor supply elasticity must be very high,

—3—

or there must be some combination of the two.

2. A Brief Literature Review
The idea of an inverse relationship between tax rates and revenue is not

entirely new. Adam Smith, in The Wealth of Nations (1776) could hardly be
more explicit:
High taxes, sometimes by diminishing the consumption
of the taxed commodities, and sometimes by encouraging
smuggling, frequently afford a smaller revenue to government than what might be drawn from more moderate taxes.
(Book V, Chapter II)
The trade literature, as exemplified by Caves and Jones (1973), has

always understood the existence of a revenue maximizing tariff. This pre—
Laffer edition contains a hump—shaped tariff revenue curve which looks just

like Figure 1. With respect to internal taxes, Jules Dupuit in 1844 states:
By thus gradually Increasing the tax it will reach a
level at which the yield is at a maximum . . . Beyond,
the yield of tax diminishes . . . Lastly a tax (which
is prohibitive) will yield nothing.
After the introduction of the Laffer curve (or perhaps the reintroduction
of the Smith—Dupuit curve) in 1974, the quality of debate deteriorates sig-

nificantly. Jude Wanniski (1978) chronicles every fiscal catastrophe from the
fall of the Roman Empire to the Great Depression and attributes each of them

to some tax hike occurring within a few years in either direction. At various
points in his analysis Wanniski suggests (a) that the mere existence of a
prohibitive range implies taxes should be reduced, (b) that the peak of the
curve is at a 25 percent tax rate, and (c) that the peak of the curve "is the
point at which the electorate desires to be taxed".-' The welfare maximizing
government would operate somewhere on the normal range with the size of its
budget determined by standard cost—benefit analysis.

—4—

For the opposition, Kiefer (1978) asserts that there is no tax rate for
the overall economy which can be measured on the horizontal axis, and that
"the Laffer Curve represents a gross simplification of a major portion of

macro—economics into a single curved line." These arguments are not compelling, either, in view of the large number of economic models which oversimplify

in order to comprehend and convey economic phenomena. Kiefer also begrudges
the supply—side concentration, reminding us that income and substitution ef-

fects tend to be offsetting. "By concentrating primarily on incentive and
supply—side effects, the Laffer Curve largely ignores the actual mechanism
by which fiscal policy exerts its biggest and most immediate impact —— demand

side effects." One gets the feeling that these antagonists are talking past
one another, using different models that are not comparable. Take for example
the claim that the existence of a prohibitive range implies a marginal pro-

pensity to consume of greater than one. This Keynesian wisdom considers reductions of noridistorting taxes and ignores the incentive effects central to

the supply—side argument.'
Canto, Joines, and Laffer (1978) build a simple equilibrium model with
one output, two factors, and a labor/leisure choice on the part of consumers.
Their utility function includes discounted consumption and leisure of each
future period, a formulation which is very similar to the larger empirical

general equilibrium model used later in this paper. Another similarity is
that capital is inelastically supplied in any one period, but can grow over

time. Labor taxes in these models place a wedge between the wage paid by pro-

ducers and net wage received by workers. Each individual reacts to this wedge
with an income effect and a substitution effect. In their model, however,
government revenues are returned through transfers or used to buy goods which

are perfect substitutes for private goods. This modelling cancels out the

—5—
income effect and leaves the economy with an unambiguously positive substi-

tution effect and upward sloping labor supply. There are three points raised
by this modelling. The first point, recognized by these authors, is that if
transfers are given to individuals other than those who pay taxes, and if individuals have different preferences, then income effects do not necessarily

cancel. The second point is that if a government does nothing other than
place a distorting wedge into the labor/leisure choice with a lump—sum rebate

of revenues, then welfare should indeed unambiguously decrease. These authors
have not allowed for any positive contribution of a government budget. Their
model does not account for the inherent efficiency gain associated with cor-

recting market failure by providing a public good. Thirdly, they fail to
allow for any complementarity between private and public outputs. Clearly
there are public goods such a police protection and transportation systems which
act to encourage private production, more than offsetting the adverse effects

of the necessary tax wedge. Since the effects of a combined tax wedge and
labor complementing public good may be offsetting, the t1balanced budget"

labor supply curve does not have to be upward sloping as these authors insist.

The aggregate uncompensated labor supply elasticity may be positive or negative, and econometric estimates of this value will be surveyed in a later
section.21
In empirical work, Grieson et al (1977) find the possibility of an inverse
relationship between tax rates and revenue for local government in New York.
"The inclusion of state taxes lost when economic activity leaves both the city
and state would . .

. raise

the possibility of a net revenue loss as a result

of an increase in business income taxes." They find that the nonmanufacturing
sector has fewer alternatives to the New York City location and should be taxed
more heavily relative to the manufacturing sector whose response to tax is more

elastic. Grieson (1979) finds the two sectors reversed for Philadelphia, where

—6—

nonmanufacturing is under greater competitive pressure. Still, "Philadelphia may have been at or very close to the revenue maximizing point
before the recent income tax increase, which raises the possibility of it
having been in excess of the socially optimal one."
Finally, Charles Stuart (1979) uses a fairly simple two sector model to
find that the current 80% marginal tax wedge in Sweden exceeds their revenue

maximizing rate by 10%. Sweden's high tax rates encourage barter and non—
market activity, placing the economy on the prohibitive range.

3. Another Simple Curve
A common feature of arguments from both sides of the debate is anim—
plicit or explicit reference to factor supply elasticities. Offsetting income and substitution effects merely imply that the relevant unèoinpensated

supply elasticity might be low or negative. The emphasis on large incentives
in the supply—side argument implies a large elasticity. The open nature of
a local economy implies mobile factors and a more elastic response to a local

tax. Indeed, the entire debate reduces to the empirical matter of determining the relevant parameter values. If supply elasticies are high enough, the
economy could be on the prohibitive range.

The very location of Laffer's curve in the rate—revenue space of Figure 1

depends on the supply elasticity of the factor being taxed.-' If that elasticity were fairly low, the total revenue maximizing point would be at a higher
tax rate for that factor, and conversely. One can imagine a third diin.ension

on that diagram giving different elasticity values. The hill would then be
converted into a ridge, running from a low tax rate and high elasticity combination to a high rate and' low elasticity pair. The crest of that ridge is

plotted in Figure 2. Everything to the southwest of that curve signifies the

—7—
"normal area", where raising rates gain revenue, and northeast of the curve
is the "prohibitive area", where no rational government would knowingly

operate. Each point on the curve shows the tax rate which maximizes total
revenue for a given elasticity.-'
At an infinite supply elasticity, the government cannot acquire additional
revenue by taxing that factor, and the maximum total revenue would be obtained

elsewhere (a zero tax rate for that factor is best). For a large finite
elasticity, the tax rate would have to be very low to remain in the normal

range, reflecting a general result from the optimal tax literature. As
this elasticity decreases, higher tax rates will maximize revenues. Finally,
at a zero (compensated) elasticity, the tax is nondistorting, and the only
bound on revenue is given by total product of the factor.

Figure 2

Factor
supply

Prohibitive
area

alas tic—

ity

Normal
area

. Tax

rate

—8—

From this description, we can place all the advocates on a cQmpre—

hensible spectrum: those who say we are in the prohibitive area believe
that the relevant elasticity and/or tax rate are higher, those who say we are
in the normal area believe they are lower, and those who deny the existence
of the inverse relationship must believe that the uncompensated supply elasticity is zero or negative.

4. The General Equilibrium Model
To simulate the effects of different tax rates for a variety of factor
supply elasticities, a previously developed general equilibrium taxation model

is used. This model is still evolving after several years of work, and it
has already been used for other purposes including the evaluation of various

tax reform proposals. However, it was built as a general purpose model, and
its features are surprisingly well suited for this application. No adjust-

ments were required to obtain the following estimates. Since more thorough
descriptions of the model are available elsewhere, I give only an essential

outline

10/
of it here.—

The economy is divided into nineteen profit maximizing producers, f if—

teen consumption commodities, and twelve consumers differentiated by income

class. Each industry has a Cobb—Douglas or Constant Elasticity of Substitution (CES) production function, where the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor is chosen as a "best—guess" value from evidence in the

literature. Each output can be used as a intermediate input through a fixed
coefficient input—output matrix. Outputs can be purchased by government, used

for investment, or converted into consumer goods. There is also a simple
foreign trade sector, though this model of the U. S. economy should be considered closed for these purposes.

—9--

Each consumer has initial endowments of labor and capital services which

can be sold for use in production. Because of perfect factor mobility and
competition, the net—of—tax return to each factor is equal among industries.

A consumer can also choose to buy some of his own labor endowment for leisure.
The capital stock is fixed in any one period, but the dynamic version of the

model allows the savings response to augment the stock in later periods. De-

mand functions are based on CES utility functions with double nesting. The
choice between present and future consumption is represented by the outside
nest, and the elasticity of substitution between those two groups is based
on an estimate of the uncompensated savings elasticity with respect to the

net—of—tax rate of return. For this value we use 0.4 as found by Boskin
(1978). The breakdown of present consumption into commodities and leisure
is represented by the inside nest, and the elasticity of substitution between
those two groups is based on an estimate of the uncompensated labor supply

elasticity with respect to the net—of—tax wage. For this value we typically
use 0.15, but relationships for different labor elasticity values will be
derived below.

The various Federal, state, and local taxes are typically modelled as
ad valorem tax rates. on purchases of appropriate products or factors. Corporate income taxes and property taxes are modelled as different effective rates

of tax on use of capital by industry. Social security, workmen's compensation
and unemployment insurance appear as taxes on use of labor. These rates differ by industry partly because different proportions of workers hit the social

security maximum, but they average 10% of payments to labor. Personal income
taxes operate as different linear schedules for each consumer group, with
marginal tax rates increasing from an average of 17.

for

the lowest income

group, to an average marginal tax rate of 40% for the highest income group.

— 10 —

The model is parameterized for 1973 using data from the National Income
and Product Accounts, the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Consumer Expenditure

Survey, and the Treasury Department's Merged Tax File. These data are adjusted for known inaccuracies of government collection procedures and for

general equilibrium consistency requirements. This "benchmark" data set is
used to solve backwards for relevant preference parameters and tax rates, so

that the model solution can replicate the benchmark equilibrium. The user
can specify different tax rates to recalculate a simulated equilibrium with

different resource allocations for comparison with the benchmark. The model
is solved using a variant of Scarf's algorithm for an equilibrium price vector

where excess demands and profits are zero.V
The model does not include involuntary unemployment, inflation per Se,

or other aspects of disequilibria. It measures real effects without a money
equation, expressing all prices in relative terms. Voluntary unemployment
is captured through the labor/leisure choice, however, and the interaction of
inflation with effective tax rates is modelled by adjusting those rates appro—

priately)-" The model thus concentrates on microeconomic behavior and can
meet the supply—side advocates on their own ground.
A potential difference, however, is our modelling of government transfers
as essentially lump—sum payments to consumer groups in proportion to their
observed 1973 receipts from social security, unemployment compensation, food

stamps, and other welfare programs. Supply—side advocates may like to model
these payments as additional work disincentives, increasing the wedge between

labor's marginal product and leisure's implicit price. Though the government

does not intend to subsidize leisure, some programs do have that effect. The
Incentive depends on the program's ability to isolate important characteristics
such as age, disability, and number of dependents which make the recipient un—

— 11 —

able

to work. If successful, the payments will have more income effect and

less substitution effect. To the extent that the reader wishes to use a larger
wedge in the following simulations, a higher tax rate can be used in describ-

ing the current U. S. economy)1'

5. Estimation
Supply—side advocates refer to several different types of taxes when they
claim an inverse relationship between a particular tax rate and government

revenue. The curve in Figure 2 could be plotted by varying a product tax
rate against the price elasticity of demand for that product, or by plotting
capital tax rates against the elasticity of savings with respect to the net—of—

tax return to capital. The latter example was attempted with the empirical
model, but no prohibitive area was discovered.--' For this reason, the example
used here is the labor tax against the labor supply elasticity.
In our basic model, the tax on labor used by industry averages 10% of

net payments to factors. The personal income tax takes another 1% to 40% of

marginal labor income, depending on the consumer's marginal tax bracket. The

total wedge thus ranges from 11% to 50% of labor income.' One problem with
interpreting a general formulation like the Laffer curve is that either average

or marginal tax rates might be applicable. The average rates are needed to

dterm1ne total revenues, but marginal rates are more important for incentive
effects. A solution is to vary the industrial labor tax rate of 10% since
this rate is both average and marginal. Variations in this rate alone are reported below, but the reader should remember that the additional wedges created

by the personal income tax and other taxes always remain. The tax wedges re-

ported are thus understatements of the model's true wedge.'
The consistent 1973 data set, with adjustments described above, also shows a

— 12 —

Table

Total

1

Revenue Associated with each Labor Tax
Billions of 1973 Dollars

Labor Supply Elasticity

Rate on
Rate on
Net Income Gross Income
—.10

.15

.50

1.00

1.50

Rate, in

1.75

2.00

2.50

3.00

.05

.048

.10
.15

.091

.20

.167

369.80 365.17 360.85

.25

.200

370.82 363.62 356.91

.30

.231

.40

.286

396.49 361.52

.45

.310

396.60

.50

.333

.60

.375

389.75

.130

4.00
341.79

355.82

.000

365.57

354.00 357.46 360.56 365.93
360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00 360.00
349.18
364.00 361.98 358.23

391.82 369.60

439.48

350.57

295.40

395.43

503.71

.70

.412

555.56 474.13 380.36

.90

.474

597.41 481.65

.95

.487

481.98

1.00

.500

615.16 481.78 336.60

1.30

.565

657.84 476.01

1.50

.600

678.84

1.70

.630

694.90

2.00

.667

711.16

2.30

.697

719.58

2.40

.706

720.89

2.50

.714

721.53

2.55

.718

721.60

2.60

.722

721.52

2.70

.730

720.92

3.00

.750

715.79

3.50

.778

697.79

4.00

.800

670.19

5.00

.833

593.30

reported.

Net—of—Tax Wage

—.111

.00

Simulations

to

with Respect

-

were made selectively to save computational expense. Not all possible rates are

— 13

—

Figure 3

Laffe Curve with a .15 labor elasticity

700
S
I.'

a
-4

-4
0

65C
r-.

a'
-I
0

a

60( -

55.

Soc

45(

40

35

2A

.10

.20

.30

.40

.60
.70
Tax rate on gross labor income
.50

.80

— 14 —

Pigure 4

Laffer Curve with a 4.0 Labor Elasticity

a

-4
-4

0

0'
-I

400

.4
0

a

0

.4

-4
-4

.4
.0

375

.4

a

a
aI.

350

a
-4

'Ia
e

I-.

325

300

275

250

—

—1.0

0

.10

.20
Tax

.30

.40

rate ou gross labor income

.50

— 15

—

Figure 5

Elasticity and Tac Rate Combinations

4.0

3.5

-lU
.4

3.0

S

-4

S

-4

S

2.5

0
.0

2.0

Prohibitive
Area

1.5

1.0

Normal

Area

.5

.10

.20

.30

.40

.50

.60

Tax rate on gross labor income

.70

— 16 —

total

tax revenue of $360 billion compared to a national income of $1,252

bi11ion.-' These values are replicated for any possible labor supply elasticity as long as tax rates are unchanged. Simulations with labor tax rates
other than 10% will have revenues which depend on the elasticity. Additional
revenues are rebated to consumers in lump—sum fashion, in proportion to their

original after—tax income. These rebates are necessary because general equi—
librium conditions require a balanced government budget, and increases in

government purchases would influence the equilibrium solution)'
The results from over sixty simulations are summarized in Table 1.-u-" The

first column shows the total revenue resulting from different labor tax rates
using the basic-model!s value of .15 for the labor supply elasticity with re-

spect to the net—of—tax wage. The "observed" total revenue of $360 billion
corresponds to the basic tax rate of 10%, and total revenues are positively
related to tax rates up to a tax which is 255% of net labor income, or 71.8%
of gross

Beyond that rate, revenues start to fal1.'

Any column of data from Table 1 can be used to plot an example of

Figure 1, as done in Figure 3 for the .15 elasticity. In any of these Laffer
curve diagrams, the modelled U. S. economy is represented by .10 on the laborS

tax rate axis. If the various tax rates, transfers, and elasticities are
reasonable as modelled, then the U. S. economy is well down the normal range

of the curve. For those who prefer a high elasticity, Figure 4 plots another
Laffer curve. The 4.0 labor supply elasticity and current tax rates place

the U. S. well onto the prohibitive range.21
Underlined in each column of Table 1 is the maximum revenue point for

that elasticity. These tax rate and elasticity combinations correspond to
points on a curve like Figure 2. When plotted for this example, the curve is
shown in Figure 5. On this curve, with tax .rates as modelled, the labor sup—

— 17 —

ply

elasticity would have to be at least 2.5 to put us over the peak and onto

the prohibitive range. Alternatively1, if the supply elasticity is at least
1.0 and the tax rate is at least 30% (In addition to the personal rates from

1% to 40%), then again we could be operating irrationally. The continuum of
Figure 5 allows the reader to select a plausible tax rate and elasticity combination to determine whether the U. S. is now in the prohibitive area.

6. What is the Labor Supply Elasticity?
The empirical model was fairly careful in establishing all of the basic
tax rates, including the .10 labor tax rate, but it is much less explicit

about the aggregate labor supply elasticity. The econometric literature gives
many estimates for population subgroups, since different individuals will

typically have different rates of response to a new net—of—tax wage. Finegan's
(1962) occupational study found managers, craftsmen, and clerical workers
varying from a —.29 to a +.42 labor supply elasticity, while Boskin's (1973)
division by sex, race, and age found estimates from —.07 (for prime—age white

males) to a +1.60 (for elderly black women). Since taxes do not distinguish
among these characteristics, the relevant elasticity parameter is an aggregate

one. Table 2 summarizes a number of econometric studies and is based mostly
on discussion in Killingsworth (1976).

There is a certain injustice to these authors in reporting their results
in such sunmiary fashion. Each study has its own measure of the wage, its own
data—year or time—period, its own mean values, and its own functional forms.
The studies differ as to how they account for labor participation rates and
as to whether they account for the balanced budget effects of government

spending as discussed above. The numbers in Table 2 are only provided to give
the reader a framework for choosing a plausible aggregate labor supply elas—

— 18 —

Table 2
Estimates of the Uncompensated Labor Supply Elasticity

Authors

Data Subset

Iype of Data

Range of
Estimates

A. For-male
Male family heads

Inter—occupational

—.35 to —.25

Male family heads

Inter—Industrial

—.30 to —.07

Male family heads

U. S. cross—section

+.05 to +.30

Male family heads
Poor male family heads

V. S. time—series
U. S. cross—section

—.24 to —.11
— .16 to —.05

Boskin (1973)

Different male subgroups

U. S. cross—section

—.07 to +.18

Hill (1973)

Poor male family heads
Male family heads

U. S. cross—section

—.32 to — .07

U. S. cross—section

—.15

Male ages 45—59

U. S. cross—section

—.25 to — .10

Married males

U. S. cross—section

Zero

Finegan (1962)

Rosen

(1969)

Xalachek—Rajnes

(1970)

(1970)

Owen (1971)
Greenburg—Kosters
(1973)

Ashenfelter—Heckman

(1973)
Fleisher—Parsons—Porter
Ashemfelter—Reckinan

(1974)

B. For females
Pinegan (1962)
Leuthold (1968)
Ralachek—Rajnes
(1970)

Boskin

(1973)

Females
Females
Females
Different female

Inter—occupational
U. S. cross—section
U. S. cross—section
subgroups

Ashenfelter—Recknian
(1974)

Married females

Winston (1966)

Aggregate

Lucas—Rapping (1970)

Short rim aggregate
Long rim aggregate

V. S. cross—section

U. S. cross—section

.095
.067

—
—

+.20 to +.9Q
—.04 to + 1.60

.87

Aggregate

Lucas—Rapping (1970)

International cross— — .11 to — .05
section
Time—series
1.35 to 1.58
Time—series
Zero to 1.12

— 19 —

ticity.

Since few aggregate studies are available, male and female estimates

can be roughly combined.

Elasticity estimates for males are mostly small and negative, ranging from

—.40 to zero. Borjas and Heckman (1978) review the econometrics of these
studies and reduce the bounds to —.19 and —.07. The estimates for females

are more often positive, and can be large in absolute value. Killingsworth
finds that females' elasticity estimates are mostly between .20 and .90 in

cross—section studies. To obtain the model's .15 aggregate labor supply elasticity, perform a rough numerical calculation. The Statistical Abstract shows
that the median money income of male employed civilians has consistently been

twice that of females. It also shows about a 1.7 ratio of males to females

in the labor force, a ratio which is decreasing with t1me In any case, the
ratio of male to female income should be at least 3.0 (though decreasing).
Taking a relatively high male elasticity of —.10 and a relatively high female
elasticity of +.90, the three—to—one weighted average is a .15 aggregate
elasticity.

7. Conclusion
This paper investigates a number of analytical and empirical arguments

about the relationship between tax rates and government revenues. A general
equilibrium tax model was used to plot this relationship as well as another

relationship between tax rates and factor supply elasticities. This new curve
'shows that the U. S. economy could conceivably be operating in the "prohibitive range" for a national tax on labor income, but that tax rates and/or labor
supply elasticities would have to be very high for that possibility to occur.
Available evidence about the value of the relevant elasticity parameter does
not support the view that our government is currently behaving irrationally

— 20 —

with

respect to that tax.

The tax rate and elasticity relationship can be applied to other federal,
state, or local taxes to find circumstances where a particularly high tax
rate on real income and/or a high elasticity could place a tax in the prohibi-

tive area. The tax on purely nominal capital gains, for example, or the under
allowance of depreciation can result in high tax rates on real capital income.
These accounting procedures and nominal personal income tax brackets should be

adjusted for inflation by indexing. The "marriage penalty" which places a
secondary worker in the higher marginal tax bracket of his or her spouse may

represent another high rate of tax on an elastically supplied factor. The
"notch" effect of welfare recipients who become ineligible at a given income

level results in implicit marginal tax rates of 100% or higher. Also, the
high elasticity argument is particularly applicable for state and local governments since factors are generally more mobile within national boundaries.
McGuire and Rapping (1968, 1970) find labor supply elasticities of 20 to 100

for particular states or industries. This mobility implies that one jurisdiction cannot charge higher tax rates than its neighbors, and it applies in-

creasingly to international factor flows. These latter considerations do not
confirm the existence of a tax on the prohibitive range, but they make one much
more plausible.

Finally, though the results of this paper tend to reject the notion of
an inverse relationship between major U. S. taxes and government revenues,
they do not necessarily invalidate the claim that these taxes should be lowered.

Even on the normal range, taxes may be higher than desired by voters. Preferences can change over time, fewer public goods may now be demanded, and the

electorate can legitimately request a tax decrease. Though incentive effects

— 21 —

can still be important without perverse revenue effects, the point is that
the "economics of the tax revolt" are less the economics of Incentive effects and more the economics of public choice.

Footnotes

1. The tax rate of Figure 1 generally refers to any particular tax instrument, while revenues generally refer to total tax receipts. Thus we
must account for the effect of one tax on all other tax bases. An
increase in the payroll tax rate, for example, could affect not only
its own revenue, but work effort and income tax revenues.
2. Michael Kinsley (1978) correctly claims that there is no logical neces—
sity for revenues to be zero at 100% tax rates, due to nonmonetary incentives for work effort, but he incorrectly infers that "there's no
logical reason to assume without proof that the Laffer curve ever reverses
direction at all." Laffer (1978) points out that there must be some higher
rate where economic activity goes to zero. "If every time a person goes
to the office he receives a bill from the government instead of receiving
a check from his employer, sooner or later even the wealthiest and most
highly motivated will stop going to the office. There won't be any
earnings, and total government revenue will equal zero. For the sake of
argument, imagine the government collects zero revenue at 100 percent
tax rates." The quote in the text is from
"Statement Prepared
for the Joint Economic Committee Hearings on the Macroeconomic Impact
of the Administration's National Energy Plan," May 20, 1977, reprinted
in Laffer and Seymour (1979).
3. Several papers have described models in which there exists the possibility
of a prohibitive range. See Canto, Laffer and Odogwu (1977) and Canto,
Joines and Laffer (1978). Other empirical papers have found examples of
local governments operating in this range. See Grieson et al (1977) and
Ronald E. Grieson (1979). Estimates from DRI, Wharton, and Chase Econometric models are also provided in Kiefer (1978). None of these papers
plot out the Laffer curve however, or estimate its relationship to various
elasticity parameters. As shown below, an open economy like a local government is more likely to be burdened with a ceiling on revenues.
4. In general, the location of the curve depends on consumption parameters,
production-parameters, and other circumstances in the economy. In wartime, for example, individuals might be willing to work harder at higher
tax rates to generate larger tax revenues. Later sections estImate the
curve with a model of the 1973 U. S. economy.

5. Other interesting claims of Wanniski include Cd) "if the tax rate is
zero . . . production is maximized," and (e) "revenues and production are
maximized at (the peak of the curve)." Walter Heller (1978) has his own
complaints about Wanniski's evidence: "At a time when only a few million Americans paid income taxes and federal spending was less than 5% of
GNP (it was 3% in 1929), we are asked to believe that federal income tax
cuts alone powered the growth of GNP from $70 billion in 1921 to $103
billion in 1929." Arthur Laffer, on the other hand, calls it "the best
book on economics ever written."

—2—

6. Also, supply—side advocates typically assume an equivalence between bond
and tax financed spending, so that spending itself creates a wedge. Debates over the rationality of consumers and the net wealth of government
bonds are best conducted elsewhere. For the purposes of this paper, I
grant this equivalence.
7. These three shortcomings of the Canto, Joines, and Laffer (1978) theoretical model are not explicitly corrected in the empirical model used
below, but they are implicitly corrected through the possibility of positive or negative labor supply elasticities.

8. Product taxes are equally relevant. Convert general product taxes to
equivalent taxes on factors, or consider specific product taxes by plotting against demand elasticities. Also, either a compensated or uncom—
pensated elasticity might consistently be used as the relevant parameter.
9. This analysis over—simplified by using a given elasticity for all tax
rates to find the revenue maximizing point. As the tax rate varies, so
would equilibrium prices, incomes, and preference parameters like the
factor supply elasticity. Also, both curves are intentionally vague
about the particular tax rate and elasticity involved because they have
a general significance which requires specific application. Both curves
will be estimated for a particular factor tax and factor supply elasticity.
10. See Fullerton, Shoven, and Whalley (1978, 1979) and Fullerton, King,
Shoven and Whalley (l979a, l979b).

11. John Whalley points out that many of these features provide more detail
than would be necessary to demonstrate the relationships of
Figure 1
and 2. This comment is correct, but it is analogous to saying that a
fancy electric can—opener is not required to open a can. My analogous
response is that if the fancy can—opener already exists, then why not
use it?
12. Effective capital tax rates are calculated by measuring each industry's
real use of capital with replacement cost depreciation. The modelling of
capital gains accounts for the largely nominal gains that are subject to
tax. The combined effect of inflation and nominal income brackets in a
progressive tax system can be modelled by increasing effective rates.
13. The difference between paying people who don't work, and paying people
not to work is the difference between a marginal payment with incentive
effects, and a lump—sum payment. Legally, an employee must be laid off
to be eligible for unemployment compensation. A worker can ask to be
laid off, but employers may be reluctant to circumvent the intent of the
law. These transfers are not automatically and fully available to non—
workers. Similarly, AFDC payments are designed to select recipients by
particular characteristics, maximizing the lump—sum effect and minimizing
disincentive effects. Social security payments are higher for the blind
or disabled. Finally note that these transfers, to the extent that they are
disincentives, do not always apply to marginal hours. Most individuals who

—3—

take an extra hour of leisure do not becQme eligible fo transfers at all.
Laffer (1978) is correct, hoeve, that "if transfer payments included
'means', 'needs', or 'income' tests they too should be included."
Another more thorough study could undertake to measure incentive effects
of transfers.
14. Over forty simultations were performed in seeking a prohibitive area for
capital taxes. Using the dynamic version of the model, rates were increased to 500% of net capital income (83% of gross capital income),
savings elasticities were increased to 4.0, and equilibria were calculated
out to fifty years in the future. There was not a single case discovered
where total revenues were less than the revenues associated with a lower
tax rate for the same period. Inverse relationships between tax rates
and revenues may exist for high effective rates of tax on certain types of
real capital income for certain individuals. No overall inverse relationship was discovered in this model, however, because the tax distortion
applies to the savings decision, while savings are only an increment to
the capital tax base. More than fifty years would be required for the
tax base reduction to offset a tax rate increase and result in lower
revenues.
15. The model measures labor income after the industries' factor tax but before
the individual's personal income tax. Since the factor tax is 10% of labor
income, and personal tax is another 1% to 40% of marginal labor income,
the wedge can be expressed as 11.1% to 83.3% of net labor income after all
taxes, or 10% to 45.5% of labor income gross of all taxes.
16. For those who wante& a higher wedge to account for the disincentive effects
of welfare programs, the extra wedge of the personal income tax could
roughly compensate for the ignored wedge of the transfer payments.
17. Our expanded notion of welfare, including leisure valued at the net—of—tax
wage, is $1,690 billion.
18. A decrease in revenue is corrected by a similar lump—sum charge on consumers in proportion to their original after—tax income, so that government purchases still remain constant. In this sense, the model is much
like Laffer's since a change in the tax wedge is accompanied by a positive
or negative lump—sum redistribution.

19. These simulations are static in the sense that total endowments of labor
and capital are fixed. Labor can be sold to industry or retained for
leisure in the simulation, while both factors can be reallocated among
industries.

20. The tax rate on gross income (t0) is related to the rate on net income
(tN) by the formula tG = tN/(1 + tN).
21. The computer model provides much other information about the simulated
equilibrium. With the .15 elasticity and 71.8% tax rate, labor supply falls
off by almost half. The gross—of—tax wage rises, but the net—of—tax wage

—4—

falls by 40% in the new equilibrium. 3ecause of the distortion in labor!
leisure choices, national income falls by more than the increased value
of leisure for a net loss of $269 billion in real terms.
22. In the 4.0 elasticity case, even the small jump from a 10% to 15% tax rate
causes a 9% fall in labor supply and a net welfare loss of $26 billion in
real terms.

Reeences
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Heckman, James (1973), "Estimating Labor Supply
Functions," in Cain, Glen C. and Harold W. Watts (eds.) Income
tenance and Labor Supply, Rand McNalley, Chicago (1973).

(1974), "The Estimation of Income and Substitution
Effects in a Model of Family Labor Supply," Econometrica, Vol. 42,
No. 1, January, pp. 73—85.

________________

Borjas, George J., and James J. Heckman (1978), "Labor Supply Estimates for
Public Policy Evaluation," Proceedings of the Industrial Relations
search Association.

Boskin, Michael J. (1973), "The Economics of the Labor Supply," in Cain,
Glen G. and Harold W. Watts (eds.) Income Maintenance and Labor Supply,
Rand McNalley, Chicago (1973).

_________________

(1978), "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest,"

Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 2, April, Part 2, pp. S37—S27.
Canto; Victor A., Douglas H. Joines and Arthur B. Laffer (1978), "An Income
Expenditure Version of the Wedge Model," mimeo, University of Southern
California.
Canto, Victor A., Arthur B. Laffer, and Onwochei Odogwu (1977), "The Output
and Employment Effects of Fiscal Policy in a Classical Model," mimeo,
University of Southern California.
Caves, Richard E., and Ronald W. Jones (1973), World Trade and Payments,
Little—Brown and Co., Boston, Toronto.
Dupuit, Jules (1844), "On the Measurement of the Utility of Public Works," translation in K. J. Arrow and T. Scitovsky (eds.) Readings in Welfare Economics,
published for the American Economic Association by Richard D. Irwin, Inc.,
Homewood, Illinois (1969).
Finegan, T. Aldrich (1962), "Hours of Work in the United States —— A Cross—
Sectional Analysis," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 70, No. 5, October,
pp. 452—470.
Fleisher, Belton M., Parsons, Donald 0., and Porter, Richard D. (1973),
"Asset Adjustment and Labor Supply of Older Workers," in Cain, Glen
C. and Harold W. Watts (eds.) Income Maintenance and Labor Supply,
Rand McNalley, Chicago (1973).
Fullerton, Don, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley (1978), "General Equilibrium Analysis of U. S. Taxation Policy," 1978 Compendium of Tax Research.
Office of Tax Analysis, U. S. Treasury Department, Washington, D. C.,
pp. 23—58.

—.2—

(1979), "General Equilibrium Impacts of Replacing the
U. S. Income Tax with a Progressive Consumption
Tax," mimeo, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

_________________

Fullerton, Don, A. Thomas King, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley (1979a),
"Corporate and Personal Tax Integration in the U. S.: Some Preliminary
Findings from a General Equilibrium Analysis" in R. Haveman and K.
Hollenbeck (eds.) Nicroeconomjc Simulation, Institute for Research on
Poverty, Madison, Wisconsin.
(1979b), "Static and Dynamic Resource Allocation Effects
of Corporate and Personal Tax Integration in the U. S.: A General
Equilibrium Approach" submitted to the American Economic Review.

Greenberg, David H., and Kosters, Marvin (1973), "Income Guarantees and the
Working Poor: The Effect of Income Maintenance Programs on the Hours
of Work of Male Family Heads," in Cain, Glen G. and Harold W. Watts (eds.)
Income Maintenance and Labor Supply, Rand McNalley, Chicago (1973).
Grieson, Ronald E. (1979), "Theoretical Analysis and Empirical Measurements
of the Effects of the Philadelphia Income Tax," Journal of Urban
Economics (forthcoming).
Grieson, Ronald E., William Hamovitch, Albert M. Levenson, and Richard D.
Morgenstern (1977), "The Effect of Business Taxation on the Location of
Industry," Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 4, April, pp. 170—185.
Heller, Walter (1978), "The Kemp—Roth—Laffer Free Lunch," The Wall Street
Journal, July 12, p. 20. Reprinted in Laffer and Seymour (1979).
Hill, C. Russell (1973), "The Determinants of Labor Supply for the Working
Urban Poor," in Cain, Glen G. and Harold W. Watts (eds.) Income Mfiin—
tenance and Labor Supply,'Rand McNalley, Chicago (1973).
Kalachek, Edward D., and Raines, Fredric Q. (1970), "Labor Supply of Lower
Income Workers," pp. 159—186 in President's Commission on Income Maintenance Programs, Technical Studies, U. S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D. C.
Kiefer, Donald W. .(l978), "An Economic Analysis of the Kemp/Roth Tax Cut
Bill H.R.8333: A Description, An Examination of Its Rationale, and
Estimates of Its Economic Effects," Congressional Record, August 2,
pp. H7777—H7787. Reprinted in Laffer and Seymour (1979).

Killingsworth, Mark R. (1976), "Neoclassical Labor Supply Models: ASur—
vey of Recent Literature on Determinants of the Supply of Time to the
Labor Market," manuscript, Fisk University.
Kinsley, Michael (1978), "Alms for the Rich," The New Republic, Vol. 179,
August 19, 1978, pp. 19—26. Reprinted in Laffer and Seymour (1979).

—3—

Laffer, Arthur B. (1978), "An Equilibrium Rational Macroeconomic Framework,"
mimeo, University of Southern California.
Laffer, Arthur B. and Jan P. Seymour (eds.) (1979), The Economics of the
Tax Revolt: A Reader, Harcourt Brace Javanovich, New York.
Leuthold, Jane H. (1968), "An Empirical Study of Formula Income Transfers
and the Work Decision of the Poor," Journal of Human Resources,
Vol. 3, No. 3, Summer, pp. 312—323.
Lucas, Robert E., and Rapping, Leonard A. (1970), "Real Wages, Employment
and Inflation," pp. 257—305 in Phelps, E. S., et al., Microeconomic
Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory, W. W. Norton Co., New
York.
McGuire, Timothy W., and Rapping, Leonard A. (1968), "The Role of Market
Variables and Key Bargains in the Manufacturing Wage Determination
Process," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 76, No. 5, September—October,
pp. 1015—1036.

(1970), "The Supply of Labor and Manufacturing Wage
Determination in the United States: An Empirical Examination,"
International Economic Review, Vol. 11, No. 2, June, pp. 258—268.

_______________

C.en, John D. (1971), "The Demand for Leisure," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 79, No. 1, January—February, pp. 56—76.
Rosen, Sherwin (1969), "On the Interindustry Wage and Hours Structure,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 77, No. 2, March—April, pp. 249—273.
Smith, Adam (1776), The Wealth of Nations, J. N. Dent & Sons, Ltd., London,
reprinted 1975.
Stuart, Charles, (l979),"Swedjsh Tax Rates, Labor Supply and Tax Revenues,"
iJniversity of Lund, Sweden, and University of Western Ontario, Canada,
mimeo.

Wanniski, Jude. (1978), The Way the World Works: How Economies Fail and
Succeed, Basic Books, New York.
Winston, Gordon C. (1966), "An International Comparison of Income and
Hours of Work," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 48, No. 1,
February, pp. 28—39.

