                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       AN INDEX OF INEQUALITY: WITH APPLICATIONS
        TO HORIZONTAL EQUITY AND SOCIAL MOBILITY



                     Mervyn A. King



                  Working Paper No. 1468




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138


                       April 1980




This research was supported by SSRC programme grant HR
14652 on Taxation, Incentives and the Distribution of
Income. I am very grateful to A. B. Atkinson, F. A.
Cowell, P. Grout, P. K. Pattanik, and N. H. Stern for many
helpful comments and suggestions. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper 468
                                                                      April, 1980




            An Index of Inequality: With Applications to
                Horizontal Equity and Social Mobility



                              ABSTRACT



An index of Inequality is constructed which decomposes into two components,

corresponding to vertical and "horizontal" equity respectively. Horizontal

equity Is defined in terms of changes in the ordering of a distribution.

The proposed index is a function to two inequality aversion parameters. One

empirical application is for comparison of a pre—tax distribution with a

post—tax distribution, and an example of this is given for the distribution

of incomes in the UK in 1977. There is a trade—off between "horizontal"

and vertical equity, and for particular combinations of the inequality aver-

sion parameters the original distribution.will be preferred to the final

distribution. The paper concludes with an application of the proposed index

to a model of optimal taxation.




                                                  Mervyn A. King
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Faculty of Commerce and
                                                   Social Sciences
                                                  University of Birmingham
                                                  P.O. Box 363
                                                  Birmingham, ENGLAND
                                                  B15 2TT

                                                  021—472—1301 Ext. 3427
           AN INDEX OF INEQUALITY      WITH APPLICATIONS TO

              HORIZONTAL EQUITY AND SOCIAL MOBILITY



                            Mervyn A. King

                       University of Birmingham



1.   Introduction

            It is conventional to assess the merits of alternative public

policies in terms of a trade—off between equity and efficiency.      In

practice, however, a change in, say,the tax system involves three

effects.     First, it may have incentive or disincentive effects leading

to efficiency gains or losses.      Secondly, it may alter the distribution

of welfare levels.     Thirdly, it may alter the ranking of individuals

(or households) within the distribution.     These three effects

correspond to efficiency, vertical equity, and (certain aspects of)

"horizontal equity" respectively, and any assessment of a tax change

must take into account all three.     The principal assumption of this

paper is that the government is concerned about the trade—off between

these three effects.

            The introduction of changes in the ranking into the

evaluation of a distribution is an example of how iion—utility

considerations may enter social rankings (See Sen (1979) and Pattanaik

(1980)).    Abandoning "welfarism", to use Sen's terminology, enables us



   This research was supported by SSRC programme grant HR 4652 on
Taxation, Incentives and the Distribution of Income.   I am very grateful
to A.B. Atkinson, F.A. Cowell, P. Grout, P.K. Pattanaik, and N.H. Stern
for many helpful comments and suggestions.
to take account of the. status which policy—makers may wish to give to

the pre—tax or pre—reform distribution.   We shall proceed on the

assumption that the relevant consideration is the effect of a

policy change on the ranking of individuals in the distribution.

The relationship between this concept and conventional notions of

horizontal equity and social mobility is discussed below.   Only

certain aspects of horizontal equity as discussed in the literature,

can be captured by a measure of the change in ranking of utilities,

but we shall argue that in these cases an index may be constructed

which has empirical relevance in describing the effects of a proposed

reform to policy—makers.

          Indexes of vertical equity (or "inequality") abound, whereas

there is no widely used index of horizontal equity.   But, as Musgrave

(1959, p.160) has commented in his discussion of the two principles

of vertical and horizontal equity, "an objective index of inequality

is needed to translate either principle into a specific tax system".

The use of an "objective" statistical index to measure the concept of

vertical inequality is open to well—known objections, and has led to

the adoption of normative measures (see, for example, Atkinson 1970,

Cowell 1977 and Sen 1973).   Similar arguments apply also to the

measurement of horizontal inequity.   Nevertheless, we shall show

that if we stipulate certain requirements for an index of horizontal

equity, there exists a unique index characterised by a parameter

which describes the degree of"aversion to horizontal inequity". The

index of horizontal inequity may be combined with an index of vertical

inequity to give an overall measure of inequality, nd in turn this

can be compared with the efficiency gains or losses of a particular

reform.   We shall show also that the same approach yields an index

of social mobility which appears to overcome many of the problems
                                   - 3—.




 which have been encountered in previous attempts to produce an index.

           In this way we hope that the proposed index will supplement

 the usual analysis of tax reforms in terms of their effects on the

 level and distribution of welfare, (as illustrated by Rosen (1976)),

by allowing considerations of horizontal equity to be taken into

account explicitly.    The aim is to develop a theoretical measure

which will provide a useful extension to the empirical analysis of

tax changes.   When evaluating a proposal, politicians are often

interested not only in the average gain which will accrue to a

particular income group, but also in the distribution of gains and

losses within the group.    Their concern might take the rather crude

form of wishing to know simply the numbers of those who would gain

and of those who would lose from the proposal in question.
                                                                But,

more generally, the social valuation of the ex post distribution will

take into account the ex—ante distribution from which it is derived,

and, in particular, any change in the ordering of the distribution

which is induced by the move.     The idea behind this is the following.

Imagine a reform which leaves average income unchanged, but which

leads to a compression of the distribution such that the Lorenz curve

for the ex post distribution lies entirely within that for the ex—

ante distribution.    If we are concerned with vertical equity alone

then there has been an unambiguous reduction in inequality, and the

reform would be favouredJ       But suppose that the reform involves

also a permutation of the order of individuals in the distribution

giving rise to"horizontal inequities" The evaluation of the reform

may no longer be so clearcut.


1Given the assumption that social welfare (as a function of individual
incomes) is S—concave.
                                   —4—



          The distinction between the effect of a tax on the shape of

the distribution and its effect on the ranking of the distribution is

illustrated by the concept of "progression".          The conventional

definition of a progessive tax (on income, for example) is that the

proportion of an individual's pre—tax income which is paid in tax

is an increasing function of his income.          But we could equally well

define progression with respect to the tax paid as a proportion of

post—tax income.   The difference between the two is simply the

difference between tax—inclusive and tax—exclusive rates of tax.

Provided there is no change in the ranking of the distribution the

two measures will give the same answer and a tax which is progressive

(regressive) in terms of the pre—tax distribution will be progressive

(regressive) also if measured in terms of the post—tax distribution.

But when there is a change in the ordering the two measures give

conflicting answers.     This is illustrated in Table 1.



                                 Table 1

                                           Income

                         Before Tax      After Tax A        After Tax B

              1             10                5                  4

Individual

              2              6                4                  5




It shows the incomes of two individuals before tax and also after tax

for two taxes A and B.     The effects on the distribution of income of

the two taxes are identical.      Tax A is clearly progressive whether we

measure progression in terms of pre—tax or of post—tax income.            This

is not, however, true of tax B.       In terms of pre—tax incomes, tax B
                                      —5—




    is certainly progressive with tax rates of 16.7% on the poorer and

    60% on the richer individuals.      But as a proportion of disposable

    income the tax weighs more heavily on the individual with the smaller

    post—tax income, and in this sense is clearly regressive.       This

    conflict in the measure of progression arises because the tax changes

    the ordering of the distribution.       The anibiguity results from a tax

    change which reduces vertical inequity on the one hand but creates

    horizontal inequity on the other.       The trade—off between the two will

    depend upon social judgements about the two types of inequity, and

    one of the aims of our proposed index of horizontal equity is to help

    make these judgements explicit.      If the policy—maker is concerned

    not only with the post—tax distribution of incomes, but more generally

    with "what is, what was, and what might have been", then he will

    attach some significance to the initial distribution.       The process

    by which redistribution is brought about is relevant, and I ou1d

    venture the empirical statement that politicians would like their

    economic advisers to provide them with information about the effects

    of a policy on the change in ranking of households, in addition to

    the usual summary statistics of the ex post distribution.

             Changes in ordering may occur for a variety of reasons.

Some may be deliberate on the part of government.          But if we assume

that those characteristics which the government wishes to recognise

as warranting differential treatment (such as household size or state

of health) are subsumed into the utility function, then changes in the

ordering of utilities will represent undesired horizontal inequitiesj


1
  The term "utility function" means here the social valuation of the
vector of arguments of the function for a given household.
                                 —6—




A government may wish to pay little or no attention to these changes

in ordering or it may be much concerned by them; the social valuation

of these changes is an ethical judgement.

          One example of a tax—induced change in ordering is provided

by the effects of an income tax in a world of heterogenous preferences.

Individuals with a relatively strong preference for leisure will be

favoured at the expense of those with a greater preference for

consumption.    Administrative constraints on the amount of information

which can be incorporated in the design of the tax system may also

lead to horizontal inequities.     Regional variations in the price

level are ignored by a national tax system.     Housing allowances,

based on rents paid are unable to discriminate between households

which face high unit costs for housing and households which choose

to consume a lot of housing services.     This factor is likely to be

taken into account by a government contemplating the introduction of

a scheme of housing allowances, and will be set against any benefits

in terms of efficiency or vertical equity which the scheme offers.

           Attempts to remove or reduce the privileged tax treatment

 of some marketable assets (such as owner—occupied housing) run up

 against the problem that existing distortions have been capitalised.

 Proposals for a gradual transition reflect concern about the

 horizontal inequities which would result from immediate withdrawal

 of the tax concessions.      Finally, the administration of the tax system

 and the use of random audits result in erors in tax payments by some

 individuals.    Moreover, the sheer complexity of the tax system may

 lead taxpayers themselves to make mistakes in their labour supply

 and consumption decisions.
               The empirical significance of an index of horizontal equity

     is enhanced by the growing exploitation of micro—data files with

 observations on individual households.      With individual observations

 we are able to compare the ranking of the distribution both before

 and after any particular change in taxes or benefits. Simulation

 of tax reforms can encompass horizontal as well as vertical equity.

 The change in ranking involved in moving from pre—tax to the post-

 tax distribution has been discussed by Atkinson (1980) who examines

 the effects of re—ranking on conventional measures of inequality

 such as the Cmi coefficient.       But he does not consider the

 welfare significance of mobility as such.      In this paper we focus

 on the evaluation of changes in ranking.

              Section 2 discusses further the concept of horizontal equity

and an index is constructed in section 3.      In section 4 we show how

the index may be modified to yield an index of social mobility. An

illustration of the use of the index is given in section 5, and

section 6 discusses theoretical applications of the index to models

in which policy changes involve a trade—off between vertical and

horizontal equity.      A simple example of the use of the index in

models of optimal taxation is examined.



2.      Horizontal Equity

             There is a widespread belief that a tax system should meet

the double criteria of vertical and horizontal
                                                  equity (see, for

example, Musgrave (1959, 1976)).      But the concept of horizontal

equity has played      little     role in the literature on optimal
                                   —8—




taxation?    Undoubtedly, the main reason for this is the difficulty

of giving precise expression to the concept of equal treatment of

those equally situated.      The most useful definition of horizontal

equity is that of Feldstein (1976), "if two individuals would be

equally well off (have the same utility level) in the absence of
                                                                        2
taxation, they should also be equally well off if there is a taxt.

The extension of this definition to the case of tax reform (a

comparison of two positive levels of taxation) is straightforward 3.

In practice, of course, no two individuals are ever identical, and to

deal with this problem we are led naturally to a comparison of the

ordering of utility levels before and after a tax change. Horizontal

equity implies that a tax should leave unchanged the ranking of

                   4
utility levels.

            Horizontal equity and vertical equity are distinct, though

related criteria.       They are related in so far as a discussion of

vertical equity cannot proceed without some assumptions about which

characteristics should be incorporated directly into the measure of
utility —   for   example, if utility is a function only of income we

would normally wish to compare household incomes adjusted to "adlt

equivalent"levels.      But more relevant for our purposes is the

possible clash between horizontal and vertical equity.      Pursuit of

one criterion may lead to violation of the other.      Atkinson and


 'Exceptions to this are Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) and Stern (1979)

 2Horizontal equity may be defined also in terms of equality of budget
 sets (Gordon 1976), but it is not clear that this approach, in terms
 of opportunities rather than preferences, is sufficiently comprehensive
 as the concept of differing "needs" illustrates.

 3See Feldstein op. cit. p.95.

 4This is also stated by Feldstein (op. cit. p.83).
                                    —9—



Stiglitz (1980) show that even where individuals possess identical

preferences and endowments, ruaximisation of a social welfare

function expressing social judgements about vertical equity does

not necessarily imply equal tax rates for identical individuals.

If the feasible set is non—convex equal tax rates may character—

ise a local minimum of welfare, and the social optimum will

involve random taxes.      Once differences in preferences and endowments

are admitted the conflict between horizontal and vertical equity is

readily apparent.     An income tax discriminates between those with

different tastes for leisure and between those with different skills

(which, for the same money income, may entail different working

conditions and job satisfaction).

          But perhaps the most striking theoretical example of the

conflict between vertical and horizontal equity arises in the model

used by Mirrlees (1971) to examine optimal income taxation.     In that

model individuals had identical preferences (defined over consumption

and leisure) and differed only in respect of their potential wage

rates or ability levels.     Clearly, in the absence of taxation

individual utility is an increasing function of ability.      Suppose

the government uses redistributive lump—sum taxes to achieve the

first—best optimum.     Then, as Mirrlees (1971, 1977) shows, the first—

best optimum for a utilitarian social welfare function has the property

that individual utility is a decreasing function of ability (provided

leisure is a normal good).     In other words, the optimum from the point

of view of vertical equity is characterised by a complete reversal of

the ranking of utilities.     Some attention has been paid to the

incentive problems which result from such an outcome, because it would

not be difficult for individuals to pretend to have less ability
 than they in fact have.'   Where this is possible and individuals

 differ in respect o,f only one type of ability, then the optimum is
                                                                      2
 equal utility for all (see Allingham (1975) and Mirrlees (1977)).

 This solution is identical. to the optimum for the case in which

 ability may be observed but where there is complete aversion to

 horizontal inequity.   In general, however, the optimum tax on

 ability will involve a trade—off between vertical and horizontal

 equity.   The possiIlity of a trade—off of this kind has been

 ignored in the literature on the model of differing abilities

because it has usually been assumed that informational constraints

permit the use of only one policy instrument, namely an income tax.

Changes in the ordering of utilities do not arise with an income

tax provided a uniform schedule applies to all individuals and the

marginal tax rate does not exceed 100%.   But alternative policy

instruments (such as the use of lump—sum taxes when we can observe a

variable which is highly, but not perfectly, correlated with ability)

may well involve changes in ranking, and to evaluate these requires

explicit value judgments about both horizontal and vertical equity.

We shall illustrate below the role which these judgements play in

the construction of an index iof horizontal equity (section 3) and

also in a simple model of optimal taxation (section 6).




'See Mirrlees (1977), Dasgupta (1979)

2The equal utility outcome would also result from a "maxi—min"
 objective function.
                                  —11—




3.   Art Index of Horizàntal Equity

           Consider a distribution of incomes                 y ranked
                                                y1, y2,
in increasing order of income.      We measure the changes in ordering

between the ex ante and ex post distributions by a scaled order
                                      1
statistic which we shall define as


                   r. -
                    1     r.
                          1
                                                                      (1)
            1
                   N-i
where      s,. iS the scaled order statistic (SOS) for household i

           r. is the rank of household i in the ex post distribution

           r. is the rank of household i in the ex ante distribution
            1

          N is the number of households in the distribution

           The SOS value for each household lies between zero and unity,

these two extremes representing an unchanged order and a move from

one end of the distribution to the other, respectively.        The statistic
is defined in the same way for a distribution of utilities, but for

simplicity we shall assume that we are concerned only with the

distribution of incomes. In this way our results may be easily

compared with existing measures of vertical inequality.        The approach,

however, is general.

                ttobjectivefl index of horizontal inequity would be some

function of the SOS values given in equation (1).         One example would

be Spearman's rank correlation coefficient.      The use of such an index

to compare changes in rankings, however, does not necessarily



Ties in rankings can be dealt with by the usual conventions.
                                 —12--




correspond to any social welfare function, and it seems preferable

to tackle this problem directly by constructing a normative index.

           The aim is to rank distributions according to the

following social welfare function


          W =
                W(y1,
                        ••         ••    SN)
                                                                      (2)



          We shall normally wish to assume that W is an increasing

concave function of incomes, and a decreasing function of the SOS

values.

          We define first the concept of the uniform reduction in

all incomes which, at the original ranking, produces the same level

of social welfare as that produced by the actual distribution given

the changes in ranking which take place.         The unchanged ordering

equivalent proportion of income, i, is defined by



                             0, ... 0) =
          W(1iy1,                        W(y1,       N' S1,... SN) (3)

          In other words, (1 —   p) measures the proportion of total
income which, for a given distribution, we would be prepared to

sacrifice to eliminate all changes in ranking.        A natural index of

horizontal inequity is therefore



                                                                      (4)



          We may define also an indec of vertical inequity.

Consider a compression of the distribution which maintains the

ordering of individuals.      In the limit the ordering is maintained

but all incomes tend to a conmion value.       Define y as the equally
                                          —13--




 distributed level of income which is equivalent to the actual

 distribution where both are evaluated at the initial ranking


           W(, ...r;O,...O)                        N' O,...O)        (5)
                                     W(y1,

 which gives the same level of welfare as the actual distribution at

 the initial ranking. Hence we may define the index of vertical

 inequity as



                 l—                                                  (6)




          where y is the mean of the distribution

               is the proportion of total income which, for a given

ranking, we would be prepared to sacrifice to eliminate all vertical

inequality.

          The index of overall inequality is defined in terms of the

equally distributed originally ranked equivalent level of income,

denoted by y*, and defined by


          W(y*, .   . .y*;   0,. ..0) =
                                           W(y1,    N' S• ... SN)   (7)


          The proportion of total income which we would be prepared

to sacrifice to eliminate all vertical and horizontal inequities is

given by the index of overall inequality.



                                                                    (8)
                             y


          The assptioi that W is an increasing and concave function

of income and a decreasing function of the scaled order statistic

guarantee that the three index ntbers lie between zero and
                                     —14—




unity.   The relationship between them may be seen as follows.

From (3) and (7) we have




         W()Jy1,
                             0, ...0)         W(y*, •   ..y*;   0,...0)               (9)



          If we impose the assumption that the measure of vertical

inequality is independent of the meanvalue of income, then from (5)

and (6) it follows that




          Wiy1,       IJy 0, ... 0)            W(u; ...     ii; 0,   .   . .0)        (10)




          We may,therefore,deduce that




            =                                                                          (11)

and

          (1 —   I)   (1 —
                             IH)(1
                                     —   I)                                            (12)


          This result shows how the index of overall inequality may

be decomposed into its two component parts, the index of horizontal


inequity and the index of vertical inquality.               The only condition

on W which is reauired for (12) to hold is that the measure of vertical

inequality is independent of the mean of the distribution; a similar

decomposition holds in the case of mean—dependence with (1 —                     i)
replaced by m(y) (1 —   I)    where m is some function of the mean income.'

Existing measures of vertical inquality are based on the assumption of



'The reader will note that the decomposition result holds for any
relevant characteristic denoted by s; and not just where s represents
the SOS value.
                                      —15—



                                                                  1
mean_indePefle and we shall proceed in a like manner.
                                             definitions of inequality into
              To convert the theoretical
                                                                      distributions,
                                          estimated for particular
indexes which can be empirically
                           restrictions on the form of the function W.
we must place some
                                                separable social
The first is that we shall assume an additively

welfare function.

                    N
                                                                             (2')
              w =
                    i=l
                                                   Sen (1973), in particular,
               This is a strong assumption.
                                                               separability —
 has discussed the restrictions implied by additive
                                                             incomes of two
                                   social valuation of the
 namely,      that the relative
                                                            other incomes. Never-
                                    of the levels of any
 individuals is independent
                                        index of horizontal ineqUitY
 theless they enable us to construct an
                      interpreted and comparable
                                                 with normative
 which is both easily
                                                                which
                                      Atkinson'S (1970) index)
 measures of vertical equity (such as                       2
                                      additive separability.
  are also based on the assumption of

                                                               function F may be
                                          shall place on the
                    The restrictions we

   summarised        in   the following three conditions.

   Conditionl
                                              incomes y1 and y., and ranks r.1
                 Let two individuals with
                                                                                 =
    and r., exchange places in the distribution.
                                                             Clearly, s =    s
                                                                    condition
               When horizontal equity is not an issue, an anonymity
       say.

   1This point is discussed further in Sen (1973) pps. 60—1

   2                                          inequality measures see
     For a discussion of additively separable
   Covell (1980). He discusses the decomposition of an index of inequality
                                                    related to some concepts
   into indexes for separate groups which, although
   of horizontal equity, is rather different from our treatment in terms

   of changes in ordering.
                                             —16--



     will   ensure that the social valuation
                                                         of the two income levels is
     unchanged'. A condition of this
                                                     type is obviously inappropriate
     here, but we replace it
                                    by the condition that the relative
                                                                               marginal       social
     valuation of the income levels is unchanged.
                                                                Formally


                F1(y,
                   1 s)

                F(y.,   s)
                                 f(y1,    y) independent of s V s, y.,
                                                                                       (13)            p

   where F1 denotes the
                               social marginal
                                                     utility of income
  of F w.r.t.y.)                                                          (the derivative


               The above implies that we
                                         may write F in the
   form                                                                  multiplicative



              F(y,   s) = V(y)    R(s)
                                                                                      (14)
             Note    that    this does not
                                             imply that the relative
                                                                  valuation of
  different incomes is
                              independent of the change of ordering.
   Constancy of the relative
                                     valuation holds only if the individuals
  at these income
                      levels have the
                                           same value of the
                                                                 scaled order
 statistic.

 Condition 2

            The second condition
                                         is that the
                                                        degree of aversion to
horizontal
             inequity may be
                                  represented by a
by , which                                                single parameter, denoted
               is assumed
                              to vary between
                                                 zero (no aversion
in ordering)                                                             to changes
               to infinity
                                (complete aversion
                                                         to changes in
                                                                         ordering).




See, for example, Sen (1973)
                             p.10.
                                               — 17—



We may, therefore, write R as


          R =    R(s,    Ti)                                               (15)


          The following restrictions imply no loss of generality.

When there is no change in the ordering the social valuation of

different income levels is given by the function V(y) and we may

write


          R(O,    ri) = 1                                                  (16)



           Similarly, when no weight at all is attached to horizontal

inequity, the valuation of the distribution disregards any re-

ordering ,and


          R(s, 0) = 1                     vs                               (17)

          Consider an individual with income y and scaled order

statistic s.      Suppose we now increase the change in his ranking by

a small amount ds.             The proportionate increase in his income which

is equivalent (in terms of the social valuation) to the further
                                                       1
displacement is (from (14) and (15))


          1 d                  1          ldR
          y ds            k(y)            R ds ' '

where k(y) is the elasticity of V with respect to y.

          Integrating (18) we obtain


          log R =    c    —
                                   k(y)   g(s, y, r)                       (19)



'Strictly speaking, we may differentiate only when there is a
 continuum of individuals.
                                           —18—



   where c is the constant of integration, and g is the integral of f

  with respect to s.           It is easy to show that (16) and (17) imply that
   c =   0.    If we assume that k is a constant, which is equivalent to

   the property that our measure of vertical equity is mean—independent

   (Atkinson 1970), then since R is not a function of y (by condition 1),

  we have



               R =   kg(s,n)                                                  (20)




               Consider now two individuals with incomes
                                                              y1 and y2 and
 intiai rankings             and F2.   Imagine a reform which results in their
 exchanging positions.          The cost of this reform may be measured in

 terms of the proportionate increase in the incomes of both

 individuals which would be
                                   necessary to compensate for the change in
ordering.       Denote the required increase by (A—i) and the SOS value,

which is the same for both, by s.           Then A is defined by


              V(Ay1)R(s) + V(Ay2)R(s)       V(y1) +   V(y2)               (21)
              With the constant elasticity form for V we have


                R(s) =   1
                                                                          (22)


              Imagine now that the reform had instead been
                                                                implemented in
two partial steps, the first of which implied an SOS value of
                                                              s1 for
both individuals and the second further
                                               changed the ordering (in the
                                           —19—



                                                                         1
same direction) with an SOS value of                 By construction


                                                                                   (23)
          s1+s2s
The cost of each step may be evaluated as above which gives


                         1                                                          (24)
          A R(s1) =

           k
          A2 R(s2) = 1                                                              (25)



Using (20) and taking logs we have


          log A =       g(s,n     )


          log A1 =                n)                                                (26)
                        g(s1,
          log A2 =      g(s2,     )

          The final condition we shall impose is that the cost of the

reform is independent of the number of stages in which it is implemented,

provided that the steps converge monotonically to the final ordering.

Condition 3

          If s =        +         then A =                                          (27)
                   s1        s2              X1A2


                                                        g(s,n) =              +
          This means that when s =
                                              5] + 2'              g(s1,ri)       g(s2,r)
i.e. g is linear in                Since     represents social preferences and

is constrained only to be positive we may norinalise such that3

          g(s,n) =      s                                                           (28)




1
 Note that (23) holds only when the various steps of a reform lead
inonotonically to the final change in ordering; when there is "over-
shooting" the equation does not hold.
    is straightforward to generalise the proof to the case of many
steps of arbitrary size provided always that the steps form a monotonic
sequence for the ranking.
3Given that the normalisation must satisfy (17).
                                               -20-


 Hence


            R(s,    T))     = e -kfl   S

                                                                                      (29)


            From (18) and (29) we see that this permits a natural

 interpretation of the parameter rj measuring the degree of aversion to

 horizontal inequity as the proportionate increase in income required

 to compensate for a unit change in the
                                                      ordering (measured by the
 SOS value).

            The above results enable us to state the
                                                                       following theorem.
Theorem 1

         Given Conditions 1—3, there is a unique social valuation

function F given by



         (y,       s) =        I
                            —1ye           j
                                                           n    0, k      1         (30)


                             logy—s,when=
         where k is the constant value of the
                                                               elasticity of V w.r.t.y.
         Atkinson (1970) has shown that if the index of vertical

inequality is independent of the mean then V has the constant elasticity

form (corresponding to constant relative riBk aversion)


         V(y) =L
                    k
                        k
                                                  k    1
                                                                                    (31)

                   logy                          k=O
             Combining this with the results derived above gives the form

 (30).   The economic explanation of the functional form (30) is the

following.     There is a close analogy between the standard analysis

of risk aversion in consinner theory, and the aversion to vertical

and horizontal inequality as expressed in the social valuation function.
                                     —21—



Constant relative and absolute risk aversion imply special and veil—

known forms for individual utility functions, and this is true also

for the social valuation function.       The assumption of mean—

independence for the index of vertical inequality is equivalent to

the property of constant relative inequality aversion, and hence the

social valuation function is of the constant elasticity form in income.

The assumption about aversion to changes in ordering embodied in

condition 3 is equivalent to the property of constant absolute re-

ordering aversion, and hence the change in ordering enters the social

valuation function in the exponential form.      Although these are

strong assumptions, they provide a useful starting point and benchmark

for empirical work.

             An implication of the result is that complete aversion to

horizontal equity is equivalent to placing no value on the incomes of

those individuals whose ordering in the distribution has changed. From

(30) we see that


             lim F(y, s) =   F(0,   s)        v s > 0                 (32)
             n4.


             As the degree of aversion to horizontal inequity increases

the social valuation of the incomes of all individuals whose ordering

has changed decreases.   In the limit a change in ordering is

equivalent to reducing the incomes of those affected to zero.      Complete

aversion to horizontal inequity implies that a reform which alters

the position in the ordering of every individual has the same effect

on social welfare as wiping out the whole of national income.

             Substituting (30) into equations (3)—(8) yields
        GIveR conj tio5 1—3, there are uniq indexes of horjzonti

vertical and ov.11 inequa1i (as a                   of the two inequaj

aversjo Parameters) given by the fo110wing exPressi            In addit10,
the 1ndex of overall       nequa1jy may be decomposed according to (12)




             1
                                                 k O                (33)




             1
                     expf.i                                        (34)
                          N

                                  1


                 I    1
                          rfYjk
                                                                   (35)
                          i(yJj



                     ex/ 1log                                      (36)
                                  Li]



             1 -
                                                                    (37)
                     L 1(y

                 -
                     ex[ I    i[iog -   - s 1'
                                           ijJ
                                                    k0              (38)
                                 —23--




         It can be checked by inspection that these expressions

satisfy (12).   Not surprisingly, the index I is identical to the

Atkinson index of inequality.     Define c = 1—k.     Then the index of

overall inequality is a function of two parameters, r and c, both of

which vary from zero to infinity, denoting the degrees of aversion to

horizontal and vertical inequity respectively.       When horizontal

equity is a matter of no concern (r       0) the index of overall inequality

reduces to I; similarly, when distributional considerations (in the

conventional sense of vertical equity) are disregarded (c =         0)   the

index of overall inequality is simply TH•      In general, however, the

index of inequality depends upon both horizontal and vertical equity.

Given values of the parameters     and c, and the ex ante and ex post

distributions, it is a straightforward matter to compute the different

measures of inequality)'

            To calibrate the index of horizontal equity it may be

  helpful to take an example.    Consider the case when c = 0 (the

  utility function is logarithmic in income) and imagine a reform which

  completely reverses the original ranking.      This corresponds exactly

  to the first—best lump—sum tax system in the Nirrlees (1971) model

  discussed above.   A complete reversal of ranking of a continuum of

  individuals implies anaverage SOS value 'of one—half, and from (34)

  we see that the percentage of total income we are prepared to

  sacrifice to eliminate the reversal of the rankings is 1 —
                                                                    exp[_.-J.
  This is equal to 4.8% when i     0.1,   22.1% when 11   = 0.5,   39.3% when

    = 1, and 63.2% when = 2.


The definitions of the indexes in the text are for discrete distributions;
the conversion to Continuous distributions is straightforward.
                                 —24—



          The value for   chosen to represent preferences about

horizontal equity will depend upon the degree of attachment to the

 ranking of the initial distribution.   For this reason it may well

 be that the value of n chosen will depend upon the reform being

 analysed)    In section 5 we shall illustrate the use of the equity

 indexes by reference to the post—tax income distribution in the UK,

 and we shall examine the sensitivity of the results to different

 assumptions about the value of ri.

          We may compare our index of horizontal inequity with

alternative measures which have been suggested.       These tend to

concentrate on the unequal treatment of people assumed to be equal

initially, and thus have the weakness that they are not directly

concerned with changes in ordering as such.   For example, Feldstein

 (1976) considers, and rejects, the use of the variance of post—reform

utilities for a. grOup of individuals with equal utility before the

reform.    Applied to a world in which everyone starts with a

different level of utility this measure is completely uninformative.

          Rosen (1978) has suggested measuring horizontal inequity

in terms of increases in the differences between successive utility

levels in the ordering brought about by tax reform.     His concept of

horizontal inequity is not confined to changes in ordering, which

has some advantages, but it is then impossible to decompose the

effects of a given tax reform into changes in vertical and

horizontal equity (as in (12) above).   Moreover, his index is not

uniquely defined because it depends on an arbitrary randomisation




1Similar considerations may apply to the value of c.   Feldstein (1976)
has suggested the use of different values of the vertical inequality
aversion parameter for different types of consumption.
                                   —25—



of utility levels.     Nevertheless, there may be some aspects of

horizontal equity which are not captured simply by the change in

ordering, in which case our index could not be equated with

horizontal equity.

          Johnson and Mayer (1962) suggest looking at the number of

"inequalities" which could be interpreted here as the number of

changes in ordering.    The objection to this is the same as that to

the use of other ttobjectivet measures (e.g. the rank correlation

coefficient), namely that it gives no indication of the magnitude of

the change in terms of a measuring rod such as the fraction of

national income we are prepared to sacrifice to eliminate the

"inequities".    This is precisely why we need a normative index

based on an explicit statement of the preferences about horizontal

equity.    Only in this way is it possible to construct an index for

empirical analysis of tax and other reforms which involve a trade-

off between efficiency, vertical equity, and horizontal equity.



4.   An Index of Social Mobility

          In this section we shall try to show that the approach used

above may help to overcome some of the problems which have been

encountered in the literature on the measurement of social mobility.

Shorrocks (1978) has shown very clearly that an index of mobility

which satisfies the relatively innocuous conditions that it lie

between zero and unity and be monotonic in the scaled order statistic

is incompatible with an objective notion of perfect mobility.1 The



1This is usually defined in terms of a transition matrix in which the
probability of ending up in any income group is the same for all groups.
                                   —26—



attempt to relax conditions on the index in order to reconcile the

measure with some objective concept of mobility does not seem to

have proved fruitful.        Shorrocks concludes that "we may finally

have to admit that no single mobility statistic has the minimum

requirements regarded as essential". (op.cit. p.1023).           An alternative

approach is to construct a normative index along the lines pursued

above. The only difference is that it is usual in the context of

social mobility to favour changes in the ordering of the distribution.

As before, we shall assume that distributions may be ranked

according to the social welfare function (2) where we assume that F

is now an increasing function of s.            We further define the

concept of the uniform increase in all incomes which, with zero

mobility, produces the same level of social welfare as that produced

by the actual distribution given the mobility which exists.            The

zero mobility equivalent proportion of income, p, is defined by



           F(py., 0) =   F(y.,    s.)                                    (39)

           I             I



           Given our assumptions p        1.     The proportion of total income

which, from a position of zero mobility, we would be prepared to

sacrifice in order to achieve the degree of mobility we observe is

   —             so a natural index of mobility is
       1], and


           IM=lj                                                         (40)




           We may write down an exact form for the index if we are

prepared to impose further conditions on F. Parallel to conditions

1—3 above, we may define
                                     —27—



(].')   If   two individuals in the distribution exchange places the relative

marginal social valuation of the two income levels is unchanged.

(2') The desire for mobility may be represented by a single parameter,

denoted by y, which varies between zero (no preference for mobility)

to infinity (complete aversion to immobility).

(3') The benefits of a reform which increases mobility are

independent of the number of stages in which the reform is implemented,

provided that no stage reverses a change in ordering brought about by

a previous stage. (Note that this condition is not concerned with

the speed at which a reform is implemented which, in general, would

alter our valuation of changes in ordering.      The social valuation

function takes no account of the time dimension of reform). Since F

is an increasing function of s, it is easy to show that conditions

l'—3' imply that (29) becomes


             R(s, y)   eky   s
                                                                    (41)


             We may now state

Theorem 3

             Given conditions l'—3' there is a unique index of mobility

(as a function of the mobility preference parameter) given by

                                      1
                                      k

                                                 k#
                                                       1


                                                                   (42)




                  l_exp{_s1j
                                                 k0
                                    28—




            (42) shows that the index of mobility depends upon both
the degree of desire for mobility and the degree of inequality

aversion.      Consequently, any index of mobility is based on some

preferences (usually implicit) about vertical inequality.        For

example, Bartholomew's (1976) index of social mobility is proportional

to the average change in SOS values



            B= s                                                       (43)



            Hence when V(y) takes the logarithmic form (k = 0)



                1 —   e'                                               (44)



and    is an increasing function of B.

            In other words,the use of Bartholomew's index to rank

distributions according to their degree of mobility, is equivalent to

assuming a value for the inequality aversion parameter c of unity.

It is interesting to note that the extent to which Bartholomew's

index is useful as a measure of mobility depends upon our attitudes

towards vertical inequality.

         The mobility index may be used to evaluate reforms which

increase mobility at: the: expense of an increase in inequality. If we

consider reforms which preserve the mean of the distribution then, by

arguments parallel to those embodied in equations (9)—(12),it may be

shown that social welfare is an increasing function of (1 —

Consider a class of mean—preserving reforms characterised by a

policy variable x such that the indexes are concave differentiable

functions of x.       The optimal policy is given by
                                          —29—



                 E(M) = E(V)
                                                                            (45)


                 where E(M) and E(V) are the elasticities of (1 —       and
     (1 —
            L)   respectively with respect to x.



     5.     An Empirical Application

                 The principal use of the index of horizontal equity is to

    examine the impact of tax reforms
                                          using large data files in which
    it is possible to
                         compute the change in ranking for each of a large
    sample of individuals or households.
                                                 To demonstrate the use of the
    index, however, we present some illustrative calculations for the

    distribution of household incomes in the UK.
                                                        Table 2 shows the
    distribution of incomes by deciles for a sample of 7,198 households

    taken from the 1977 Family
                                  Expenditure Survey.     Col. (1) shows the
    distribution of "original" income (defined as factor incomes
                                                                 plus
    cash transfers).   Col. (2) shows the distribution of income after

    taxes and benefits (except for
                                       public expenditure on defence, law
and order and public investment)1.

              From the available data it is impossible to calculate the

changes in ranking of each household in the sample.           But the Royal
Commission on the Distribution of
                                         Income and Wealth had access to
the same data and found that 4l.5Z
                                          of households in the distribution
of original income had moved up or down one decile in the distribution

of final income, and that 27.5% had moved by more than one decile.



1
 Details of the assumptions about
                                  incidence used to compute the
distributions are given in Economic Trends January 1979.
Clearly, many of these changes were deliberate and represented the

use of taxes and benefits to take account of differing "needs" such
                                  But others were not, and in Col. (3)
as household size and age.

we show a plausible representation of the change in ordering induced

by the process of redistribution.        Six of the decile groups have an

unchanged order, and four move up or down one decile.            Table 3 shows


the index of horizontal inequality (defined by (33)) for the change

in the distributions for different values of the two inequality

aversion parameters.        The parameters may be interpreted as follows.

If we attach the same social value to a marginal dollar in the hands

of someone with income y as to x dollars for someone with income Ay,

                    For example, when c =   0.5,   one dollar taken from some-
then x = A6.
                                       the same social value as 50 cents
one on twice average earnings has

given to a person on one—half average earnings.            The social value

 attached to the income, y, of a person who has changed position in

 the distribution is equal to the social value of an income ye.

 When Ti   = 0.5   this is equivalent to a reduction in income of about 5%

 for a change in ordering of one decile, and when Ti
                                                            =5   the equivalent

 reduction is about 40%.

             Table 4 shows the index of overall inequality for both the

                                            The first two columns correspond
 originalandfinaldistribut1orlso
 also to the index of vertical inequality.           It can be checked that

 the Lorenz curve for the final distribution lies entirely within
                                                                 far as vertical
 that for the original distribution, and, therefore, as

 inequality is concerned, the redistribution is unambiguously desirable.

 But for some values of the horizontal inequity aversion parameters the

 10550fhoizontaIequityOff6etSthe gain in vertical equality, and

  the index of overall inequality is greater for the final distribution
       TABLE 2 DISTRIBUTION OF   -
                                     HOUSEHOLD     INCOMES, UK 1977

                              (El 4nnum)

DECILE           Original Income             After Taxes and Benefits
            (including cash benefits)

                                          Income         Ranking in Initial
                                                           Distribution
Bottom               1090                  1141                   2

  2                  1658                  1674                   1


  3                  2431                  2166                   3

  4                  3267                  2668                   4

  5                  4014                  3198                   5

  6                  4740                  3709                   6

  7                  5476                  4253                   8

  8                  6357                  4914                   7

  9                  7640                 5867                    9

 10                11,343                  8491                  10

Mean                 4802                  3808




Source Economic Trends January 1979, Tables 9 and 12.
                                  — 39_




            TABLE 3       INDEX OF HORIZONTAL INEQUITY



                                0.5                  1.0             5.0

              0                   .017                .033            .134

             0.5                  .019                .038            .164
E
             1.0                  .022          -     .044            .200

             2.0                  .030                .059            .282




           TABLE 4 INDEX OF OVERALL INEQUALITY

          Original Distribution                        Final Distribution

                                                                11



                                          0         0.5       1.0      5.0

    O              0              1
                                          o         .017      .033         .134

    0.5            .093                  .072       .090      .107         .224

c   1.0            .187                  .143       .162      .181         .314

    2.0            .361                  .274       .296      .317         .479
                                  — 3—




than for the original distribution.      This occurs, for example, when

ii   = 5 for the values of c shown in Table 4.    If we ignore the

efficiency costs of the process of redistribution, we may rank

distributions according to the value of the index of overall inequality.

From (37) we see that this means there is a trade—off between

vertical and horizontal equity.      The trade—off for the distribution

of incomes in the UK is shown in Figure 1.       For combinations of the

inequity aversion parameters to the north—west of the indifference

line II, the final distribution is preferred to the original

distribution, whereas for combinations to the south—east the status

quo is preferred. Diagrams such as figure 1 may be a useful way of

presenting information about a proposed reform to policy—makers.




6. An Application to Optimal Taxation

           Administrative errors are one source of horizontal inequities

and we present below a highly simplified model to illustrate the

application of the approach developed above.       Stern (1979) has

explored optimal lump—sum taxes in a model in which there was a fixed

probability that indviduals (either skilled or unskilled) were

incorrectly classified.      He computed the optimal level of taxes for

a utilitarian social welfare function.      We shall consider a simple

version of his model and examine explicitly the trade—off between

horizontal and vertical equity.      To do this we allow the probability

of error to be endogenous.
                           vertical inequality aversion parameter
                                                    C')




            L)
                       -                                         ('4
                                                                       /
                                                                           ('4
                 Lii             UI             Q   Ui           C)        UI    UI
       C)




       C)
       o
                                                      tJ
                                                          1.11




      CD

0
                                                      (D
                                                      I-1 .
                                                      Ilcn
N                                                     (Drt
0                                                         P1
                                                          I—



                                                          I-,-
                                                          0
(Dj
P3
                                                                                      1rJ
                                                                                      H-
                                                                                      -Q

P3
                                                                                      CD
CD


13)


0


11
P3

CD


CD




                                           0
                                           P1




                                      mgi
      NJ
      0'                              ic
                                      (D

                                      P1
                                      (D0
                                      Qct
                                           P1




                                           rt
                                           H-
                                           0
                                        —34—



           Consider a centrally planned economy in which there are two

groups with fixed endowments y1 and y2 (y2 >
                                                      y1; mean income =      y).
social welfare is a concave function of individual consumption

levels.     The planner allocates consumption bundles directly (using

local administrators) which can be seen as equivalent to imposing

 lump—sum taxes such that


            c        y, +a
                                           aO                                 (46)
                 =     —a
            C2

            When the planner can be sure that the local administrators

make no mistakes he will choose taxes to give equal consumption levels.

We now introduce administrative errors.             Suppose that the planner

knows the relative numbers of the two groups in each region and

allocates consumption accordingly.             The local administrators are

told to allocate consumption c. to people with income y1.
                                                                       But they
sometimes confuse the groups and with probability p make an error.

We shall assume that p is an increasing function of a, perhaps

because when the consumption bundles are very different the local

administrators try hard not to make mistakes but they become

careless when distributing roughly similar bundles.             In general, the
optimal tax will depend on the trade—off between vertical and

horizontal equity.'          There are certain special cases.      When ii     0,
the optimal outcome is complete equality for any positive c, and when

c =   0 the solution is to impose no taxes if        ri is positive.



1Because of the very simple structure of the model examined
                                                            here, it
seems less plausible that the planner would be concerned about  changes
in ordering as the consumption levels tend to equality, but
are intended to be illustrative                             the  results
                                only.
                                                    —35--




           Consider the case when c                         1.      The expected value of social

we:lfare is


           EW = (1 —                                   +                      +                    +
                                   p(a))[log(y1+a)              log(y2—a)]        p(a)[log(y1+a)
                        log(y2+a)
                                       —   2)
                   =                                        —
                        log(y1+a)
                                       +
                                           iog(y2—a)             2p(a)                             (47)




               The solution depends on the function p(a).                             A sufficient,

though not necessary, condition for the first—order condition to

yield a local maximum is that p be convex.                               Consider the simplest

linear form where p = 0 when a 0 and p =                                     (i.e. random allocation)

when   a= y        —
                       y1.

                               a
                             —                                                                     (48)
                         2(y—y1)

               It is easy to show that the solution is the following

(i) jf         <   r*,    there is an interior solution given by


                             (y—a) =       (y2—y1—2a) (y—y1)
                                                                                                   (49)



                    = (A—i)
                       — ,where                 A
                                                       y2/y1
                          2A



(ii)   if ri           ri*, a =     0 and the optimal solution involves no taxes.



7. Conclusions

               We have shown that if we are prepared to define vertical

and horizontal inequity as a mean—preserving spread and a change in
                                                                                                          -
ranking respectiveiy,::it is possible to construct an index of overall
                                  - 36—




inequality which decomposes into two measures of vertical and

horizontal inequity.      Provided certain conditions are accepted, these

indexes are uniquely defined as a function of two inequity aversion

parameters.      It is hoped that the indexes will prove useful in the

evaluation of tax proposals (to examine the trade—off between

vertical and horizontal equity), and also as a measure of social

mobility.

            Horizontal equity is an elusive concept, and it is most

unlikely that a single index will capture all the different

interpretations which have been given to it.     For example, it has

been argued that little importance should be attached to a change

in ordering per Se, but that concern for horizontal equity restricts

the use of certain tax instruments.'      Our index is limited to those

cases where changes in ordering do affect social valuations.      It is

based on strong assumptions, but the aim has been to construct an

index which may be of use in empirical research, always bearing in

mind Sen's (1973, p.76) stricture that "the glib man who can make

inequality comparisons perfectly between every pair of distributions

and the wise guy who finds all such comparisons 'arbitrary' both

seem to miss essential aspects of the concept of inequality".




'See Atkinson (1980) for a discussion of alternative views.
                                     —37—



                                  REFERENCES

 Allingham, M.G. (1975)   "Towards an Ability Tax", Journal of Public
          Economics, Vol. 4, pps. 361—76.

 Atkinson, A.B.  (1970) "On the Measurement of Inequality", Journal
          of Economic They, Vol. 2 pps. 244—63.

 Atkinson, A.B.   (1980)   "Horizontal Equity and the Distribution of
           the Tax Burden' in (ed.) Aaron, H. and Boskin, M.J.., The
          Economics of Taxation, Brookings Institution.

Atkinson, A.B. and Stiglitz, J.E. (1976)   "The Design of Tax Structure:
          Direct versus Indirect Taxation", Journal of Public Economics,
          Vol. 6, pps. 55—75

 Atkinson, A.B. and Stiglitz, J.E. (1980) Lectures on Public Economics,
          McGraw—Hill, forthcoming.

 Bartholomew, D.J.     (1967)      Stochastic Models for Social Processes,
          Wiley.

 Cowell, F.A.     (1977)     Measuring Inequality, Philip Allan, England.

 Cowell, F.A.  (1980) "On the Structure of Additive Inequality Measures",
          Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.

 Dasgupta, P.  (1979)   "Economic Decentralization and Individual Rights",
          Inaugural Lecture at the London School of Economics, mimeo.

 Feldstein, M.S. (1976)   "On the Theory of Tax Reform", Journal of
         Public Economics, Vol. 6 pps. 77—104.

 Johnson, S.B. and Mayer, T. (1962) "An Extension of Sidgwick's
          Equity Principle"., Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 76
          pps. 454—63.

 Mirrlees, J.A.   (1971)  "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum
          Income Taxation", Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 38,
          pps. 175—208.

 Mirrlees, J.A.   (1977)  "The Theory of Optimal Taxation", to appear
          in (eds.) Arrow, K.J. and Intriligator, M.D., Handbook of
          Mathematical Economics.

 Musgrave, R.A.     (1959)      The Theory of Public Finance, McGraw—Hill.

 Musgrave, R.A.   (1976)  "ET, OT and SBT", Journal of Public Economics
          Vol. 6, pps. 3—16.

Pattanaik, P.K. (1980)   "The Anatomy of Welfare", Inaugural Lecture
         delivered at the University of
                                               Birmingham.
                                   —38--




  Rosen, H.S. (1976) "A Methodology for Evaluating Tax Reform
           Proposals", Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 6, pps. 105—22.

  Rosen, H.S. (1978)   "An Approach to the Study of Income, Utility and
          Horizontal Equity", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
             XCII, pps. 307—22.

 Sen, A.    (1973)   On Economic Inequality Oxford University Press.


Sen, A.K.    (1979) "Personal Utilities and Public Judgements: Or What's
            Wrong with Welfare Economics?", Economic Journal, Vol. 89,
            pps 537—58


 Shorrocks, A.F. (1978)   "The Measurement of Mobility",
                                                         Econometrica,
         Vol. 46, pps. 1013—24.

Stern, N.S. (1979)    "Optimum Taxation with Errors in
         Warwick Economic Research Paper No. 157, n-iimeo.Administration",
