                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       ACCELERATING INFLATION AND THE DISTRIBUTION
             OF HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS INCENTIVES



                      Edward J. Kane




                   Working   Paper No. 1470




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138


                        April 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
project on the changing role of Debt and Eciuity Finance in
U.S. Capital Formation in the United States, which is
being financed by a grant from the American Council of
Life Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper 470
                                                                        April, 1980




           Accelerating Inflation and the Distribution
                 of Household Savings IncentIves


                            ABSTRA


    This study describes how accelerating inflation has led households in

different economic and demographic classes to reallocate their "transactable

savings." Cross—section data from the 1962 and 1970 Surveys of Consumer

Finances are used to estimate both the composition of accumulated household

saving and prospective rates of return on this saving.

    The paper shows that accelerating inflation has, in thee presence of com-

prehensive ceilings on deposit interest rates, altered the savings incentives

of different types of households. The effect has been to bias small savers

toward leveraged investments in tangible assets (especially real estate) and

large savers toward certificates of deposit and marketable bonds. Small savers

with disadvantaged access to credit are simply victimized.

     Our analysis helps to explain a number of anomalous features of the 1975—

1979 macroeconomic recovery, particularly the dominant role of consumer spending,

the unprecedented expansion of household debt, the boom in housing, and de-

clining flows of household savings into deposit institutitons.

     These data underscore the unintended consequences of trying to reconcile

deposit-rate. ceilings with accelerating inflation. This combination of policies

unpleasantly distorts the sectoral composition of spending and risk—bearing

(crowding out some productive business investment) and aggrevates inequities

in the distribution of income and opportunity.
                                                    Professor Edward J. Kane
                                                    Ohio State University
                                                    1775 College Road
                                                    Columbus, Ohio 43210

                                                    (614) 422—8708
                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                                       Page Number
0.    Introduction .    .    .    .   .       .            .       .                             1

      How Accelerating Inflation Has Hurt the Small Saver                                        4

      A. Some Preliminary Definitions         .            .       .                             4

      B.   How Interest Ceilings Hurt Small Savers .                                             5

      C.   Effect of Accelerating Inflation
           on Financial Incentives Facing Small Savers                                           8

           1.   Unfavorable Movements in Marginal Tax Rates                                      9

           2. Unfavorable Movements in
                Transactions Costs in Securities Markets.                                •       10

           3. Discriminatory Adjustments in Deposit-Rate Ceilings              •         .       10

II.   Behavior of Inflation and Interest Rates During the 1960s                •         .       11

      A. Post-1966 Evolution of Deposit-Rate Ceilings.                                   •       12

      B. Investments in Real Estate
           and Consumer Durables as Opportunities for Escapes                            •       13

III. Limitations of Our Data Base .               .        .       .                     •       15

IV. Consolidated Balance Sheets for

      Households in Different Age and Wealth Classes .                         •          •      17

      A. Testing the Age Hypothesis: Consolidated
           Balance Sheets for Households Classified By Age                     •          .      19

      B. Evidence on the Accuracy of
           the Estimated Value of Owner-Occupied Housing                                         22

           1.   Bias Due to Neglecting
                Depreciation on Recently Purchased Homes                           •         .   22

           2. Assessment Bias .           .           .        .       .   .       .         .   23



                                                      II
Table of Contents, Contd.


                                                                      Page Number
    C. Testing the Wealth Hypothesis: Consolidated Balance Sheets for
         Households Ranked By Their Net Transactable Wealth .     .     .      24

V. Estimated 1970 Weighted-Average
    Rates of Return for Each Age and Wealth Class     .   .   .   .     .      25

VI. Testing the Minority Hypothesis:
    Consolidated 1970 Balance Sheets and Estimated Portfolio Yields
    For Families in Different Demographic Circumstances•.     .   .     .      29

VII. Summary of Findings .      .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .     .      31

    Tables   .   .    .     .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .     .   34—52

    Footnotes     .   .     .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .     .      53

    References.       .     .   .   .   .     .   .   .   .   .   .     .      54




                                        111
                                                           (Revised: February 1980)


             ACCELERATING INFLATION AND THE DISTRIBUTION

                     OF HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS INCENTIVES*

                                 Edward J. Kane

      Political rhetoric characterizes inflation as a high-ranking public enemy
that society must band together to fight. But this view is exaggerated. Real-world
inflation is never uniform in its effects. While some prices shoot up rapidly, other
prices move hardly at all, and a few even decline. Uneven movements in prices
cause inflation to affect the economic welfare of different people differently.
The distribution of costs and benefits across the population works through the
distribution of assets, debts, and labor skills. Just as some homes are protected
against floods or earthquakes, some households possess skills and balance sheets
whose net market values are protected against inflation.
       Even when society as a whole is doing little to stop inflation, a venturesome
household can neutralize inflation by suitably reallocating its wealth. It can do so
by shifting its wealth (as far as transactions costs permit) into a collection of
assets and liabilities whose overall rate of return promises to improve with
anticipated and unanticipated increases in inflation. But most portfolios that
protect against unanticipated inflation are speculative, in that they threaten to
develop substantial losses if unanticipated deflation should ensue instead.
       This study describes how, in the middle and late 1960s, households in
different economic and demographic classes reallocated their "transactable say-
 ings" to cope with accelerating inflation. We define transactable savings to mean
                                                                                   2

essentially noncontractual savings:      savings that are not administered for
households by insurance companies, pension funds, or the U.S. Social Security
System.
       We use cross-section data from the 1962 and 1970 Surveys of Consumer
Finances to estimate both the composition of household portfolios of transactable
savings and prospective rates of return on these portfolios. Our purpose is to cast
some light on how accelerating inflation affects the savings incentives of different
households and to map out resulting differences in the distribution of opportunities
for accumulating personal wealth.
       Our data set neglects claims on pension funds and wealth accumulated in
collectibles, food inventories, and consumer durables that are not built into homes.
Aggregate Flow of Funds data for the household sector developed by Cagan and
Lipsey (1978) suggest that these unmeasured asset categories captured about half
of the flow of net household saving between 1962 and 1970.1 This proportion may
be somewhat higher for younger and less-wealthy households.
      As Cagan and Lipsey (1978) have shown, Flow of Funds data covering the
household sector as a whole show virtually no change in balance-sheet ratios
between 1962 and 1970. Moreover, although households' aggregate ratio of tangible
to intangible assets rises sharply after 1972, Cagan and Lipsey argue that the
increase can be attributed to capital appreciation on a relatively unchanging
collection of assets, with no need to presume an active shift into inflation-
protected assets. The research reported here indicates that the apparent passivity
in aggregate household portfolio ratios conceals some important shifts in asset-
holding among wealth and age classes.
      In the contemporary United States, the redistributive effects of
accelerating inflation can be properly understood only in conjunction with
                                                                                   3

longstanding federal and state policies to promote homeownership and housing
construction whose qualitative effects on savings incentives vary with the rate of
inflation. These policies consist principally of income—tax preferences available to
homeowners and a grab—bag of programs and political forces that act to slow
inflation-induced increases in the nominal rate of interest charged on mortgage
funds.

         Our analysis features the concept of regulation-constrained portfolio
balance. We show that, both to hedge inflation risk inherent in their nontran-
sactable savings and to eke out a positive net real after-tax rate of return on their
transactable funds, all but the wealthiest U.S. households found it advantageous to
substitute investments in housing and investment real estate (and presumably also
in collectibles, food inventories, and consumer durables) for traditional financial
vehicles for savings. Influenced by transactions-cost and tax differentials, the
nation's oldest and wealthiest households shifted their transactable wealth dif-
ferently. They moved on balance out of home equity and traditional deposit
accounts into certificates of deposit (CDs), marketable bonds, and equity in
investment real estate.
         Although both patterns of portfolio rebalancing make sense ex ante, the
resulting balance sheets are noticeably riskier than the portfolios held by the
corresponding sets of households in 1962. When in the 1970s bond prices declined
and stock values failed to increase with unanticipated inflation, real returns earned
by most wealthy households fared badly ex .       These developments have left our

nation's wealthiest households anxious and confused, particularly about the ability
of common stocks to act as an inflation hedge. On the other hand, trends in
housing prices have rewarded and reassured those generally less-wealthy investors
who shifted heavily into real estate, especially those who dared to leverage
themselves to the hilt.
                                                                                  4


      Disaggregating household behavior, particularly by wealth and age, helps to
explain a number of puzzling special features of the 1975-79 macroeconomic
recovery. These special features include: the dominant role of consumer spending;
unprecedented increases in household debt; changing patterns of financial inter-
mediaton; the improving quality of owner-occupied housing; and the growing specu-
lative boom in residential real estate. Our analysis portrays each of these
developments as a reasonable response to changes in the savings incentives facing
households of different means.


      I. HOW ACCELERATING INFLATION HAS HURT THE SMALL SAVER

                           Some Preliminary Definitions.
       It is convenient to begin with some definitions. By t?small savers,'t we mean
households of modest means: families whose accumulated net transactable wealth
is less that $10,000. Returns on these savings may be expressed in several ways.
Nominal rates of return are ratios of capital income to invested principal that
 make no correction for either anticipated or observed changes in the purchasing
 power of the sums to be lent and repaid. So-called market yields are invariably
 stated in nominal terms. Real rates of return are nominal rates less the rate of
 inflation anticipated or observed over the period during which the financial
 contract is held.
       Anticipated inflation clearly affects the terms of loan contracts. Lenders
 want to negotiate a nominal rate of interest that exceeds the anticipated rate of
 inflation by what they take to be the "realt' opportunity cost of their funds. In
 turn, borrowers can afford to pay nominal rates of interest that exceed the
 antieipated rate of inflation by the amount of the funds' perceived ttrealtt
  productivity in the use they are going to serve. Hence, market interest rates tend
                                                                                      5


to rise and fall with the level of anticipated inflation (Fisher, 1930). In addition, at
any point in time an asset's nominal yield tends to rise with its subsequent inflation
risk. Other things equal, the less perfectly an asset's nominal yield promises to rise
with unanticipated future increases in inflation, the higher the nominal yield it
must offer today (Fama and Schwert, 1977).
       Explicit interest consists of returns to capital (coupon interest plus capital
gains) that are paid, or are at least receivable in, the coin of the realm. Implicit
interest covers services and other in-kind concessions that are often embodied in
debt contracts. An asset's total rate of return is the sum of its explicit and
implicit yields. Finally, an asset's net yield is its total rate of return minus any
transactions costs associated with buying and selling the asset.


                      How Interest Ceilings hurt Small Savers.
       By raising expected rates of future inflation, observed accelerations in
inflation tend to raise market rates of interest, although the response is not
necessarily one—for-one and tends to be spread out in time. In nominal terms,
rising market rates of interest mean improved new loan and investment
opportunities for lenders. When deposit institutions are allowed to compete freely
for deposit funds, pursuing these opportunities bids up deposit interest rates.
       On the other hand, when deposit rates are held down by government-imposed
ceilings, small savers cannot directly participate as fully in rising market rates as
large savers can. This is because it is more costly per dollar for small savers to
move their funds into securities markets. For small accumulations of wealth, the
costs in yield equivalent of acquiring marketable securities are substantial. First,
most small savers find it expensive simply to acquire sufficient financial sophisti-
cation to identify and track suitable investment opportunities.            Second, the
                                                                                   6


structure of dealer and broker transactions charges prevents low—value investments
in open-market instruments from being economical. Third, because marketable
instruments are seldom issued in small denominations, small portfolios of market-
able instruments are almost always imperfectly diversified and subject therefore to
excessive default and interest-rate risk.
      In fully competitive markets, retail financial institutions (called financial
intermediaries) develop to overcome these disadvantages by indirectly pooling
household funds into amounts that can be invested economically (Gurley and Shaw,
1960). The pooling is indirect because these firms (commercial banks, thrift
institutions, insurance companies, and mutual funds) sell their own debt to house-
holds and invest the proceeds for their own accounts. Intermediation occurs with
respect both to denomination and to portfolio risk and is typically coupled with
provisions for delivering additional services (e.g., depository institutions offer
liquidity and transactions services to their accountholders). To the extent that the
costs of providing nonpecuniary services are not recouped through fee income,
these services may be treated as implicit interest payments. In competitive
deposit markets, arrangements for paying implicit interest could in principle be
sufficiently flexible to avoid efficiency losses from ceilings on explicit interest
rates. But this condition is unlikely to be met in practice, especially in view of the
asymmetric tax treatment of implicit and explicit interest receipts by           U.S.

 households. Because households (unlike business firms) cannot deduct service
 charges from taxable income, implicit interest is tax—advantaged.
        In competitive equilibrium, the value of implicit and explicit interest
 payments to intermediary customers must at the margin equal the risk-adjusted
 yield that competing intermediaries expect to earn on market instruments after
 meeting expenses and paying normal returns on capitaL               If a depository
                                                                                   7


intermediary were to pay less interest than this, competitors would bid its
depositors away. If a depository intermediary incurred excessive expenses (perhaps
in the process of subsidizing a disproportionate amount of nonpecuniary services),
either explicit interest or returns on capital would slide below competitive norms.
Either event would cause pressure on the intermediary's management to restore
operating efficiency.
       Effective ceilings on deposit interest rates undermine the efficiency of
intermediation. They force depository institutions to compete exclusively in terms
of implicit interest. They are led to expand their packages of subsidized customer
services, often in imaginative ways. Such services include merchandise premiums,
longer operating hours, superfluous branch offices or electronic teller machines,
and "free" checking. Unfortunately, the aggregate value of these services to
individual customers is often far less than their cost to the depository institution.
As individual customers attempt to make the best of what is for many of them a
"bad" bargain, their use of undervalued services wastes economic resources.
       Compared to the unregulated case, the efficiency of                  financial
intermediation is also reduced by so-called disintermediation, which occurs when
developing interest—rate differentials drive depositors to unregulated institutions
and instruments. Whenever inflation drives open-market yields above the ceiling
rates on deposits, higher—cost unregulated institutions (such as money-market
mutual funds and credit unions) and unregulated instruments (such as repurchase
agreements) are able to expand at the expense of traditional arrangements for
intermediating household savings.
                                                                                    8


   Effect of Accelerating Inflation on Financial Incentives Facing Small Savers.
      Financial theory holds that wealthowners' demand for any asset varies
directly with the net after—tax real rate of return it offers relative to returns
available on other assets. It is also supposed that the level of household saving
increases with the net after-tax real rate available on traditional savings vehicles,
although the evidence for this is far from conclusive (Boskin, 1978; Wachtel, 1977;
Howrey and Hymans, 1978). During the last 15 years, unfavorable movements have
occurred in marginal tax rates (which were only partly offset by increases in the
standard deduction), in already—discriminatory dealer and broker transactions
charges, and in the real (i.e., inflation—adjusted) values of interest-rate ceilings.
Taken together, these changes have made it unrealistic for small savers to
anticipate earning a positive net real rate of return on any collection of strictly
financial assets. While financial instruments continue to offer implicit returns in
the form of transactions, liquidity and diversification services, household savings
invested in the types of financial assets available to nonwealthy households have
shown reduced after-tax purchasing power with virtually every passing year.
       To counterbalance the negative real after—tax rates of explicit return
offered them by financial assets (and the roughly zero real returns accumulating on
 their nontransactable wealth), small savers have increased the weight of favorably
 taxed and inflation-protected real assets in their portfolios. To carry this off, they
 have had - as our survey data show - to supplement their accumulated savings with
 mortgage and instalment debt and to redirect their current savings into down-
 payments and debt service. Ironically, usury ceilings enacted in many states to
 improve small savers' access to credit probably interfered with this process.
 Theoretical and empirical analysis (Nathan, 1978) suggests that families who
 receive credit when usury ceilings are erfective generally have above—average
                                                                                   9


incomes and wealth. This occurs not just because such individuals are perceived as
more creditworthy, though perceived creditworthiness may seem to dominate
rejections of loan applications from members of minority groups (Sowell, 1975).
What is often more important is that economically advantaged households can more
easily increase deposit balances or meet increases in such up—front costs as higher
downpayments or loan closing fees when lenders choose to exact implicit interest
in such ways.
Unfavorable Movements in Marginal Tax Rates. Because progressive income taxes
are levied on nominal incomes, accelerating inflation increases the effective tax
rate that applies to every level of real income. However, legislated changes in the
applicable tax structure provide some offset. As Table 2 shows, effective marginal
tax rates were raised only for middle-income households. For example, using the
implicit price deflator for GNP a taxable 1970 income of $30,000 corresponds to
$23,173 in 1962 dollars. Using the tax schedule for joint returns with the same real
(i.e., inflation—adjusted) taxable income at both dates, a taxpayer's marginal
federal tax rate would be 40 percent in 1970, but only 38 percent in 1962. On
balance, this taxpayer's average federal tax rate decreased from 28 percent in 1962
to 27 percent in 1970. Because ordinary income tax rates apply to all nominal
interest received, for middle-income households these changes increased the
attractiveness of assets that yield either in-kind services that are not taxed at all
or capital gains that are taxed preferentially.
       In addition, the real value of dependent and standard deductions declined
and, in many states, increases in state income taxes observed between survey dates
further enlarged the wedge between before-tax and after-tax rates of return on
nominal interest.
                                                                                   10



Unfavorable Movements in Transactions Costs in Securities Markets. In the face of
comprehensive interest-rate ceilings on traditional household savings instruments,
secularly and cyclically accelerating inflation causes disintermediation of house-
hold funds into potentially riskier high—yielding open-market instruments. Disinter—
mediation implies a larger flow of small-denomination trades offered to securities
dealers and brokers. During the late 1960s, the first waves of inflation-induced
disintermediation created clearings logjams in the backrooms of securities firms.
To reduce the volume of individual trades to be processed, securities firms repriced
their services in ways designed to discourage small individual trades.          They
instituted posted "ticket fees" on transactions of less than $100,000. The practice
of imposing a charge of $10 to $20 merely for writing up a small purchase or sale
transaction spread through the industry. For many types of trades, securities firms
also raised value—based odd-lot fees, transactions minima, and execution lags.
Even though computerization of transactions and partial deregulation of the
securities industry have lowered costs for large transactors, ticket fees on small
trades have risen. Currently, they range betweeen $25 and $40 per trade.

Discriminatory Adjustments in Deposit-Rate Ceilings. The larger is a household's
wealth, the more alternative financial investment outlets it can economically
consider. Larger savers can reallocate their portfolios to escape much of the ex
ante burden that inflation and deposit-rate regulation would otherwise place on
them. In contrast, poor households' principal avenue of adjustment is to cut back
on their savings, a response that spreads the burden onto their future standard of
living.
          Larger savers' differential ability to escape deposit—rate ceilings explains
why regulators have over time adapted the ceilings to permit deposit institutions to
                                                                                  11


offer differentially higher interest rates to larger savers who can not be put off by
high minimum denominations or punitive penalties for early withdrawal of time-
deposit funds.     Restrictions on minimum denomination and early-withdrawal
penalties have been the cutting edge of a regulatory strategy of enabling deposit
institutions to pay near—market interest rates to interest-sensitive depositors
without raising yields offered to interest-insensitive customers.

   II. BEHAVIOR OF INFLATION AND INTEREST RATES DURING THE 1960s

      Table 1 shows that long-term interest rates rose throughout the 1960s, with
the rate of increase accelerating sharply (along with the rate of inflation) in the
last half of the decade. For calendar-year holding periods, the last two columns
report ex 2 returns on bonds and stock. From year to year, these ex 22 returns
vary sharply.
       Let us interpret the twin 1966 shocks of accelerating inflation and
comprehensive deposit-rate ceilings as a joint experimental "treatment" and
inquire how the treatment affected interest-rate spreads. Until 1966 when federal
deposit-rate ceilings were first extended to savings accounts at savings-and-loan
associations (S&Ls) and mutual savings banks (MSBs), mean S&L deposit rates
tended to fluctuate above the average level of yields on Treasury bills, roughly
tracking the average yield on long-term Treasuries.
       Subsequently, Treasury yields averaged steadily higher than S&L deposit
rates. Whether this benefited mortgage borrowers is debatable, since even in the
face of deposit-rate ceilings, mortgage rates regularly exceeded yields on long-
term Treasuries, with the spread fluctuating within the same bounds that applied in
the early 1960s.
       From 1966 forward, high interest rates on new mortgages offered unusually
good earnings spreads for mortgage lenders. However, federal officials feared that
                                                                                  12


open competition for savings funds would bankrupt older S&Ls and MSBs that had
to carry lots of low-rate mortgages on their books. With free competition, higher
deposit rates would have to be paid on all accounts, while competitive mortgage
rates could be earned 2! on current loans. Institutions holding substantial
proportions of older low—rate mortgages would experience negative overall cash
flows. Alternatively, one could say that higher current interest rates reduced the
market value of many thrifts' seasoned long-term assets enough to exhaust their
previously accumulated net worth. Restrictions on S&L and MSB deposit interest
were introduced to prevent newer firms from ruining the older ones. To keep
commercial banks at a disadvantage, ceilings for thrifts were initially set 50 basis
points above those that applied to commercial banks. (This "differential" has since
narrowed to 25 basis points.) Federal authorities conceived the system of ceilings
as a temporary stopgap measure, intended to avert an immediate threat of
 financial panic and to avoid temporarily destablizing the flow of mortgage credit
 and homebuilding activity. They sought to assure specialized mortgage-lending
 institutions a positive net cash flow by locking in an above—market profit margin on
 new lending to offset the slim (or negative) spread on old lending, presumably only
 until interest rates turned down again cyclically.

 Post-1966 Evolution of Deposit-Rate Ceilings
        Once the ceilings were in place, their justification broadened. In repeated
 battles over proposed legislation, a coalition of the thrift, labor, and construction
 lobbies has been able to defeat subsequent attempts to remove the ceilings. Since
 1966, the large and cyclically fluctuating spread between open-market yields and
 passbook rates has accentuated cyclical disintermediation and reduced the flow of
 savings to these institutions during most of the cycle. To minimize the disruption,
 authorities have undertaken a series of additional actions. Regulatory officials
                                                                                   13


adopted a strategy of restructuring deposit-interest ceilings in ways that promised
to lessen the disintermediation without greatly increasing costs on interest-
Lnse!itive funds. Repeated restructurings have developed a series of deposit
instruments that - by making the maximum interest payable on any type of deposit
account vary directly with its maturity and/or minimum denomination - allow
depository institutions to offer higher interest rates to interest—sensitive customers
without extending higher payouts to interest-insensitive ones. Although large CDs
are now completely exempt from regulation, between 1966 and early 1970, even
large CDs (though treated preferentially) were subject to ceilings. After January
21, 1970, interest was unfettered for certificate—of—deposit accounts of less than
90-days maturity and at least $100,000 in minimum denomination.
       To make its own securities less competitive with thrift deposits, the
Treasury held interest rates on U.S. Savings Bonds well below those on marketable
securities of similar maturity: at 4.25 percent until December 1969, when they
were raised to only five percent. The Treasury also acted in February 1970 to raise
the minimum denomination of Treasury Bills from $1,000 to $10,000. Knowledge-
able small savers had increasingly placed noneompetitive bids in $1,000 and $5,000
units, winning a larger and larger proportion of the total amounts awarded in the
Treasury's weekly Bill auction (Mullineaux, 1973).


  Investments in Real Estate and Consumer Durables as Opportunities for Escape.
       During the post-1966 era, for households of modest means the inflation-
adjusted after—tax rate of return has been negative on the few financial assets
their transactable wealth permits them to buy. Even in the twenty-percent tax
bracket, a 5.25 percent return on passbook savings yields only 4.20 percent after
 taxes. In the thirty—percent bracket, the after-tax yield falls to 3.68 percent. It is
                                                                                 14


hard to remember when the rate of inflation in product prices did not exceed these
low rates of return. This means that savings invested in these assets have less real
value with each passing year.
      In the absence of government—enforced ceilings on deposit interest rates,
market forces would have pushed financial-institution deposit rates up at least
enough to promise low—bracket depositors a small anticipated net yield. With
deposit-rate ceilings in place and transactions costs keeping small savers out of
bond and stock markets, many households have found that real-estate assets offer
their transactable savings the best available protection against inflation—induced
erosions in purchasing power. Real estate ownership has been a traditional goal for
Americans and returns on real property have been taxed much more favorably than
returns on financial assets. Federal tax treatment of a property's capital income is
especially generous for owner—occupants. Real estate gained attractiveness under
comprehensive deposit-rate ceilings because well-developed mortgage markets
provided a convenient vehicle for small savers to leverage their modest saving
enough to cover the purchase price of a residence or rental property. Institutional
arrangements do not exist to let them borrow so easily to purchase stock shares or
fixed-interest securities.   Households dealing with dealers and brokers must
maintain margin accounts and pay one or two points over the broker—dealer interest
rate for margin credit.
       Ironically, restrictions on deposit interest have driven small savers
increasingly into debt. Lacking enough wealth to invest directly in diversified
round lots of marketable bonds and stocks and prevented by law from enjoying the
full fruits of indirect investments in securities markets made by means of deposit
accounts, they have turned to investing in real assets, supplementing their savings
as necessary via mortgages and instalment loan contracts. With interest expense
                                                                                 15


tax-deductible, real after-tax rates on loans made to support tax-favored
investments seem unusually low.
      Although this explanation is still not widely appreciated, small savers'
efforts to protect their transactable wealth from being eaten away by artificially
low deposit rates provide the motive force both for declines in recorded ratios of
deposit—institution inflows to personal income and for an ongoing speculative boom
in housing. In this way, deposit-rate ceilings have reinforced the secular inflation
in housing costs and, by discouraging the flow of middle-income households' savings
into strictly financial instruments, reduced the pool of savings available for new
business investment too. Even though deposit-rate ceilings were intended to
promote housing activity, authorities by no means meant to push it so assiduously
or at such a high cost in macroeconomic destabilization.

                     III. LIMITATIONS OF OUR DATA BASE

       Although the University of Michigan's Survey Research Center surveyed
consumer finances throughout the 1960s, only the 1962 and 1970 survey question-
naires develop detailed information on household balance sheets.2 Fortunately, the
two years lie symmetrically four years before and four years after what we can
call the twin economic—policy "crimes of '66." As we did with interest-rate
spreads, we propose to interpret the twin economic—policy shocks of accelerating
inflation and the spread of deposit-interest ceilings to thrift institutions as an
experimental "treatment" and to view survey data collected in the two years as
representative samples of pre—treatment and post—treatment values of household
income and balance-sheet variables.
       Table 3 lists the particular survey variables investigated in this study.
Unfortunately, assets are not valued on a consistent basis. Respondent family units
were requested to furnish face values for bonds but to estimate market values for
                                                                                16


stocks and investment real estate. They were asked to estimate the "present
value" of owner-occupied real estate (which we call homes) if they had resided
there during the second calendar year preceding the year of the survey; otherwise
they were asked merely to supply the home's purchase price. No matter how
accurately they may be able to value their assets, secretive people or families
whose members had reason to conceal assets from each other would have an
incentive to underreport their holdings. Forgetfulness would cause underreporting,
too. On the other hand, a desire to impress interviewers might tempt some
respondents toward boastful overstatement.
      Clearly, as compared to contemporaneous transactions values, estimates
gathered in this way should have some systematic biases and should be more
accurate for some asset categories than for others. For example, information
needed to estimate the value of a household's stock portfolio is more readily
 accessible than that needed to appraise real estate. When housing prices are rising
 especially quickly, household estimates may tend to lag market values. As discount
 instruments, the values of unmatured U.S. Savings Bonds or Treasury Bills would be
 consistently overstated. Similarly, the generally upward trend of interest rates in
 the 19605 leads us to suspect that the market value of Other Bonds would on
 average fall short of face value. The reader should keep these difficulties in mind
 in interpreting our results.
        Even in our two focal years, values for most types of what we call
 "nontransactable" assets and most debts were not reported at all. A few variables
 were reported in one year only. As Table 3 indicates, across the two years some
 variables are defined differently or are available in different detail.
        Whatever one does to correct for these conceptual difficulties, one should
  also recognize that (precisely because high-income sample cells are small in
                                                                                 17


absolute size) SCF samples deliberately over-represent high—income families and
that SCF data tapes required careful editing to adapt them to our use. A few
observations appear more than once on SCF data tapes. Occasional overflows
occur in capital income and in individual assets, while in the 1970 survey partially
incomplete reports pose some difficult problems.3 In particular, differences in the
accuracy and completeness of respondent reports across conventional income and
age classes change the representativeness of our samples relative to the population
of U.S. households. Omissions and overflows should occur predominantly for
households whose incomes and wealth are high, and result in an understatement of
assets held by these groups. This measurement bias partly offsets the sampling
bias Survey Research Center personnel created by oversampling high-income
households.

            IV. CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEETS FOR HOUSEHOLDS IN

                    DIFFERENT AGE AND WEALTH CLASSES.

       In analyzing SCF data, we seek to identify how average asset-holding
patterns differ with household income, transactable wealth, and the age, sex and
race of the household head. Our principal focus is to determine the extent to
which households in different economic and demographic circumstances shifted
their transactable wealth among three classes of assets for which survey
measurements exist:
       1. Equity in real estate: defined as the difference between the value of
       investment real estate and owner—occupied housing (i.e., "homes") and the
       dollar amount of household debt secured by these properties;
       2. Regulated financial assets: deposits and U.S. Savings bonds;
       3.     Unregulated financial assets: stocks, marketable bonds, and mutual
       funds.
                                                                                18


      The purpose of the exercise is to investigate how the combined burdens of
inflation and interest-rate ceilings are distributed across the population of U.S.
households. We are concerned particularly with determining how these burdens are
distributed across different types of families and how they have affected the mix
of debt and equity assets in household portfolios.
       Given the structure of income taxes, transactions costs and interest—rate
ceilings, a household's ability to take advantage of regulation-exempt and tax-
avoiding savings opportunities may be expected to increase with its income (the
"income hypothesis") and its transactable wealth (the "wealth hypothesis"), and to
be influenced by its place in the life cycle (the "age hypothesis") and possible
membership in minority groups (the "minority hypothesis"). By analyzing cross-
section data on earnings, assets, debt and demographic characteristics collected in
the 1962 and 1970 Surveys of Current Finances, the rest of this paper develops
evidence consistent with a more precise formulation of each of these hypotheses.
       Looking backward from 1979, it should be clear that ex        the big losers
from accelerating inflation have been family units possessing large amounts of
stock or "regulated assets" (deposits and U.S. Savings bonds) and those who did not
own any real-estate assets at all. While wealthy households tend to be heaviest in
stock, households that fit the rest of this profile turn out to be drawn dispropor-
tionately from the ranks of the old, the black, the female, the poor, and the young.
Particularly in competing for mortgage loans, these groups are traditionally
disadvantaged (Sowell, 1975).      Moreover, with accelerating inflation, deposit—
interest ceilings heighten that disadvantage by driving up both the cost of housing
and the demand for mortgages by other groups, while reducing the disadvantaged
 families' ability to accumulate the financial wherewithal to make an acceptable
 downpay ment.
                                                                                 19




                         Testing the      Hypothesis:
          Consolidated Balance Sheets for Households Classified •

      Survey    data depicting the composition of household assets indicate that
between 1962 and 1970 the combination of accelerating inflation and deposit-rate
ceilings has markedly changed the age distribution of real-estate ownership. This
is shown in Table 4. Even as early as 1970, households whose heads were less than
55 years in age had sharply increased the proportion of their accumulated savings
held as equity in real estate, while older households had shifted their funds out of
both real estate equity4 and "regulated financial assets" (deposits and U.S. savings
bonds) into "unregulated financial assets" (stocks, marketable bonds, and mutual
funds). Moreover, within their holdings of regulated assets, older households moved
funds from other categories into certificates of deposit (CDs). In 1970, survey
households whose heads were 55 or older owned approximately 55 percent of
reported net transactable wealth, but 75 percent of total CDs, deposits, and stock-
market investments and 85 percent of marketable bonds. In 1962, this age group
owned approximately 40 percent of respondents' net transactable wealth, and
(except that they held only 15 percent of marketable bonds) allocated their funds
fairly evenly across individual asset categories.
       Presumably, older households find the in-kind return on housing less valuable
as their children grow up and set up households of their own. However, they could
afford economically to undertake these reallocations because they are on average
large savers.    Also at issue are the development of experience and efficient
patterns for accumulating and decumulating wealth to smooth consumption over
the life cycle. Our interpretation of these data implicitly attributes observed
                                                                                 20


changes in portfolio distributions between 1962 and 1970 to differences in the
ability of households of different ages to protect themselves both against increases
in inflation and inflation risk and against unfavorable regulatory developments in
financial markets. We simply presume that 1962 portfolio patterns are determined
predominantly by life-cycle considerations. However, since the 1962 survey was
taken about a year into a cyclical recovery and the 1970 survey at the beginning of
an economic decline, cyclical influences probably affect the results, too. During
the months of the 1962 survey, unemployment was cyclically high but falling. In
1970, unemployment was low but rising. Although aggregate unemployment rates
were not greatly different, unemployment among males aged 20 to 24 averaged
11.2 percent in the 1962 survey months and only 7.7 percent during the 1970
interview period. The cyclically poorer labor-market outlook in 1962 may well
have made some young households temporarily hesitant to undertake the
responsibilities of homeownership.
       However, young households' dramatic increase in the proportions of their
transactable wealth placed in regulated assets and real-estate equity seems far too
large to attribute to this small difference in age-class unemployment rates. In
1962, only 6.2 percent of households whose heads were under age 25 owned their
own residences, but by 1970, 20.3 percent of households in the counterpart age
class were homeowners. In 1970, the youngest age class quadrupled the portfolio
weight carried by its 1962 counterpart. (Even if we eliminate as an outlier the
 wealthiest household in the 1962 age—class sample, the 1970 portfolio weight for
 home equity is still 2.5 times its 1962 value.) Because households in the youngest
 age class had generally smaller families in 1970 than in 1962 (so that they
 presumably found the continuing services of a given living space less productive),
 they must have anticipated substantial future appreciation in housing prices to
                                                                                     21



justify this allocational pattern. It is possible that this inflation-spawned increase
in the propensity of young families to undertake leveraged homeownership reflects
as well a generational difference in both borrowers' and lenders' attitudes toward
risk-bearing. The young have to live with the consequences of accelerating
inflation over a longer economic horizon than anyone else. In the face of
contemporary inflation, Table 5 indicates that modern lending officers and would-
be young borrowers have proved less inhibited psychologically by conventional
attitudes about the alleged "prudence" of "staying out of debt." But, adopting
plausible assumptions about prospective yields on alternative assets, we show in
section V that even these massive portfolio shifts were insufficient to bring the
prospective 1970 portfolio rate of return for this age class up to the level earned
by older households.
          Table 5 indicates that, whatever assets are ultimately supported by
 real—estate debt (Arcelus and Meltzer, 1973), most age classes (especially the
 youngest) carry in 1970 a larger proportion of this debt in their portfolios. Even
 more important, the observed reallocation of the housing stock among age groups
 has shifted ownership on balance from families who traditionally carry low debt
 ratios to younger households who show much higher ratios of mortgage debt to
 home equity and transactable wealth. This explains how the aggregate proportion
 of home equity to net transactable wealth can actually decline between the survey
 dates.
        To show that our results measure a true generational difference, we can
 reclassify the data to emphasize that the cohorts of households belonging to each
  age group differ substantially between survey dates. Table 6 resets the boundaries
  of the 1962 age classes to let us compare portfolio weights for the same age
  cohorts at each survey date. This table makes it clear that household heads who
                                                                                 22


are less than 25 years old in 1970 were not even sampled in 1962. Otherwise, it
confirms the age-class and generational paterns of asset accumulation and decumu-
lation inferred from Table 4. Further analysis (not reproduced here) indicates that
allowing for the effects of housing-price appreciation on each age cohort's 1962
investment in housing does not change the qualitative pattern of age-class portfolio
reallocation.

  Evidence on the Accuracy of the Estimated Value of Owner-Occupied Housing
      In valuing household real-estate investments, the two main sources of
measurement error are: (1) reliance on self—assessment and (2) the neglect of price
appreciation on homes purchased in the year preceding the survey date. These
errors are worrisome because they threaten to prove reinforcing. Taken together,
they might cause a serious understatement of home equity.
Bias Due to Neglecting Depreciation on Recently Purchased Homes. Turning to the
second issue first, Table 7 develops information on the four percent of 1970 survey
respondents who had purchased their homes in 1969. The U.S. Commerce
Department estimates that the average sales price of houses sold           in 1969
increased 4.9 percent, with the rate of price increase greater in the first half of
the year than in the second. In the first half of 1970, prices increased another 0.7
percent. Since the survey instrument did not ascertain precisely when in 1969
individual homes were acquired, our calculations assume that by the survey date
each of these homes had experienced six months' appreciation in 1969 (2.5 percent)
plus a further 0.7 percent in 1970. Except in the youngest age class, the effect of
accounting for this appreciation is negligible. Even for this class, when raw data
are employed, the portfolio weight for home equity rises only by 1.2 percentage
points.
                                                                                 23


Assessment Bias. Respondents' self-assessments of the value of their homes may
be inaccurate because homeowners who do not actively participate in housing
markets have a poor idea of trends in house prices. In Table 8, we develop
evidence by which to investigate whether, given the inflationary surge in house
prices during the 1960s, homeowners who had occupied the same residence for
various periods of time consistently undervalued their property in 1970.
       To do this, we report data on housing values at each survey date by the year
in which homeowners first occupied their homes. We extrapolate the values
estimated in 1962 forward to 1970, using cumulative rates of increase observed in
average housing prices. These projections are meant to be compared with roughly
parallel assessments quoted by respondents in 1970.
       Unfortunately, the data do not permit precise comparisons. First, 1962 and
1970 SCF data tapes aggregate reported years of occupation into largely noncom-
formable intervals. Hence, the two data sets place different boundaries on the
date-of-occupation variable. Second, since, indices of average housing prices are
available only from 1963, the first observations on year-to—year changes in housing
prices date from 1964. To fill in the gap for 1962 and 1963, we used movements in
the GNP Price Deflator to proxy the rate of housing-price inflation. Finally, since
data published on housing prices cover only new houses, we need to consider
whether on average homeowners upgrade older houses to incorporate most of the
comforts being built routinely into newer structures.5 What we call our "low
projections" track changes in the value of a hypothetical house whose attributes
are fixed. Our "high projections" track changes in the value of the specific types
of houses constructed and sold in each year.
      Since the assessments made by respondents in 1970 average near the high
projections of comparable 1962 estimates, our data suggest that (at least in the
aggregate) self-assessment is not a serious source of downward bias.
                                                                                  24


           Testing the Wealth Hypothesis: Consolidated Balance Sheets
             for Households Ranked y Their Net Transactable Wealth
      For both survey dates, Table 9 reports consolidated portfolio weights for
households grouped by their decile of net transactable wealth. The observed
changes in portfolio patterns by wealth class confirm earlier analyses (Kane, 1970
and 1977) of post-1966 disintermediation. Sophisticated households with sizeable
amounts of savings can and do shop among a variety of assets. By 1970, they could
rearrange their financial—asset portfolios to lessen the burden that deposit—interest
ceilings would otherwise have placed on them. Moreover, the longer the ceilings
remained in force, the more fully financial markets and institutions could adapt to
help them. The rapid growth of money—market mutual funds and credit unions -
and the development of small-denomination bonds by large municipal and corporate

issuers - provide examples of this adaptation. Relaxing the ceilings on minimum—
denomination and longer-maturity certificates of deposits allows the nation's
wealthier households to earn higher explicit deposit rates at banks and thrift
institutions than ordinary families can. For small savers, possibilities for adapting
their financial portfolios are severely limited and have been further compressed by
government action to reduce disintermediation, notably the 1970 increase in the
minimum denomination of U.S. Treasury Bills. Providing they can obtain debt
financing, small savers lessen the burden of low ceiling rates of interest on
regulated financial assets principally by investing directly in homes, investment
real estate, and consumer durables.
       Hence, in Table 9, between 1962 and 1970 we see that through the sixth
decile portfolio weights for regulated financial assets fall while the weights for
real—estate equity rise. Although households in the seventh decile of wealth show
 much the same portfolio weights at both dates, between 1962 and 1970 savers in
                                                                                  25


the eighth and ninth deciles undertook some marked shifts in the allocation of their
transactable wealth. Looking simultaneously at Table 10 which develops more
detailed data on financial assets, we see that these households moved funds
proportionately out of investment real estate, common stocks, checking accounts
and savings bonds into high-rate CDs and (to a lesser extent) into other savings
accounts.
      Families in the highest—wealth decile (whose actions loom very large in
aggregate figures), reduced their home equity and moved out of every type of
regulated asset except CDs. Unlike middle—wealth households who decreased the
portfolio weight for common stock or low-wealth households who increased it, the
highest-wealth households held steady. They increased their portfolio weights for
only three asset categories: CDs, marketable bonds, and investment real estate.
       For each survey date, Table 11 reports real-estate debt ratios by wealth
decile. For all deciles but the third, ratios of real-estate debt to various asset
values decline between 1962 and 1970. However, debt-to-income ratios behave
quite differently for households in different places in the wealth distribution. For
small savers, the ratio increases sharply between survey dates. For households in
the sixth through ninth wealth deciles, the ratio falls. The pattern of debt-to-
income ratios observed supports the hypothesis that in 1970 low-wealth households
found it necessary to leverage more of their human capital to support expansion in
real-estate equity and other assets.

            V. ESTIMATED 1970 WEIGHTED-AVERAGE PROSPECTIVE
            RATES OF RETURN FOR EACH AGE AND WEALTH CLASS

       Our explanation of the changing distribution of household savings across
 assets presumes that households reallocate their funds as far as possible to escape
 the costs that accelerating inflation and deposit-rate regulation would otherwise
                                                                               26


impose upon them. To clarify how this process affects ex—ante portfolio returns,
Table 12 uses proxies for prospective 1970 asset yields to translate the portfolio
proportions underlying Tables 4 and 9 into weighted-average prospective rates of
return for each age and wealth class.         Because these calculations neglect
discriminatory variation across wealth classes in the rates of return earned on
deposits, they provide conservative estimates of the degree to which returns on
financial assets differ with a household's transactable wealth and position in the
life cycle. On the other hand, reporting bond values on a face—value basis
systematically overw eights yields on the bond portion of household portfolios.
Since bond holdings tend to rise with wealth and age, at least the two biases are
offsetting in direction.
       Specifically, the calculations reported in Table 12 employ the following
estimates of the annual average yield that might have been anticipated on
individual assets in 1970:
              1. Yield on Demand Deposits = 6.36 percent (Stevens, 1976)6
              2. Yield on Savings Deposits = 5.06 percent (Table 1).
              3. Yield on U.S. Savings Bonds: 5.00 percent (Yield set on new U.S.
              savings bonds in December, 1969).
              4. Yield on Other Bonds: 6.58 percent (Table 1, Long-Term Treasury
              Bond Yields)
              5. Yield on Stocks and Mutual Funds: 8.5 percent [Mean Annual
              Return on Common Stocks, 1926-1974 (Ibbotson and Sinquefeld,
              1976)].
              6. Yield on Equity in Home: 8.45percent (Table 1, FHLBB Mortgage
              Interest-Rate Series)..
                                                                                27


             7. Yield on Equity in Investment Real Estate:            9.86 percent
             (Average Interest Rates on Income Property Mortgages, American
             Life Insurance Association, cited in Gettel (1976, p. 108)].
      Our proxies for the last four yields are chosen conservatively, especially on
a before-tax basis. Yields on shorter instruments, taxable-equivalent yields on
municipals, and yields on corporate bonds averaged much higher than yields on
long-term U.S. governments. Moreover, although the ex 2 yield on stocks was
only 4.01 percent in 1970, prospective yields on common stocks almost certainly
exceeded the rate of inflation.    For two—year and three-year holding periods,
realized per—annum yields on common-stock investments made in 1970 averaged 9.0
and 12.2 percent respectively. Over 1901—1971, Friend and Blume (1975) estimate
mean per-annum yields on stocks of 9.0 percent.
      Most importantly, while yields on both forms of real—estate equity should
equal corresponding mortgage interest rates at the margin, prospective returns
figure to be higher on average. Our estimates of prospective real—estate yields
may be excessively conservative. Although a telephone survey of trade associ-
ations in St. Louis, Chicago, and Washington could uncover no direct data on real-
estate returns, information in the files of the General Services Administration's
Appraisal Staff supports using an ex-ante per-annum return of just over 12.00
percent in 1970. Diamond (1979) estimates (net of anticipated price appreciation)
a before-tax "user cost of capital" of 12.49 percent for owner-occupied housing in
1970. liendershott and Hu (1979) report estimates of this cost in 1964, 1972, and
1978, for households in three different tax brackets and under two alternative
models for forming expectations of future price appreciation. Hendershott and
Hu's estimates range between 12 and 13 percent for households in their lowest tax
bracket.
                                                                                28


      Alternatively, a 10—percent basic rate of prospective return on housing in
1970 can be constructed as the sum of an imputed rental rate of return and an
anticipated rate of housing-price appreciation. Drawing on the national-income
accounts, Larry Kotlikoff of the National Bureau of Economic Research estimates
(in private correspondence) that the imputed rental rate exceeded 4 percent in
every year between 1962 and 1970.        Over the three years preceding 1970,
Commerce Department indices of housing prices increased roughly 6 percent.
Factoring in the benefits of leverage easily supports a rate of return on equity of
12 percent or more.
      Table 13 develops alternative, less-conservative estimates of portfolio rates
of return for households in our ten wealth and six age classes. These estimates
assume higher anticipated returns on other bonds (8 percent) and on both forms of
real—estate equity (12 percent).
       Under either set of assumptions, prospective 1970 yields on regulated
financial assets average less than 6.00 percent. Even without formal calculations,
it is obvious that overall rates of return will be highest for classes with low
percentages of their transactable wealth in these assets and high percentages in
unregulated assets and real-estate equity. Because deposit-rate regulation artifi-
cially restricts the explicit rewards offered on low—risk assets, households have
been encouraged to occupy riskier and less-than—perfectly-diversified balance-
sheet positions.
       Tables 12 and 13 develop two remarkable results. First, while households in
the lowest deciles have simply been short-changed, households in the middle wealth
deciles used investments in real estate to offset a good portion of the discrim-
inatory effect of deposit—rate ceilings on the yields they could earn on strictly
financial assets. Although differences in marginal tax rates importantly affect the
 desirable breakdown between prospective in-kind running yield and price
                                                                                   29


appreciation, combined portfolio yields differ much less by wealth than financial
yields do. Second, along with the very poor, young households (those whose head is
under 25 years of age) emerge as the group most severely burdened by the double—
whammy of accelerating inflation and interest-rate ceilings. This may occur
because these households realize a lower in-kind running yield from a given living
space or because they have a hard time competing for mortgage funds, especially
when state usury ceilings are binding on mortgage interest rates. Whatever the
reason, unlike other age classes in 1970, young families were able to use real-
estate investments to eliminate only about half of the gap between the yield on
their portfolio and that earned by members of the modal class.
       Even the conservative estimates in Table 12 indicate that on a before-tax
basis households in the middle and upper wealth classes were able in 1970—by
taking on additional portfolio risk—to anticipate earning a positive real rate of
return even on their financial assets. Whether after-tax real yields are positive as
well depends on the breakdown of these returns between explicit running yields,
implicit yields, and price appreciation. However, households in the various wealth
classes reached out for this yield along different effective risk-return loci and took
on quite—distinct risks. Unanticipated developments over the decade of the 1970s
(particularly, unanticipated inflation) made shifts into real-estate equity look even
wiser ex post and movements into unregulated assets look fatuous.

               VI. TESTING THE MINORITY HYPOTHESIS:
    CONSOLIDATED 1970 BALANCE SHEETS AND PROSPECTIVE PORTFOLiO
    YIELDS FOR FAMILIES IN DIFFERENT DEMOGRAPHIC CIRCUMSTANCES


       Accelerating inflation and deposit-rate ceilings tax the poor to finance
"welfare" for the rest of us. In their distributional effect,they are equivalent to a
 confiscatory federal tax that fails on the financial wealth of small savers only and
                                                                                  30


whose proceeds are designated to subsidize homebuilders, homeowners, and
managers and/or stockholders of inefficient depository institutions.7
       Besides stock—market investors, after—the—fact losers in the ame of accel-
erating inflation cum deposit regulation have been families of modest means who
concentrate their savings in regulated assets and/or do not own any real-estate at
all. Compared to other respondents, these families are drawn disproportionately
from the ranks of the black, the female, the poor, and the young. In competing for
mortgages, these groups are traditionally portrayed as disadvantaged. However,
deposit—interest ceilings aggravate that disadvantage by driving up both the cost of
housing and demands for mortgages among other groups, while reducing the
disadvantaged sectors' ability to accumulate an acceptable downpayment.
       For four different demographic groups, Table 14 shows how household asset
allocations and anticipated portfolio returns varied with net transactable wealth in
1970.8 Less than ten percent of the lowest—wealth households were able to
participate in real-estate ownership. They placed the bulk of their wealth in
regulated assets (deposits and U.S. savings bonds). Within each group, wealthier
households proved increasingly able to use both real-estate and securities invest-
ments to secure an anticipated positive net real rate of return on their overall
portfolios. Interestingly, controlling for wealth and sex of head, black households
show a higher propensity for real—estate investment than white families.
      Distinguishing between real-property owners and nonowners in the same four
demographic groups, Table 15 shows how 1970 portfolio weights and anticipated
yields varied by age class. In each demographic group, the proportion of young
families that own real property is low. However, because of differences in the
distribution of wealth, it is almost uniformly lower for female—headed families than
for male-headed families and for black families than for white ones. Controlling
for the age and sex of household heads, black families show a lesser participation in
real-estate ownership than white families. This occurs despite black families'
                                                                                  31


greater propensity for real-estate ownership as shown in Table 14, because they
families have disproportionately less wealth and income than white households.
       For the same groups that are featured in Table 15, Table 16 presents 1970
portfolio weights and anticipated yields by household income. Households with less
than $7500 in 1970 income are about evenly divided between real-property owners
and nonowners, but within this category black and female—headed families prove
less likely to own real estate.

                           VU. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS

       Evidence developed in this paper clarifies how in the face of comprehensive
deposit—rate ceilings real estate has served as the ordinary citizen's chief hope
against accelerating inflation. By expanding their proportionate holdings of real
estate, households with below—average wealth were able in the late 1960s to
anticipate positive real after—tax rates of portfolio return despite painful interest-
rate ceilings on the deposits and savings bonds in which their transactable wealth
had traditionally been concentrated. By discriminatorily reducing the efficiency of
financial intermediation, interest—rate ceilings have biased investments by small
savers toward tangible assets (especially real estate) and investments by very large
savers toward unregulated financial assets.
        Although these reconstituted portfolios made sense in 1970, they appear
 unnecessarily risky ex ante for both groups.         With real-estate investments
 protected against unanticipated inflation and stocks and bonds proving surprisingly
 vulnerable to it, so far the nation's wealthiest households have fared less well ex
 post than the average homeowner. However, precisely because homeowners'
 portfolios of transactable wealth are protected against unanticipated inflation,
 they remain exposed to substantial deflation risk. As they come to realize this,
 homeowners may begin to function politically as an explicit constituency for
 inflation.
                                                                                  32


       Other remarkable findings concern the increased emphasis on leveraged
housing investment among the very young. Between 1962 and 1970, households
headed by persons under 25 years of age greatly expanded equity in homes,
although not enough to lift estimated yields on their savings up to the level
achieved by older groups. Since the implicit yield on a given home tends to
increase with family size, along with older households contemporary young families
may be disadvantaged in the running yields that they can earn on equity invested in
homes. In addition, binding ceilings on mortgage interest rates tend to restrict
young persons' ability to finance desired purchases of homes.
       Our data also show that, between 1962 and 1970, direct holdings of
marketable bonds and stock have become more tightly concentrated in the hands of
wealthy investors. This development supports the hypothesis that at least in 1970
only wealthy households could economically engage in strictly financial-market
disintermediation. This explains why federal banking and S&L regulators settled on
the strategy of relaxing deposit-rate ceilings only on minimum-denomination and
longer-maturity accounts. This approach conserves depository-institution profits
by allowing them to increase the yields offered to interest-sensitive customers
without simultaneously raising yields on interest-insensitive funds.      However,
regulators must recognize that, even among small savers, interest sensitivity tends
to increase with the length of time that sizeable interest-rate differentials remain
in force.
       Finally, our analysis provides a more balanced perspective on the supposedly
unfavorable trends of falling funds flows to traditional savings institutions and
rising ratios of household debt to income. These developments reflect not
profligacy but households' willingness to expose themselves to deflation risk in
hopes of enhancing the real value of their accumulated savings. Aggregate
                                                                               33


household saving is alive and well, but it is taking some unconventional and risky
forms. More and more, prudent households are focusing on building up a
speculative investment portfolio of inflation-protected tangible assets to
supplement their holdings of strictly financial assets.
                                                                                                                                         34


                     Table 1. Inflation Rates and Mean Annual Return on Selected Instruments, 1961 to 1970
                                                     (Stated in Percent Per Annum)
                                                         FHLBB              Yield on           Annual
                Interest Rate                           Series of            Savings          Change in                Ex-Post Returns
               on New Issues          Yield on          Effective           Accounts           Implicit
               of Three-Month        Long-Term          Mortgage               in               Price                on             on
                U.S. Treasury         Treasury       Interest Rates          Savings          Deflator         Corporate          Common
Year                Bills              Bonds         on New Homes         Associations        for GNP              Bonds           Stocks
1961                2.38                3.90                                  3.90                 0.9              4.82            26.89
1962                2.78                3.95              .    . . .          4.08                 1.0              7.95            —8.73

1963                3.16                4.00                  5•91a           4.17                 0.8              2.19            22.80

1964                3.55                4.15                  585a            4.19                 0.8              4.77            16.48

1965                3.95                4.21                  5.81            4.23                 1.5             —0.46           12.45

1966                4.88                4.65                  6.25            4.45                 2.6              0.20          —10.06

1967                4.33                4.85                  6.46            4.67                 2.6             —4.95           23.98

1968                5.34                5.26                  6.97            4.68                 3.9              2.57           11.06

1969                6.69                6.12                  7.81            4.80                 4.7             —8.09           —8.50

1970                6.44                6.58                  8.45            5.06                 4.5             18.37            4.01



Sources: Business Conditions Digest for U.S. Treasury interest rates and        changes   in the   GNP deflator.
           .
         U S. League        of Savings Associations,Savings    and Loan Fact Book (annual)   for   mortgage rates and savings-accountyields.

         Ibbotson   and Sinquefeld    (1976) for returns on   common stocks and corporate bonds.

aDecembef figures.
                                                                                       35



          Table 2. Effective Federal Tax Rates on Equivalent Real Taxable Incomes
                     for Households Filing Joint Returns in 1962 and 1970


                                       1962           1970
                   Equivalent        Marginal       Marginal
Taxable             Taxable          Tax Rate       Tax Rate         1962            1970
Income             Income in         on 1962        (Includes      Average          Average
in 1970               1962          Equivalent        2.5%          Tax              rIax
Dollars              Dollars         Income          Surtax)         Rate            Rate


                         772            .20             .15           .20             .14
 1,000
                       3,862            .20            .195           .20             .17
 5,000
                                        .22            .226           .21             .19
 10,000                7,724
                      15,448            .30            .328            .24            .22
 20,000
                                        .38            .400            .28            .27
 30,000               23,173
                      38,621            .53            .513            .36            .35
 50,000
                                        .69             .636           .49            .46
100,000               77,243
                                        .90             .718           .78            .66
500,000               386,214



Source:     Equivalent 1962 real incomes are calculated using the Implicit Price Deflator.
            Joint-Return tax schedules are taken from Federal Tax Handbook, 1963, Engle-
            wood Cliffs: Prentice—Hall, 1962 and 1971 U.S. Master Tax Guide, Chicago:
            Commerce Clearinghouse, 1970.
                                                                                          36


                    Table 3. List of Variables Generated from the 1962
                and 1970 Surveys of Consumer Finances for Use in This Study

                                                      Variable   Available    Available
Variable Name                                         Symbol     in 1962?     in 1970?

A. Financial Assets                                     FA       Calculated Calculated
    1. Regulated Assets                                 RA       Calculated Calculated
       a. Checking Accounts                                         Yes          Yes
       b. Savings Accounts                                          Yes       Calculated
             1. Certificates of Deposit                             No           Yes
            ii. Other Savings Accounts                              No           Yes
       c. U. S. Savings Bonds (Face Value)                          Yes          Yes
    2. Unregulated Assets                               UA       Calculated Calculated
       a. Stocks and Mutual Funds (Market Value)                    Yes          Yes
       b. Bonds other than U. S. Savings Bonds
               (Face Value)                                      Calculated      Yes
             i. U. S. Government Bonds                              Yes          No
            ii. Municipal Bonds                                     Yes           No
           iii. Corporate Bonds                                     Yes           No
B. Real-Estate Assets                                   REA      Calculated Calculated
    1. Home, Farm, or Mobile Home
                                                        HE          Yes          Yes
        a. Equity
        b. Market Value                                 HV          Yes          Yes
    2. Investment Real Estate (Including Land Contracts)
                                                       IRE           Yes         Yes
        a. Equity
        b. Estimated Market Value                      IRV           Yes         Yes
C. Real-Estate Debt                                    RED       Calculated Calculated
    1. Value of Mortgages on Home, Farm, or
          Mobile Home                                                Yes          Yes
     2. Value of Mortgages on Investment Real Estate                 Yes          Yes
 D. Explicit Income in the Previous Calendar Year
     1. Total Household Income                         Y             Yes          Yes
     2. Capital Income (Dividends, Interest, Trust
            Funds, Royalties, and Rent)                YC
         a. Of Whole Household                       YCWH            Yes          No
         b. Of Head Only                              \CH            No           Yes
 E. Age of Head                                          AGE         Yes          Yes
                         Table 4. Percentage Breakdown of Households' Portfolios of Transactable Financial
                                   Assets and Real—Estate Equity by Age Class in 1962 and 1970
                                              (Proportions Stated   in Percentage Points)
                                                 Financial Assets                      Real-Estate Equity
                                                                                                                              Percent
                                                                                             Equity          Equity in          of
      Age of                                                                                   in           Investment
 Household Head                                                                                                               Sample
                                          Unregulated        Total            Total          Home           Real Estate   Respondent
    (in years)             Regulated
  1962 Data Set
                                             57.4            76.9              23.2            8.8             14.4             9.1
    Under   25                19.5
(Under 25 deleting
                                             (33.7)          (62.7)           (37.2)          (14.1)          (23.1)           (9.1)
Wealthy   Outlier)           (29.0)
                                              12.2            31.1             68.9           48.1             20.8            19.5
     25 to 34                 18.9
     35 to 44                 13.1            20.1           33.2              66.8           50.2             16.6            23.4
     45 to 54                 14.6            20.0           34.6              65.4            51.0            14.4            19.5
                              17.6            17.7           35.3              64.7           47.1             17.6            13.3
     55 to 64
   65 and over                27.0            12.8           39.8              60.2           42.0             18.2            15.3
                              18.1           17.9            36.0              64.0           47.1             16.9            100.1
2,117 Respondents

  1970 Data Set
     Under 25                 44.8            8.7            53.5              46.5            36.1            10.4            10.0
     25 to 34                 19.9            8.1            28.0              72.1            53.2            18.9            18,3
     35 to 44                 14.4            14.7           29.1              71.0            47.7            23.3            18.9
     45 to 54                 15.7            10.4           26.1              73.8           55.0             18.8       .    20.0
                              16.9            27.5           44.4              55.7            37.3            18.4            16.5
     55 to 64
                              21.2            25.9            47.1             52.8            32.6            20.2            16.3
    65 and over
                              17.8            20.2            38.1             61.9            42.1            19.8            100.0
2,576 Respondents

Source: Calculated from Survey of Consumer Finances data tapes. (For a description of these surveys, see G. Katona,  L. Mandell,
        and J. Schmiedeskamp, 1970 Survey of Consumer Finances, Ann Arbor: Survey    Research  Center, Institute of Social Research,
          1971.)
Note: Components of totals shown may not add to 100.0 because of rounding.
                                                                                                               38



                        Table 5: Ratios of Household Real-Estate Debt to Various Asset Totals
                                 and to Family Income by Age Class in 1962 and 1970

                                      (Proportions Stated in Percentage Points)

                              Home-Mortgage             Total Real Estate         Total Real Estate   Total Real Estat
     Age of                       Debt                       Debt to                   Debt to             Debt to
Household Head                       to                  Total Value of            Total Value of           Total
   (in years)                   Home Value                Real Estate               Assets Held        Family Income

1962 Data Set
Under 25                            67.0                       46.9                     17.0                11.8
25 to 34                            57.2                       52.3                     43.0                60.0
35 to 44                            42.1                       37.6                     28.7                66.2
45 to 54                            25.7                       25.2                     18.0                45.3
55 to 64                            17.0                       14.7                     10.1                30.9
65 and over                          4.0                          4.5                    2.8                17.7
2,117 Respondents                   30.4                       27.3                     19.4                48.3
1970 Data Set
Under 25                            73.6                       68.8                     50.7                25.0
25 to 34                            59.4                       54.2                     46.0                54.0
35 to 44                            42.7                       38.2                     30.5                70.2
45 to 54                            27.4                       28.1                     22.4                49.6
55 to64                             11.7                       13.8                      8.2                33.2
65 and over                          7.2                          5.6                    3.1                21.1
2,576 Respondents                   29.3                       26.4                     18.2                48.5


Source: Calculated from Survey of Consumer Finances data tapes.
                                                                                                                            39



                                       Table 6. Percentage Breakdown of Households' Portfolios of
                          Transactable Financial Assets and Real Estate Equity by Normalized Age Class in 1962
                                               (Proportions Stated in Percentage Points)
                                         Financial Assets                             Real-Estate Equity
                                                                                                                           Percent
         Age of                                                                             Equity          Equity in        of
  Household Head                                                                              in           Investment      Sample
     (in years)              Regulated     Unregulated        Total          Total           Home          Real Estate   Respondents
1962 Data Set
     Underl7                     0              0               0              0               0               0             0
      17 to 26                  19.1           47.0           66.1            33.9            13.2            20.7          12.2
(17 to 26 deleting
Wealthy Outlier)               (25.2)         (27.2)          (52.4)         (47.5)          (18.5)          (29.0)         (12.2)
      27 to 36                  16.1           22.9            39.0           61.0            41.1            19.9           21.3
      37 to 46                  13.0           12.8            25.8           74.3            58.8            15.5           21.8
      47 to 56                  15.0           21.4            36.4           63.5            50.5            13.0           19.5
    57   and over               23.9           14.3            38.2           61.9            42.8            19.1           25.2
2,117 Respondents               18.1           17.9            36.0           64.0            47.1            16.9          100.0


Notes: Same as Table 4.
                           Table 7. Effects of Unreported Appreciation in Value of Homes Acquired in 1969
                                               On Portfolio Weights, by 1970 Age Class
                                                             Value of 1969
                                                            Acquisitionsas    Calculated                         Calculated        Additional
                          Percentage of     Reported        a Percentage of    Increase         Reported        Survey-Date Home Equity I
                          Respondents in    Value of          Home Value      in Value of         Equity            Equity     1969 Acquisitio
                          the Age Class        Homes         Reported by          Homes         in Homes          in Homes        Relative to
     Age of               that Acquired      Acquired          the Full         Acquired         Acquired         Acquired           Survey
 Household Head           Homes in 1969       in 1969         Age Class          in 1969          in 1969          in 1969          Reports
   (in Years)              (in percent)    (in $ million)    (in Percent)     (in $ million)   (in $ million)   (in $ million)    (in percent)


  1970 Data Set



    Under 25                    5              0.21               39              0.01             0.04             0.05             7.1

     25   to 34                 8              0.65               15              0.02             0.17             0.19             1.1

     35to44                     7              0.91               11              0.03             0.37            0.40              0.6
     45 to 54                   3              0.24                3              0.01             0.11             0.12             0.2
     55 to 64                   2              0.17                2              0.01             0.09             0.10             0.2

   65 and over                  1               0.12               3              0.00             0.08             0.08              0

                                4              2.31                7              0.07             0.85             0.92             0.3
2,576 Responcients




Notes: Same as Table 4.
                                                                                               41



                              Table 8. Constructing Housing-Value
                    Projections That Cast Light on Aggregate Assessment Bias
                        Aggregate         Number of     Average
     Year              Est. Value of      Households   Estimated          High             Low
   in Which          Homes Occupied       Moving in     Value of       Projection       Projection
  Homeowner           in Designated       During the   Designated       of Value         of Value
  Moved Into               Years          Designated     Homes           in 1970          in 1970
Current home          (in $ Thousand)       Years      (in $ thou.)    (in $ thou.)     (in $ thou.)
 1962 Data Set
1939 or earlier            2,386             163          14.64           21.96           19.47
   1940—1949               3,120             229         13.62           20.43            18.11
1949 or earlier*           5,506             392          14.05           21.08            18.69
   1950—1954               3,575             258          13.86           20.78            18.43
   1955—1960               6,972             455          15.32           22.98            20.38
1960 or earlier*           16,053           1,105         14.53           21.80            19.32
     1961                  1,153              79          14.59           21.89            19.40
     1962                    64               4           16.00           24.00            21.28

1970 Data Set

1945 or earlier            4,474             229          19.54
   1946—1955               6,666             333          20.02
   1956—1960               5,474             238          23.00
1960 or earlier*           16,614            800          20.77
   1961—1965               8,283             373          22.21


   Source:   Same as Table 4
   Notes: Projections for 1970 employ a cumulative growth factor generated by
   multiplying year-to—year changes in two "extended" indices of housing prices (U.S.
   Department of Commerce, 1977). The "high projection" combines the rate of
   increase in the GNP price deflator for 1962 and 1963 with the Commerce
   Department's series of changes in the average sales price of new houses
   actually sold in each of the years 1964 through mid-1970. The estimated
   cumulative inflation factor is 50 percent. The "low projection" replaces year-to-
   year changes in the prices of houses sold in each year with changes in the average
   sales price of the kinds of houses sold in 1974. This produces a cumulative
   inflation factor of only 33 percent.
         The symbol * indicates observations constructed by summing aggregate
   values in the preceding categories.
                    Table 9. Percentage Breakdown of Households' Portfolios of Transactable Financial Assets and
                              Real-Estate Equity by Decile of Net Transactable Wealth, 1962 and 1970
                                             (Proportions Stated in Percentage Points)
                                      Financial Assets                               Real-Estate Equity                           Upper
                                                                                   Equity           Equity in                    Boundar
                                                                                      in           Investment                    of Decili
 Wealth                                                                             Home           Real Estate                  (in dollars
 Decile          Regulated        Unregulated          Total         Total

1962 Data Set
                                                            0.0           0.0             0.0                 0.0                       0
 1                  0.0                  0.0
                                         0.0               100.0          0.0             0.0                 0.0                  100
 2                 100.0                                                                                                           741
                    88.2                 1.3               89.5          10.5             10.5                0.0
 3
                    50.0                 5.3               55.3          44.7             41.9                2.8                 2,250
 4
                    29.1                 3.5               32.6          67.5             60.5                7.0                 4,900
 5
                    18.1                 4.9               23.0          77.0             70.9                6.1                 7,700
 6
                                         4.6               19.2          80.7             73.6                 7.1                10,838
 7                  14.6
                    16.5                 5.6               22.1          78.0             64.8                13.2                16,800
 8                                                                                                            15.9
 9                  17.6                 9.2               26.8          73.2             57.3                                    28,901
10               17.3                   27.7               45.0          55.0            33.6                 21.4               874,000
                                        17.9               36.0          64.0            47.1                 16.9
2,117 Respondents 18.1
 1970 Data Set
                     0.0                 0.0                0.0           0.0             0.0                 0.0                       0
 1
                    92.0                 4.0               96.0           4.0             4.0                 0.0                      290
 2
                    76.7                 2.9                79.6          20.4            17.0                3.4                  1,525
 3
                    36.6                 5.5                42.1          57.9            50.9                7.0                  4,660
 4
                    19.9                 3.4                23.3          76.7            68.7                8.0                  8,800
 5
                    14.8                 3.4                18.2          81.7            76.0                5.7                 13,101
 6
                    15.5                 3.1                18.6          81.4            74.6                6.8                 18,600
 7
                    20.5                 5.6                26.1          73.9            65.0                8.9                 27,750
 8
                    23.6                 7.3                30.9          69.1            57.0                12.1                50,300
 9
10                  15.3                 31.1              46.4           53.5            25.9                27.6              1,654,99
                                                                          62.0            42.1                19.8                 .
                                         20.2               38.0
2,576 Respondents 17.8

Notes: Sums of components of totals shown may not add to 100.0 because of rounding. Zeroes are          recorded in every column for
                                                                  no assets or real-estate equity.   Because    we chose not to split
the lowest wealth ciecile because members of this dedile report
                                                         first "decile" actually represents  15.7 percent  of the  sample in 1962 and
identical wealth values across neighboring deciles, this
                                                                                                4.6  percent  and 8.7 percent respec-
11.1 percent in 1970. To balance out these overflows, corresponding second deciles contain
           other  wealth  decile in our samples contains less than 9,9 percent  or more  than 10.1  percent  of the cases.
tively. No
                                                                                          Financial Assets
                 Table 10. Percentage Breakdown of Households' Portfolios of Transactable
                                   by Dedile of Net Transactable Wealth, 1962 and 1970
                                         (Proportions Stated in Percentage Points)
                                                                                                      Stocks
                                                                         u.s.                          and        Total
                                                                       Savings         Other          Mutual   Financial
Wealth                     Checking      Savings                                                      Funds      Assets
                           Accounts      Accounts         CDs           Bonds          Bonds
Decile
1962 Data Set
                                            0                             0             0               0              0
     1                         0
                                           33.3                           0             0               0          100.0
     2                        66.7                                                                      1.5        100.0
                                           47.1                          13.2           0
     3                        38.2                                                                      9.6        100.0
                                           61.8                          12.9           0
     4                        15.7                                                      0              10.7        100.0
                              14.4         60.5                          14.4
     5                                                                   12.1           0.3            20.8        100.0
     6                        17.3         49.5
                              13.5         50.7                          11.9           0              24.0        100.1
     7                                                                   13.0           0.2            25.1        100.0
     8                        15.3         46.4
                               9.2         47.0                           9.5           0.4            34.0        100.1
     9                                                                                  1.6            59.9       100.0
                               4.9         24.5                           9.1
    10                                                                    9.9           1.1            48.6        100.0
2,117 Respondents              7.6         32.7

1970 Data Set
                                                            0             0              0              0              0
     1                         0             0
                                            29.2            0             8.3            0              4.2        100.0
     2                        58.3                                                                                  99.9
                              31.1          56.7            1.2           7.3            0.6            3.0
      3                                                                                                            100.1
                                            57.6            1.2           7.7            0             13.1
      4                       20.5                                                                                  99.9
                                            58.5            2.5           5.2            0             14.5
      5                       19.2                                                                     18.6        100.0
                                            58.8            2.5           6.0            0
      6                       14.1                                                                     16.5        100.0
                              11.7          58.0            4.0           9.7            0.1
      7                                                                                                21.3        100.0
      8                        9.5          51.9            7.8           9.4            0.1
                               7.1          52.4           10.5           6.3            1.8           21.9        100.0
      9                                                                                                             99.9
                               2.9          16.4            9.6            4.0           7.3           59.7
     10                                                                                                            100.0
                               5.3          27.6            8.9            5.0           5.4           47.8
2,576 Respondents
 Notes: Same as Table 9.
                                                                                                                               44



                    Table 11: Ratios of Household Real-Estate Debt to Various Asset Totals and to
                        Family Income by Decile of Net Transactable Wealth in 1962 and 1970
                                      (Proportions Stated in Percentage Points)


                      Home-Mortgage        Total Real Estate     Total Real Estate Total Real Estate             Upper
                          Debt                  Debt to               Debt to           Debt to                Boundary
 Wealth                      to             Total Value of        Total Value of         Total                 of Dedile
 Decile                 Home Value           Real Estate           Assets Held      Family Income             (in dollars)

          Set
1962 Data —
 1                         100.0                 100.0                 100.0                 4.1                        0
 2                         100.0                 100.0                  89.7                 6.5                      100
 3                          91.8                  91.8                  54.2                 9.2                      741
 4                          80.1                  79.3                  63.2                47.5                   2,250
 5                          63.3                  61.9                  52.3                66.2                   4,900
 6                          45.4                  44.6                  38.2                67.2                   7,700
 7                          34.0                  33.7                  29.1                64.5                  10,838
 8                          29.0                  29.4                  24.5                64.4                 16,800
 9                          19.9                  20.9                  16.2                56.0                 28,901
10                          15.7                  13.8                   8.1                47.3                874,000
                            30.4                  27.4                   19.4               48.4
2,117 Respondents

1970 Data Set
_________ —                100.0                 100.0                 100.0                 13.8                       0
 2                          99.5                  99.5                  89.1                 13.7                     290
                            92.9                  91.9                   69.9                23.2                  1,525
 3
                            75.1                  74.2                   62.5                58.5                  4,660
 4
                            56.9                  58.1                   51.5               74.5                   8,800
 5
 6                          39.7                  40.0                   35.3               59.1                 13,101
 7                          32.8                   32.2                  27.8               56.7                 18,600
 8                          27.3                   27.9                  22.2               54.3                 27,750
 9                          16.1                   17.4                  12.7               41.9                 50,300
10                          13.0                   13.6                   7.8               52.3              1,654,997
2,576 Respondents           29.3                   26.4                  18.2               48.5


 Notes: Sums of components of totals shown may not add to 100.0 because of rounding. Zeroes are recorded in every column for
 the lowest wealth dedile because members of this decile report no assets or real-estate equity. Because we chose not to split
 identical wealth values across neighboring dediles, this first "dedile" actually represents 15.7 percent of the sample in 1962 and
 11.1 percent in 1970. To balance out these overflows, corresponding second deciles contain 4.6 percent and 8.7 percent respec-
 tively. No other wealth decile in our samples contains less than 9.9 percent or more than 10.1 percent of the cases.
                                                                     45



 Table 12. Estimates of Prospective 1970 Portfolio Rate of Return
               for Each Age Class and Wealth Dedile
                    (Stated in Percent Per Annum)
 Decile Ranking                     Yield on               Combined Yield on
 of Households'                     Financial               Financial Assets
Net Transactable                     Assets                 and Real-Estate
     Wealth                           Only                       Equity
        1
        2                              5.96                       6.06
        3                              5.57                       6.21
        4                              5.77                       742
        5                              5.81                       7.95
        6                              5.88                       8.06
        7                              5.78                       8.05
        8                              5.91                       7.91
        9                              5.93                       7.84
        10                             7.26                       8.29
2,576 Respondents                      6.85                       8.12


     Age of
 Household Head
   (in years)
     Under 25                          5.81                       7.18
     25 to 34                          6.20                       8.09
     35 to 44                          6.86                       8.32
     45 to 54                          6.46                       8.19
     55 to 64                          7.10                       8.11
   65 and over                         6.88                       8.00
 All Respondents                       6.85                       8.12




Source: Calculated from portfolio weights underlying Tables 4 and 9, using yield
assumptions stated in the text.
                                                                      46



Table 13. Less-Conservative Estimates of Prospective 1970 Portfolio
       Rate of Return for Each Age Class and Wealth Decile
                    (Stated in Percent Per Annum)
 Dedile Ranking                      Yield on              Combined Yield on
 of Households'                      Financial              Financial Assets
Net Transactable                      Assets                 and Real-Estate
     Wealth                            Only                       Equity
        1
        2                              5.96                       6.20
        3                              5.58                       6.89
        4                              5.77                       9.38
        5                              5.81                       10.56
        6                              5.88                       10.88
        7                              5.78                       10.84
        8                              5.91                       10.41
        9                              5.95                       10.13
        10                             7.37                       9.85
2,576 Respondents                      6.93                       10.07


    Age of
 Household Head
      years)
     Under 25                           5.82                       8.69
     25 to 34                           6.23                       10.38
     35 to 44                           6.88                       10.51
     45 to 54                           6.51                       10.56
     55 to 64                           7.20                       9.87
   65 and over                          6.97                        9.63
 All Respondents                        6.93                       10.07




Source: Calculated from portfolio weights underlying Tables 4 and 9, using yield
assumptions stated in the text.
Note: As compared to the estimates reported in Table 12, these calculations
assume higher anticipated rates of return on other bonds (8 percent), home-
owner equity (12 percent), and equity in investment real estate (12 percent).
         Table 14. Average Portfolio Patterns and Yields by Race and Net Transactable Wealth, for Male-headed Family Units in 1970
                                              (Except Where Indicated, All Figures in Percent)
                                Dollar Value of Wealth for Male-Headed White Households Dollar Value of Wealth For Male-Headed Black Households
                                Less 1000 5000 1000 25000 50000 10000 250000             Less 1000 5000 10000 25000 50000 100000 250000
                                Than     to     to      to    to     to      to    or    Than to         to     to    to    to    to     or
                                1000    4999 9999 24999 49999 99999 24999 More            1000 4999 9999 24999 49999 99999 249999 More
Panel A: All Family Units in the Survey
                              88      40         20     17     23    24      18     4       89    23       7     8      8      16     14     6
Percentage of Portfolio
 Placed in Regulated
 Financial Assets
                               5           5      5      4      7    13      26    49        0      3      4      7     0     61       0     0
Percentage in
 Unregulated  Financial Assets
                               7          55     75     79     70    63      56    46       11    74      89     86    92      23     86    94
Percentage in
 Real-Estate Equity
Estimated Mean Per—         6.02        7.32   7.95   8.02   7.85   7.93   8.24 8.67      5.72 7.91 8.29 8.34 8.60 7.97 9.05               8.24
 Annum Portfolio Yield
Number of Survey                  393    255    236   519     254    140     67     20      82     37     27     26     7       1      2

 Respondents
                                 0.08   0.70   1.73   8.49   8.73   9.37   9.71   11.47   0.01   0.11   0.19   0.35   0.24   0.06   0.21   0.25
Aggregate Valueof
 Family Portfolios   (in $   million)
Panel B: Family Units    Without Real Property
                                                                             50     —      100     83     22     —      —.     —      —      —
            of Portfolio           96     88     82     79     77     97
Percentage
 Placed in Regulated
 Financial Assets
                                 4        12     18     21     23      3     50              0     17     78
Percentage in
 Unregulated Financial Assets
                                 0         0      0      0      0      0      0              0      0      0
Percentage in
 Real—estate Equity                                                                 —
EstimatedMeanPer—             5.78      5.69   5.83   5.84 5.88     5.17   6.8            5.38   5.85   7.74
 Annum Portfolio Yield
                                                 25     20      8      6      3     —       78      5      1
Number of Survey               367       104
 Respondents                                                                        —
                              0.07      0.22   0.17   0.32   0.26   0.37   0.44           0.01   0.01   0.01
Aggregate Value of
 Family Portfolios (in $ million)

Source: Calculatedfrom 1970 Survey of Consumer Finances data tapes.
Notes: Detail may not add to totals because of rounding error and classification problems.
       Each family in the stratified sample represents about 25,000 demographically similar households. Interest-rate assumptions used to
       calculate portfolio yields are explained in the text.
  Table 14. (continued) Average Portfolio Patterns and Yields by Race and Net Transactable Wealth, for Female—Headed Family Units in 1970
                                                (Except Where Indicated, All Figures in Percent)
                                Dollar Value of Wealth: Female-Headed White Households Dollar Value of Wealth: Female-Headed Black Households
                                Less 1000 5000         1000 25000 50000 10000 250000 Less 1000 5000 10000 25000 50000 100000 250000
                                Than     to     to      to    to     to     to    or    Than to         to     to    to    to    to     or
                                1000    4999 9999 24999 49999 99999 24999 More          1000 4999 9999 24999 49999 99999 249999 More
Panel A: All Family Units in the Survey
                               86     51          32      23     29     29        17      11         71      20     8      5       0
Percentage of Portfolio
 Placed in Regulated
 Financial Assets
                                5           6      0       4      7     29        43      80           0      0      0     0       0
Percentage in
 Unregulated  Financial Assets
Percentage in                  10          42     68      74     65     42        40       9         29      80     92     95    100
 Real-Estate Equity
EstimatedMeanPer—           5.98        6.79 7.50      7.81 7.64      7.66       8.23 8.23      6.41       8.05   8.34   8.43   8.45
 Annum Portfolio  Yield
Number of Survey             116           54     36      76     56         20     7       1         67       9      9     10      1
 Respondents
Aggregate Valueof                0.02   0.14 0.26      1.20 1.89      1.45       1.04 0.32      0.01 0.03 0.06 0.14 0.04
 Family Portfolios (in $ million)
Panel B: Family Units Without Real Property                                                —
                             94      88   100             77     89         64      2                100    100
Percentage of Portfolio
 Placed in Regulated
 Financial Assets
                              6            12      0      23     11         36     98      —           0      0
Percentage in
 Unregulated Financial Assets
                              0             0      0       0      0          0      0                  0      0
Percentage in
 Real-estate Equity                                                                        —
EstimatedMeanPer—          5.72          5.55 5.12      5.84 5.48     6.31       8.42            5.37      5.37
 Annum Portfolio  Yield                                                                                                           —        —        —
                                           33      6       7      4          2      1      —          61      3     —      —           —
Number of Survey            109
 Respondents                                                                               —                        —      —      —    —   —        —
Aggregate Value of               0.02    0.08   0.04    0.12   0.13    0.17      0.21            .004      .004
 Family Portfolios   (in $   million)

Source: Calculatea from 1970 Survey of Consumer Finances data tapes.
Notes:   Detail may not add to totals because of rounding error and     classification   problems.
         Each family   in   the stratified sample represents about 25,000   demographically similar households. Interest-rate assumptions used to
         calculate portfolio yields are explained in the text.
                                                                                                                                 49



                  Table 15. Average Portfolio Patterns and Yield by Race, Sex, and Age of Heads of Household,
                                  For Family Units with and Without Real Property in 1970
                                       (Except Where Indicated, All Figures in Percent)

                                                    1e of White Male Head in Years              of Black Male Head in Years
                                                               35    45    55    65         Less 25     35    45    55    65
                                                   Less 25                                                          to    or
                                                   Than    to     to    to     to     or    Than to     to to
                                                           34     44    54     64    Mere    25     34    44    54   64       Mere
                                                     25


        Panel A: Family Units With Sane Real Property
                                                    15   12   14    14    19   6     18   10    6    5   13
           of Portfolio Placed in             20
Percentage
   Regulated Financial Pssets                            15   11    29                                    0
                          Financial Pssets     5      8
Percentage in unregulated                                73   75    57    55   33    77   65   94   95   87
                                              75    77
Percentage in Peal-Estate Duity Yield             8.27 8.41 8.29  8.23  8.08 6.62  8.27 8.16 8.37 8.86 8.67
Estimated Mean Per Annum Portfolio                           324   252   209     2   17   23   30   13   13
Number of Survey Respondents                  38   222 304                                             0.23
                                                  2.84 9.28 9.76 13.12 13.16     0 0.14 0.20 0.58 0.21
Pgregate  Value of Family Portfolios
   (in   $   million)
        Panel B: Family Units Without Peal Property
                                                     84                                                                   0      0
                                              83
Percentage of Portfolio Placed in
   Regulated Financial I½ssets                       16 16   17   22   32    0    0   43    0                             0      0
                                              17
Percentage in Unregulated Finaixial Assets                    0    0    0    0    0    0    0                             0      0
                                               0      0  0
                                                                     6.20 5.03 5.58 6.65 5.06                          0         0
Percentage in Peal-Estate Buity Yield
Estimated Mean Per Annum Portfolio          5.85 5.79 5.78 5.77 5.82                                                             9
                                             156    148 68   70   44   47    9   22   16   16                         12
Number of Survey Respondents                                         0.51    0 0.01 0.02    0                          0         0
                                            0.12 0.18 0.23 0.25 0.56
Aggregate Value of Family Portfolios
   (in   $   million)

     Source:      Calculated fran 1970 Survey of Ojnsumsr Finances data tapes.
     te:        Etai1 may not add to totals because of rounding error and classification prcblns.
               Table 15. (continued) Average Portfolio Patterns and Yield by Race, Sex, and Age of Heads of Household,
                                       For Family Units with and Without Real Property in 1970

                                           (Except where Indicated, AU Figures in Percent)


                                                      2geof White Faiale Head in Years     of Black Faia1e Head in Years
                                                     Less  25    35    45    55    65 Less   25    35    45    55    65
                                                     Than to     to to to or Than            to    to    to    to    or
                                                      25     34    44     54     64    MDre    25    34  54    64
                                                                                                              44    Ibre

        Panel A: Family Units With Scire Real Property
                                                                    26     24     21     20               0        4   7    3    7
                                               23    20
Percentage of Portfolio Placed in
   Regulated Financial Assets                                                            22    ——      0        0       0    0   0
                                                0      3             2      4     20
Percentage in Unregulated Financial Assets                                                     ——              96      93   97   93
                                               77    77             72     72     59     58          100
Percentage in Real-Estate Buity                                                                —    8.45      8.37 8.46 8.47 8.30
Estimated Mean Per Airnun Portfolio Yield            7.87 784 7.72 7.78 7.93 8.03              ——                6    9    5    8
                                                        2    8   21   30   64   78                        4
Nunber    Survey Respondents
         of                                                                                    —    0.01      0.05 0.08 0.07 0.07
                                                     0.02 0.11 0.27 0.63 2.07 2.47
Aggregate Value of Family Portfolios
   (in $ million)

        Panel B: Family Units Without Real Property
                                                    97 100   81   84   46  100  100  100 100   100                                0
                                              94
Percentage of Portfolio Placed in
   Regulated Financial Assets                  6     3   0   19   16   54    0    0    0    0    0                                0
Percentage in Unregulated Financial Assets     0     0   0    0    0    0    0    0    0    0    0                                0
                                                                     6.92 5.47 5.06 5.06 5.03 5.06                                0
Percentage in Real-Estate Duity Yield
Estimated Mean Per Annun Portfolio          5.39 5.22 5.14 5.73 5.70                                                              5
                                              33    22  21   20   19   47   10   17   17    7    8
Nur±er of Survey Respondents                                    0.06 0.53    0    0    0    0    0                                0
Aggregate Value of Family Portfolios        0.02 003 0.03 0.09
   (in   $   million)

     Source: Calculated frcm 1970 Survey of Cbnsiner Finances data tapes.
     Note: rtail may       add to totals because of rounding error and classification prthlems.
                            rt
                                                                                                                                                                              51

                                                                                          Race and Income,
                                       Table 16. Average Portfolio Patterns and Yield byReal
                                     For    Male-Headed Family Units With and  Without       Property in 1970

                                                 (Except Where Indicated, All Figures in Percent)

                                                      Dollar    Ino of Male-Headed                                Dollar Incaie of Male-Headed
                                                                                                                       Blad Households
                                                               White HcxiselDldS
                                                                          10000   15000 25000 50000           3000 5000 7500 10000 15000 25000 50000
                                                                                                                                                 or
                                          Less 3000 5000 7500                                                                           to           to       to
                                          Than to to      to to to to                            or
                                                                                                       ls to
                                                                                                       Than                to                                            9     t'tre
                                                                                                Ikxe 3000 4999 7499 9999 14999                                999
                                          3000 4999 7499 9999 14999 24999 49999

         Panel   A:   Family Units With Sane Real Property
Percentage of portfolio Placed in                                                                                                                                  6    20
                                                                                                 61       0        0            0            2            4
  Regulated 'inancial Assets                  5        4        3    5      11       18
percentage in Unregulated                                                                                                                                       88      61
  Financial Assets                                                                   64   50             98       95        96           88            84
                                             81       76       75    82     71
Percentage in Real-Estate Buity                                                    8.08 8.44    8.33                                                 8.36     8.74     8.41
                                           8.28 8.25 8.10 8.53 8.12                                    8.46 8.30 8,44 8.71
Estimated an   Per Annum
                 Yield                                                                                                                                :27          9      3
    portfoliq                                                                       296   70      17     13       14        14           18
                                             75   91 158 217 425                                                                                                       0.08
Nunber of Sifr'vy Respondents                                                     11.65 6.37    5.96   0.12 0.36 0.14                   18           0.36     017
                                           1.59 2.71 4.41 5.83 9.84
kjyregate Value  of Family
  portfolios  (in $ million)

         Panel B: Family Units Without Peal Property                                                      0         0 100 100 100                              47
                                              96       56       96   96      76       74   62
Percentage of portfolio Placed in                                                                                                                              53
                                                                                                              0     0               0            0     0
  Regulated Financial AEsets                           44        4    4      24       26   38
                                               4
Percentage in unregulated                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                            0    ——           0        0    0    0                        0
   Financial Assets                               0        0  0  0 0                   0
 Percentage in Real-Estate E)uity                                                   5.98 6.49    ——           0        0 5.49 5.47                   5.21 7.03
                                            5.31 6.68 5.37 5.33 5.92
 Estimated Maan Per Annum                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                 ——       20       13           16           14        17
   portfolio Yield                                                   106 117          42    8
                                              71       79      110                               ——           0        0            0            00.01 0.02
 Number of Survey Respondents                                  0.17 0.17 0.72       0.39 0.09
 Ajgregate Value of Family
   Portfolios (in     $   million)
      Source: Calculated fran 1970 Survey
                                          of Cbnsumer Finances data tapes.

      Note: ttai1 may      add to totals because of rounding error and classification prthlenE.
                              it
                                                                                                                                    52


                                Table 16. (continued) Average Portfolio Patterns and Yield by Race and Income,
                                                               Units With  and Without  Real Property in 1970
                                   For Female—Headed Family
                                                 (Except Where Indicated, All Figures in Percent)
                                                                                                   tbllar   Inie  of Fnale-Headed
                                                Dollar Incx of Faiiale-Headed                               Bladc Househlds
                                                    White HouselDldS
                                                                             50000      3000 5000 7500 10000 15000 25000 50000
                                                                                            is
                                       Less 3000 5000 7500 10000 15000 25000                            to to to or
                                       Than to to to to           to    to or Than to to to 14999            24999 49999 ?.bre
                                                                       49999 !bre  3000 4999 7499 9999
                                        3000 4999 7499 9999 14999 24999

        Panel A: Family Units With Sate Peal Property                                                        7    7    0
                                                                   23     21    17    11      5       9
                                     21 23 21 18
percentage of Portfolio Placed in
  Igulated Financial Assets                                               36     0    48      0       0      0    0    0
PercEntage in Unregulated                  81511 827
  Financial Assets                                                        42    83           95      91     93    93 100
                                          71     62    68    74    50                 •4l
percentage in Peal-Estate Equity
Estimated   !an Per Annum                                                            8.23   8.36 8.20 8.48 8.47 8.48
  portfolio Yield                                                  17     10     2     1     10       5      7     6   4
                                          61     42    40    30
NuiTber of Survey Pespondents                                                               0.08 0.02 0.04 0.07 0.06
                                                            0.67 0.57 0.98 0.08 0.11
Jgregate Value of Family
  Portfolios (in $ million)
        Panel B: Family Units Without Peal Property                                   ——                           0   0    100
                                                    79             79      2    —            100     100    100
                                     97   92   56
Percentage of portfolio Placed in
  REgulated Financial Assets                                                                   0       0      0    0   0      0
                                      3    8 44     21             21     98
Percentage in unregulated
  Financial Assets                                                                               0     0 0         0   0      0
                                            0              0    0          0
Percentage in Peal-Estate Equity
                                                 00                      8.42               6.36 5.06 5.03         0    0   5.03
               Per Annum                 5.20 5.37 6.63 5.83 5.85
Estimated    an
  portfolio Yield                                                               —     ——      31      18     11    1    2     1
                                           67     32   37     15    10      1
Nunber of  Survey Pespondents                                                   —     —        0       0      0    0    0      0
                                         0.16 0.12 0.17 0.08 0.03 0.21
 Aggregate Value of Family
  Portfolios (in $ million)
                                                       Finances data tapes.
      Source: Calculated fran 1970 Survey of Cbnsurrer
      Note: Detail may   xtadd to totals because of rounding error and classificatiOn problatE.
                                                                                  53



                                   FOOTNOTES


*The author, who is Everett D. Reese Professor of Banking and Monetary
Economics at The Ohio State University, wishes to thank Alexander J. Shumay for
skillful and painstaking research assistance and the Inter-University Consortium for
Political and Social Research for furnishing Survey of Consumer Finances data.
Data-processing took place mainly via IBM 370 programs written by Mr. Shumay.
This paper extends and substantially refocuses an earlier study (Kane, 1980). For
detailed criticism of earlier drafts, the author is grateful to Philip Cagan, Dennis
Draper, Benjamin Friedman, John McConnell, Joseph Minarik, John Tuccillo, and
George von Furstenberg and to seminar audiences at The Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, The Georgia Institute of Technology, Michigan State University, The
National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge), The University of Washington,
Western Michigan University, and The University of Wisconsin, Madison.
      Finally, the research reported here is part of the NBER's research on The
Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in Financing U.S. Capital Formation. The
author wishes to thank the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
and The Ohio State University Center for Real Estate Education and Research for
financial support. AU opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the NBER or any sponsoring agency.

'Between 1962 and 1970, net acquisition of claims on pension funds averaged a
fairly steady 22 percent of household asset acquisitions. Year by year, this
proportion varied only between 20 and 24 percent. Net acquisitions of consumer
durables averaged about 29 percent of household acquisitions, and the proportion
ranged year by year between 21 and 36 percent.

2Katona et al. (1963 and 1971) reproduce copies of the survey instruments. As
explained by Hansmire (1976) the SCF was discontinued after 1970. Her essay
includes a summary statement of just what variables were measured in each year.
Under the sponsorship of the three federal banking agencies, the Survey Research
Center conducted a partly similar Consumer Credit Survey in 1977. In future
research, I plan to compare changes in household balance sheets across the three
survey dates.

3Because incomplete records often show substantial values for one or more specific
categories of assets, in compiling portfolio distributions, we chose to treat missing
values as true zeroes.

   is interesting to note that in 1978 federal tax law was changed to increase the
special tax forgiveness for capital gains on sales of personal residences by older
taxpayers from $35,000 to $100,000 and the minimum age for qualifying for this
benefit was lowered from 65 to 55. To secure this change, older households
(especially those in the 55-to-64 age class) must have complained bitterly about the
government's growing tax take on these transactions.
                                                                                54

5To communicate the types of quality improvements that are occurring, Herter
(1979) reports that between 1970 and 1977 new one—family houses increased in size
and amenities. The median square footage increased from 1510 square feet to 1720
square feet, while the percentage of homes that included each of the following
features increased as follows: a dishwasher (from 42 percent to 82 percent); two or
more bathrooms (from 48 to 70 percent); one or more fireplaces (from 35 to 61
percent); and a garage (from 58 to 68 percent).

60f the four financial yields we estimate, this is the only one that features an
implicit component. We treat this series asymmetrically because implicit returns
dominate competition for demand deposits.

71n the case of mutual institutions, availability of these subsidies may have
intensified managerial incentives for converting to a stock charter.

8Our analysis of minority portfolios ignores a relatively small number of disparate
nonwhite respondents who are nonbiack.
                                                                           55



                                  REFERENCES

1. AARON, HENRY. "Income Taxes and Housing," American Economic Review,
            Dec. 1970, 60 (5), pp. 789—806.
2. ARCELtJS, FRANCISCO, and MELTZER, ALLAN H., "The Markets for Housing
            and Housing Services," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 5
            (February 1973), pp. 78—99.
3. BOSKIN, MICHAEL J. "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of
           Political Economy, April 1978, Part 2, 86 (2), pp. S3-S27.
3. CAGAN, PHILLIP, and LIPSEY, ROBERT E., The Financial Effects of Inflation,
           Cambridge: BaLlinger Publishing Company for The National Bureau
           of Economic Research, 1978.
4. DIAMOND, DOUGLAS B., Jr., "Taxes, Inflation, Speculation and the Cost of
         Ownership: 1963—1978," paper presented before the American Real
            Estate and Urban Economics Association, May 23, 1979.
5. FAMA, EUGENE F., and SCHWERT, G. WILLIAM. "Asset Returns and
          Inflation," Journal of Financial Economics, 5 (November 1977),
            pp. 115—146.

6. FISHER, IRVING. The Theory of Interest. New York: Macmillan, 1930.
7. FRIEND, IRWIN AND BLUME, MARSHALL E. "Short Run Asset Effects on
            Household Saving and Consumption: The Cross-Section Evidence,"
            American Economic Review, Sept. 1975, 65 (4), pp. 624-33.
8. GETTEL, RONALD E. Real Estate Guidelines and Rules of Thumb. New York:
             McGraw-Hill, 1976.
9. GURLEY, JOHN G. and SHAW, EDWARD S. Money in a Theory of Finance.
             Washington: Brookings Institution, 1960.
10. HANSMIRE, EVELYN. "Survey Data Available from the Economic Behavior
             Archive," in "Surveys of Consumers, 1974—1975. Edited by RICHARD
             T. CIJRTIN. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Institute for Social
             Research, 1976, pp. 285—312.
11. HARTER, THOMAS R. "Housing Outlook 1979," New York: Mortgage Bankers
            Association of America (niimeographed, 1979).
12. HENDERSHOTT, PATRIC, and RU, SHENG CHENG, "Inflation and the Benefits
             from Owner—Occupied Housing," paper presented before the
             American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association,
             May 23,1979.
13. I-IOWREY, E. PFIILLIP AND HYMANS, SAUL I-I.           "The Measurement and
             Determination of Loanable Funds Saving,"       Brookings Papers on
             Economic Activity, 1978, (3), pp. 655—705.
                                                                             56


14. IBBOTSON, ROGER G. and SINQUEFELD, REX A. "Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and
           Inflation: Year—by—Year Historical Returns (1926—1974)," Journal of
             Business, Jan. 1976, 49 (21), pp. 11—47.
15. KANE, EDWARD J. "Short-Changing the Small Saver," Journal of Money,
             Credit, and Banking, Nov. 1970, 2 (4), pp. 513—522.
16. ________. "Good Intentions and Unintended Evil: The Case Against Selective
             Credit Allocation,"      Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
             Feb. 1977, 9 (1), pp. 55—69.

17. ________. "Consequences of Contemporary Ceilings on Mortgage and Deposit
             Interest Rates for Households in Different Economic Circumstances,"
             in The Government and Capital Formation. Edited by George M. von
             Furstenberg. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1980 (forthcoming).
18. KATONA, GEORGE, LININGER, CHARLES A. AND KOSOBUD, RICHARD F.
              1962 Survey of Consumer Finances. Ann Arbor:         University of
              Michigan Institute for Social Research, 1963.
19. KATONA, GEORGE, MANDEL, LEWIS AND SCHMIEDESKAMP, JAY. 1970
              Survey of Consumer Finances. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
              Institute for Social Research, 1971.
20. MULLINEAUX, DONALD J.         "Deposit-Rate Ceilings and Noncompetitive
              Bidding for U.S. Treasury Bills," Journal of Money, Credit and
              Banking, 5 (February 1973), pp. 201—212.
21. NATHAN, HAROLD C. "Economic Analysis of Usury Laws: A Survey,
           Washington: Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Working Paper
              No. 78—7 (mimeographed, 1978).
22. SOWELL, THOMAS. Race and Economics. New York: David McKay Company,
            Inc., 1975.
23. STEVENS, EDWARD J. "Measuring the Service Return on Demand Deposits,
              Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper No. 7601,
              (Mimeographed, 1976).
24. U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, Bureau of the Census, Construction
            Reports: Price Index of New One-Family Houses Sold, Quarterly,
              December 1977.
25. WACHTEL, PAUL. "Inflation, Uncertainty, and Saving Behavior Since the
          Mid—1950s," Explorations in Economic Research, Fall 1977, 4 (4),
              pp. 558—78.
