                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          MONETARY STABILIZATION, INTERVENTION
                  AND REAL APPRECIATION


                    Rudiger Dornbusch



                  Working Paper No. )472




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138


                       April 1980




This paper is a chapter of my forthcoming book Open
Economy Macroeconomics, Basic Books, July, 1980. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper 472
                                                                       April, 1980




     Monetary Stabilization, Intervention and Real Appreciation


                              ABSTRACT



     This paper investigates the adjustment process to a reduction in

the rate of credit creation in an open, flexible exchange rate economy.

The framework of analysis is one of rational expectations with respect

to interest rates, inflation and depreciation. The special feature of

the model is the role of exchange market intervention and the resulting

endogeneity of the money stock.

     The model is of empirical interest because of the growing experience

in countries such as Israel, Spain or Argentina with th fact that monetary

disinflation rapidly leads to real appreciation, unemployment and money

creation induced by exchange market intervention. With capital flows

and induced money creation threatening attempts at stabilization, there

is a need to understand the relationship between intervention and inflation.




                                                   R. Dornbusch
                                                   E52—357
                                                   M.I.T.
                                                   Cambridge, MA 02139

                                                    (617) 253—3548
                                               R. Dornbusch
                                               Revised, November 1979




             MONETARY STABILIZATION, INTERVENTION AND REAL APPRECIATION


           This chapter investigates the adjustment process to a

reduction in the rate of credit creation in an open, flexible exchange

rate economy. The framework of analysis is one of rational expectations

with respect to interest rates, inflation and depreciation. The

special feature of the model is the role of exchange market intervention

and the resulting endogeneity of the growth rate of the money stock.

           The model is of empirical interest because of the growing

experince, for example in Israel, Spain and Latin America,

with the fact that monetary disinflation rapidly leads to real

appreciation, unemployment and money creation induced by exchange

invervention. With capital flows and induced money creation threat-

ening attempts at stabilization policy, there is a need to understand

the interaction of stabilization and invervention.

           Table 1 shows the facts to be explained. While these

facts are becoming well—known, there appears to have been little formal

modelling to date. Work by Liviatan (1979), however, has addressed

these issues and the present model is directly stimulated by that

contribution.

           The chapter also adds to rational expectations models of

flexible exchange rate systems. At present there are three main

avenues of modelling. Following Black (1973) there are models of the

"asset market approach" that emphasize the fast adjustment of financial

relative to real markets as a basis of exchange rate dynamics. The
                                                                      la.
                        TABLE 1 SOME FACTS



                                  ê                   RIB     H/H

                                           SPAIN

1977                            18.5       24.5        17.5    21.6
1978                           —13.4       19.7        26.7    24.9
79/1—78/I                      —14.8       16.3        27.6    37.8

                                           ISRAEL
1977                            31.1       34.6       119.0    42.5

1978                            67.0       50.6       179.9    27.8
79/1—78/I                       21.8       58.1       259.3    17.5

                                         ARGENT INA

1977                           117.7      176.1        52.0   140.3

1978                            67.9      175.5       60.5    109.7

79/1—78/I                       60.4      169.0        81.8   131.1



NOTES: é =   %   change in the local .currency price of the $ US;
        =    %   CPI inflation;
             = change in central bank foreign assets as
                 % of "reserve money";
       n/H =     %   change in "reserve money".

SOURCE: IMP International Financial Statistics, August 1979
       Lines ae, 11, 14 and 64.
                                 12—2




previous chapter explores that approach. A second line of theory

emphasizes the current account as a basis of exchange rate dynamics

and is dealt with inthe last two chapters of this book. The third

approach is concerned primarily with imperfect substitutability

between domestic and foreign securities and takes portfolio composition

effects as an important source of exchange rate movements and variability.

Work along these lines has been done by Kourri (1975) and Dooley—Isard

(1979), Branson (1976), Calvo and Rodriques (1977) and Henderson (1979).

           This chapter is most nearly in the spirit of this third

approac'h, especially in its emphasis on exchange market intervention.

It does, however, differ in a critical respect. Rather than modelling

imperfect capital mobility as the instantaneous, but imperfect substi-

tutability of domestic and foreign securities we take the older approach

that focuses on capital flows in response to interest differentials.

The theory is less clear—cut than portfolio balance approaches, but

it commands an empirical plausability.

           Part I sets out the model, adapting the assets market

approach developed in the previous chapter to a world of inflation,

exchange market intervention that is "leaning against the wind" and

finite capital mobility. The model is used to show the adjustment

to a sustained reduction in the rate of domestic credit

creation. We show that the adjustment process involves an initial

overshooting in the rate of exchange depreciation relative to the

trend rate of inflation, real appreciation and unemployment. The

rate of monetary growth, fed by intervention, may acutally expand
                                   12—3




for some time. The monetization of reserve gains constitutes part of

the rise in real balances that takes place during the adjustment.

           In Part II we study for comparison the adjustment process

when there is no intervention. The exchange rate immediately

appreciates and the unemployment level rises instantaneously. The

difference between the two regimes is therefore seen to be one of

timing. The concluding part and the appendices deal with a more

general model.


I THE MODEL


           Output is demand determined and depends on relative prices

and the real rate of interest. Deviations of output from full

employment and money creation are the sources of inflation. Nominal

interest rates are determined in the standard LM curve manner, by real

income and the real money stock.


1. The Structural Equations


           The nominal interest rate, i, is determined by real income,

y, and real balances, h—p:


(1)        i =   ky   — f(h—p)


where y, h, and p are all in logs. Aggregate demand is a function of

relative prices and the real rate of interest, i—p:


(2)        y =   a'(e—p) —   b'(i—j)
                                     12—4




or, substituting from (1) for the nominal interest rate:


(2)'       y = a(e—p) + b(h—p) + c; a, b, c > 0


Here e is the nominal exchange rate and e—p is the real exchange rate

or the relative price of our goods. For the time being,we concentrate

on a special case where aggregate demand is ind'ependent of the rate

of interest, b = c =    0;   only in Part IV below do we return to the

general case. For our special case then the equilibrium level of

output is solely determined by the real exchange rate;


(2)"       y = a(e—p)


           The full employment level of output, by choice of units,

is set at the level y =      0.   Then y can be interpreted as the deviation

of output from normal and similarly, e—p is the deviation of the real

exchange rate from the level consistent with full employment.

           Inflation is determined by the output gap, y, and by the

rate of monetary growth, i.        Inclusion   of money growth in the inflation

equation is required for steady state full employment inflation, although

the steady state growth rate of credit could serve the same purpose.


(3)



           Equation (4) shows the intervention policy of "leaning

against the wind." The rate of accumulation of reserves as a fraction

of the money stock, it/H, is negatively proportional to the excess of
                                      12—5




the rate of depreciation, &,        over   the rate of domestic credit creation,
 1
V


(4)           R/H = — 9(ê—v)


              The intervention rule can be looked at in a slightly

different way by defining total adjustment as the sum of reserve

accumulation plus appreciation relative to trend: R/H — (é—v).2
With that definition of total adjustment, and using (4), we have

the fraction of adjustment that is effected through reserve changes

as:

                 R/H
(4)'                           =Q/(l+O)    A
              R/H -    (ê-v)

             Active intervention or a value of A close to unity thus

implies that the exchange rate is maintained close to the long—run

inflation trend, è         v. A low value of A by contrast allows the

exchange rate to deviate substantially from trend inflation. We

refer to A as the "intervention coefficient."

             The balance of payment's is a function of the real exchange

rate, real income and thenominal interest differential adjusted for

exchange depreciation:


(5)          R/H =[g(e—p) — my + n(i_é_i*)]

Replacing the intervention, R/H, by the rule given in (4) allows us to

replace reserve changes with exchange depreciation to obtain:

(5)'      O(e—v) = — [g(e—p) — my ÷ n(i—e)]

       alternative intervention rule is R/H = — O(e—p).         See Appendix II.

2Total adjustment corresponds to what          Girton   and Roper (1977) call
"exchange market pressure."
                                 12-6




 where,f or convenience, we have set the foreign interest rate equal to

 zero. In (5) and (5)', it is the excess of. the nominal interest rate

 over the rate of depreciation that governs capital flow. Capital

 mobility is measured by the coefficient n) A rise in the nominal

 interest rate leads to a capital inf low while increased depreciation

 leads to a capital outflow. Capital mobility is less than perfect

 in that, in the short run,tnterest differentials can persist.

            Rational expectations are used here in two places. The

actual real rate of interest, i—k, determines
                                                aggregate spending
and the actual interest differential,
                                        i-4.-i*, governs capital flows.

It is readily apparent that the assumption of rational expectations

simplifies the analysis since it dispenses with the need of additional

equations describing the formation of expectations about inflation

and depreciation.

            FinalLy, monetary growth is equal to the growth of domestic

credit plus the monetary growth derived from exchange market intervention:


(6)



           The monetary growth equation shows that when exchange

depreciation is high, the resulting intervention leads to a slowdown

in monetary growth. Conversely, high depreciation leads to growth

over and above the scheduled rate of credit creation.

LThe coefficient n is to be interpreted as the rate of capital
     as a fraction of the money stock, generated               inflow,
                                                 by a change in the
     interest differential. Even with high capital mobility, it is
     thus likely to be a fraction. The same normalization oü the
      nominal money stock applied to the coefficients   g and in.
                                   12—7




               Our model is simplified in three respects. First, we do

not allow for a role of import prices, and hence the exchange rate,

in the real balance deflator. Second, we exclude depreciation from

the definition of the real interest rate in aggregate demand. Third,

we do not allow for a direct effect of depreciation on domestic inflation.

Axt alternative model is explored in Appendix II and shows some of these

extensions.


2. Dynamics


               We now have completed the description of our structural

model and can turn to the equilibrium conditions and the dynamics.

At any point in time the levels of the exchange rate, prices and

nominal money are exogenously given. So are the growth ratof

domestic credit and the intervention coefficient which are policy

parameters.

               For given levels of the statecivariables we can solve the

system   for   the current rates of inflation, depreciation and money

growth and thus for the rate of change of the real exchange rate

and the rate of change of real balances. Using (1), (2)", (3) and

(5) we obtain:


(7)            h— = 4a(e—p)

                                              g—a(m—nk)
(8)            ê—v = i(e—p) + v(x—); u    —
                                                          <0; v nf/(—n) > 0.
                                     12—8




where x =     h-p   and x denotes steady state real balances.1 The rate

of change of the real exchange rate is given by


9)                  = iS(e—p) + (l+O)'u(x—);   ô   (l+G)i —     $a   <   0


For stability of this system we assume that tS     <0   and that e—n >       0.
          •    In Figure 1 we show the schedule é =    along which the

real exchange rate is constant. An increase in real balances lowers

the nominal interst rate. The resulting interest differential leads

to a capital outflow, abalanceof payments deficit——an increased

deficit or a reduced surplus——and therefore increased exchange

depreciation. Since by assumption there is no effect on income and

inf1atiot, there is unambigously a depreciating real rate. To offset

the effect of higher real balances,a higher level of the real exchange

rate, and hence a higher level of income and an improvement in the

external balance,are required. Thus the schedule is positively

sloped.

               Real balances are constant along the horizontal axis where

relative prices are such that output is at the full employment level.

The steady state equilibrium is shown at point A .      At A the rate of
depreciation equals the rate of credit creation; there is no intervention

and real exchange rates and real balances are constant.

               We also show in Figure 1 the schedule h =   v=   ê along which
growth of money derives only from domestic credit. Intervention

and the balance of payments are zero and depreciation equals the rate


LEquation (8) is derived in terms of deviations from long—run equilibrium,
     recognizing that in the steady state é =   =
             12—9




e—p




                             /
      I                  /        VI




 0                                     h—p



                         1,
      •111
                 /               'V

             /
              FIGURE 1
                                            12—9A




    of credit creation. The      schedule   is steeper than the e=p    locus as

    can be noted from equations (8) and (9). Above the horizontal axis

    there is overemployment which causes by itself real appreciation. Along

    the e=p schedule,the inflationary effect of the overemployment is pre-

    cisely offset by the   depreciation     in excess of the rate of domestic

    credit   creation. As the real exchange rate increases further the rate
    of deprecSiation declines and the first term in (9) becomes progressively
    smaller. Along the Iv schedule,the real exchange rate is therefore
    apprec iatriig.
         With these reference schedules we can now characterize the 1evls

    and relative rates of change of the endogeneous variables in the various

    regions. With symmetry we can limit ourselves to the first three:



                                       TABLE 2

                                     THE ROAD MAP


:                 I                           II                          III


         p>b>v>e                        h>p> v>e                      h>v> e>p
           y>o                            y< 0                            y     0

             Surplus                        Surplus                      Surplus



         One. point of Table 2 is worth emphasizing. That i,iu all

    three regions the rate of credit creation,or the longrun rate of inflation,

    exceeds. the. rate of depreciation, v >   e.    Accordingly there is exchange

    intervention leading   to   money creation
                                   12—10




 in excess of the rate of domestic credit expansion. There are thus

 balance of payments surplusses in all three regions.


 3 The Adjustment Process To a Change in Credit Creation


            We now consider the adjustment process to a reduction in

 the growth rate of domestic credit, v. We start with a full equilibrium

at point A in Figure 2. The reduced rate of credit creation will, in

long—run equilibriujn,lead to no change in relative prices or output,

but will change the equilibrium stock of real balances, x, because

 from (2), dx = —dy/f >   0.   In addition, the new equilibrium inflation

 rate will be lower, as will be the nominal interest rate, didv.

 Point A' thus indicates the new long—run equilibrium.

           Starting from the initial equilibrium we have,as yet,

unchanged real balances and an unchanged real exchange rate; output

and nominal interest rates are at their initial level. This is the

essential point for an understanding of the exchange rate implications

of the stabilizaton. The authorities, in line with the intervention

rule, reduce the rate at which the exchange rate is allowed to depreciate.

In so doing they create an interest differential in favor of the home

country——an interest differential adjusted for depreciation, i—e.

Accordingly, there is a capital inf low or reduced outflow, creating

pressure for a further reduction in the rate of depreciation and thus

leading to intervention and money creation.

          From (8) above the impact effect of reduced credit creation

on the exchange rate, at the intial equilibrium, is
               12-11




e—p




                              IIp

               I
           A                        h—p
  0

      II

               III   //
                   PIGURE 2
                                      12—12




(10)       d/dv          = l—vdx/dv = 9/(9—n) > 1

                   t=0


There is,accordingly,an overshooting not in the level of the exchange

rate, but in its rate of change. As shown in Figure 3 a reduced

rate of credit creation thus leads to a reduction in the rate of

depreciation below its new trend level.

           The impact effect of reduced credit creation on monetary

growth must take into account the monetary expansion due to inter—

vention From (6) and (10) we have:

(11)       dh/dv         = 1 — nO/(O—n) =       {A—n}   0
                   t=0


           A reduction in the rate of credit expansion need not reduce

monetary growth unless A—n >     0.    With capital highly responsive

to interest differentials, it is entirely possible that the intervention

more than offsets the reduction in domestic credit creation.

           Finally, the effect of reduced credit creation on inflation

is, from (3), given by the change in monetary growth. Accordingly,

with highly mobile capital and the intervention coefficient, A,

relatively small, it is possible that inflation in the first instance

actually rises.

           The impact effect of reduced credit creation thus involves

real appreciation of the exchange rate, including the possiblity of

rising inflation with nominal appreciation. The real appreciation

at point A will lead to a fall inclemand and output. Once output falls
                        12—13




h,é,j,v

    V




                   1;




              P

              t0                •t ime



                   FIGURE 3




          9
                                 12—14




and thus exerts a dampening effect on inflation, real balances will

be rising. This is the adjustment process shown in region II.

           Real appreciation and rising real balances will continue

until we reach the ê =   f schedule.   Both inflation and depreciation

are below the trend,v, while monetary growth is above trend. Nominal

interest rates have declined due to the fall in output and the rise

in the real money stock. Depreciation and inflation now have converged.

Depreciation has increased, as the trade balance has worsened in

response to the real appreciation, and the capital account has

deteriorated because of lower interest rates. Inflation, by contrast,

has declined due to the increased output gap.

           From here on there is real depreciation. Money growth

is still in excess of the reduced rate of credit creation and there

is still intervention to keep the depreciation more nearly in line

with the rate of credit creation. Continued ral depreciation and

real balance growth restore output. The real depreciation in

combination   with rising real balances, brings the balance of payments
more nearly into equilibrium.
           By the time the economy reaches point A' relative prices
are back to their initial level but the stock of real balances has

risen in adjustment to the lower rate of interest,iñflation and

depreciation.

           Thus in the long-run, the reduãtion in credit creation

is only   reflected in a corresponding reduction in nominal interest

rate, the trend rate of depréciationand, of course, in a higher
                                 12—15




stock of real money balances. How is the gain in real balances

achieved? Our model of inflation, allowing a full impact of money

growth on prices, implies that the only way real balances can rise

is through unemployment,or an output gap. It is true that intervention

policy leads to nominal money growth, but that growth finds its way

directly into inflation and thus does not help raise real balances.

In Appendix II we explore an alternative model where depreciation

direcly affects inflation. In that model it is true that the deceleration

of depreciation immediately contributes to real balance growth, although

that effect is subsequently undone when the real exchange rate
               1
depreciates.

           In summary, we have shown that a reduction in the rate of

credit creation will, in the long run, reduce inflation and depreciation.

In the transition, however, unemployment is created as the real

exchange rate initially appreciates in response to an interest

differential that is created by the disinflation policy. Can the

transitory unemployment and real appreciation be avoided? Liviatan

has proposed an equalizing tax on capital flows that would eliminate

the incentive for capital imports in the transition. An alternative,

for the believer in rational expectations models as shown here, is

a once and for all increase in the stock of nominal money along with

a reduced rate of growth. The combination of the two would move the

economy to point A' instantaneously, although at a higher

LIn fact this result holds independently of whether intervention is
     geared to the change in the real exchange rate, é—f, or to trend
     inflation, é—v. With the present intervention model and an inflation
    equation: =(y—y) + aé + (l—ct)Fi the impact effect onreal balances
    is: d(ti—,)/dv = —ct(l+O)n/(O—n).
                                     12—16




price level than is implied by the adjustment path in Figure 2.

Of course, it is hard to persuade the public that the true path to

monetary stabilization is a big money—bubble up front.


II     FULLY FLEXIBLE RATES


            In   this part we compare   the adjustment process derived so
far,with   one where there is no intervention at all; where exchange

rates are fully flexible and can jump in response to new information.

We maintain all other assumptions of the model, including in particular

the perfect foresight assumption concerning exchange rate expectations.


1. The Model Without Intervention


           In the absence of intervention money growth is equal to the

growth rate of credit because the balance of payments is identically

equal to zero. The balance of payments in (5) can be set equal to zero

and solved for the rate of depreciation. Setting 0          0 in (8) yields

the rate of depreciation:


(12)       é —   v = (e—p)    —   f(x—);   p [g—a(m—nk)]/n > 0


The important point to note is that (12) differs from (8) not only

in that the intervention coefficient 0 is zero,but also in the effect

of the real exchange rate on the rate of depreciation. Since a real

depreciation improves the balance of payments by assumption, and

since the overall balance must be zero,a real appreciation must be

accompanied by a deterioration in the capital account through increased
                                   12—17




anticipated depreciation. A rise in real balances lowers interest

rates and worsens the capital account. It must be offset by a

compensating reduction in anticipated depreciation that keeps the real

interest, i—k, and hence the capital account, constant.

          With real depreciation determined by (9) it is readily seen

that the equation for the evolution of the real exchange rate, ê—f, now

is given by


(13)          = tS(e—p) — f(x—x)    ;
                                                  — 4a > 0



          Figure 4 shows the schedule ê=p along which the real

exchange rate is constant) Above the schedule the real exchange

rate is depreciating and below the schedule it. is appreciating. Above

the horizontal axis real balances are falling while below the axis the real

money stock is rising. The arrows indicate the saddle—point instability

characteristic of rational expectations models.

          There is a unique trajectory FF along which the economy

can converge to the steady state at point A. Any other trajectory

does satisfy all equations, including the perfect foresight characteristic,

but they do not converge. We assume henceforth that the economy will

in fact be on FF, although there is no process in our model that will

guarantee this.


2 A Reduction in Credit Growth


          Consider again the reduction in credit growth already studied

in the previous part. Real balances across steady states will again

be higher and, in long—run equilibrium, will be at x,in Figure 5.

'We assume that iS   >0   and deal only with that case here.
       12—18




e-p




  0              h -p




      FIGURE 4
                12—19




e-p




                          F




      0                       h -p




          F'



               FIGURE 5
                                   12—20




The adjustment process is the following. Announcement of the reduced

credit growth shifts the perfect foresight path down to F'F'. The

exchange rate innnediately appreciates and the level of the real exchange

rate moves directly to point A" on the new perfect foresight path.

            The immediate real appreciation contrasts with the case of

intervention. There,the real exchange rate starts appreciating while

here,the level of the real rate directly rises. The freely flexible

rate thus anticipates with a jump at thebeginning the real appreciation

process that builds up more steadily under intervention,as shown in

Figure 2.

            The impact effect of reduced credit growth at point A" is

to lower real income because of the real appreciation. The fall in

real income,in turn,itnplies a decline in nominal interest rates. What

then maintains overall balance of payments equilibrium? It is

readily shown from (12) that at A", the rate of depreciation of the

nominal exchange rate is reduced. It is uncertain though whether

the rate of depreciation declines below the new Erend rate of inflation,

V.

            In   the subsequent adjustment process, as the arrows indicate,

the real exchange rate is depreciating. Accordingly nominal exchange

depreciation exceeds inflation. Since across steady states real balances

have to rise it is also apparent that inflation falls short of money

growth during the adjustment process.

            The unemployment effects of the monetary stabilization arise

under flexible rates just as much as they do under the intervention
                               12—21




system. Here the unemployment shock is concentrated at the beginning

with the subsequent real depreciation slowly eroding the economic

slack. Cumulative deflation, to generate higher real balances, is

just the same here as It is under the intervention system. Under

both systems, deflation (or a once and for all rise in nominal money)

1s required to accommodate the reduction in velocity or the rise in

real balances,associated with lower trend inflation. The real

differences between the fully flexible rate and the Intervention

system thus lies in the time path of adjustment.


Part []1 THE EXTENDED MODEL


          In concluding this chapter we look at the extended model

where the real interest rate,as well as the real exchange rate,are

determinants of aggregate demand. The formal model is laid out in

the appendix and we only comment here on some points regarding the

structure and results.

          The essential complication of this model arises from the

link between the balance of payments, money growth, depreciation and

inflation. Appreciation, by raising money growth, raises inflationary

expectations, reduces the real rate of interest and therefore expands

aggregate demand. These channels are captured in the reduced form

equation for output derived from (2)', (3) and (6). The equation

is, once again, expressed in terms of deviations from long—run
           1
equilibrium

he bar over a coefficient denotes that the coefficients in (2)' are
    multiplied by (l—c$Y > 0.
                                      12—22




(14)          =   (e—p)   + b(x—x)   — Oc(é—v)


            Equation (14) shows that real depreciation, or an expansion

in the real money stock, raises output. A balance of payments deficit

or a depreciating exchange rate (relative to trend), however, raises

real interest rates through reduced money growth and inflationary

expectations, and lowers output.

            The second relationship we use is the balance of payments

in (5)',having substituted for the nominal interest         rate   from (1)


(15)         —v           (g(e—p) — (m—nk)y —    nf(x—x))

and where we assume here that the adverse expenditure effect of

higher income on the current account outweighs the favorable capital

account effect through higher nominal interest rates, m —           nk   >   0.

Equations (14) and (15) are now used to show the impact effect of a

change in credit growth on the depreciation rate and en output

            Figure 6 shows, using the negatively sloped schedule, QQ,

the    output level of the economy as determined by demand and shown

in (14). The positively sloped schedule BB shows the balance of

payments relation in (15). Both schedules, of course, represent

reduced forms that take into account monetary equilibrium and the

intervention rule. They are drawn for given real balances x and x

and a given real exchange rate, e—p.

            A reduction in the growth rate of credit will raise steady

state real balances and thus shifts both schedules in Figure 6.
                         12—23




                    B



N                   B'


                                 y




               Q,




    FIGURE 6
                               12—24




The output schedule shifts down and to the left because at each

level of depreciation (relative to trend) there is now a reduction in

inflationary expectations, higher real interest rates and thus lower

demand. The balance of payments schedule shifts down and to the

right. Here,intervention around the new and lower trend of credit

growth implies a real interest differential in favor of the home

country and a capital inflow that must be offset by a deterioration in

the external balance through higher income.

         The reduction in credit growth in Figure 6, leads,in the

short run,to a new equilibrium at point A'. The rate of depreciation,

once again has fallen below the new trend inflation rate so that

we preserve here the overshooting property as well as the fact

that there is,in the transition,a surplus and external money creation.

         What determines the output effect of reduced credit

creation? The higher expected real interest rate at home exerts

an unambiguous deflationary effect shown by the downward shift of the

output schedule. A high interest response of aggregate demand insures

that this effect is large. The countervailing effect comes from the

money supply side. The reduction in the rate of depreciation creates

an international interest differential in favor of the home country,

leading to capital inflows and external money creation which potentially

offsets the effect of reduced credit growth.

          It is readily shown that the output schedule shifts down
                              12—25




further than the balance of paymetns schedule provided A —   n   >   0.1
Thus output must fall initially if intervention is sufficiently

vigorous relative to the degree of capital mobility. This condition, of

course, Is the same as that which ensuresthat a reduction in credit growth

reduces the rate of growth in nominal money. It is through that

channel that the expected real interest rate rises and the contraction

in demand occurs. In any event it is apparent that for real balances

to increase across steady states,there must on average be unemployment

in the transition. For the stable systeln,an initial output expansion,

if It should occur, implies a subsequent recession that more than

offsets the initial output gain.

          The extended model once more draws attention to the importance

of the intervention coefficient. The interaction of intervention,

money growth and inflationary expectations makes the intervention

coefficient a key parameter. Vigorous intervention implies small

interest differentials, small capital flows and therefore small

external money creation. The other point that is to be emphasized,

and this decidedly is a special feature of the model, is the direct

link between money growth and inflation. The model is quite sensitive

to the indicator of trend inflation expectations that we chose——ih, v, é


he downward shift of the BB scheudleL from (15) is d(é—v)/dv—n/(O—n).
     We have used here the fact that dx/dv = —1/f, noting that increased
     trend inflation raises nominal interest rates. For the output
     schedule the downward shift is d(è—v)/dv = —b/fc& which,from
     the definitions of b and c,is readily shown to equal —1/0. For
     the output schedule to shift down further than the BB schedule
     we thus require l/0>n/(0—n) or A — n > 0.
                                12—26




or some combination of these. Any one formulation remains a special

case but it is certainly an area for more modelling.'


'To make the point, consider in placeof (3)the inflation equation
       = $y + . What happens to relative price and output dynamics?
                                                         12—27



APPENDIX I

        This   appendix shows the reduced form equations of our complete

modi and develops the stability requirements. From equations (1) to

(6) we derive the equations determining the level of output and                             the   rate

of depreciation at a point in time:


(A—i)          y =               +              +
                      7r1(e—p)       rr2(h—p)           T13v


                 =
                      a1(e—p) + ci2(h-p) + a3v

where the following are the coefficients:


(A—2)                = Ca (0 —n)+cO g} /t2y                    = b (1-FO) (A —n) /ty
                                                          7r

               713
                     = Cc(l+0)(X—n)}/y          ;
                                                          a1 —{g—11

               a2 = {nf+b}/t                        ;
                                                               =   (i-f6)fAc}/t
                     = (0—n)+c0                 ; =(m—nk)/(l—c);y = (l—c);A=0/(l+O)

        The dynamics are defined by the evolution of relative prices and

real balances, omitting          the   constant trms and using equation (3)


(A—3)                 =                —
                          -4rr1(e—p)

(A—4)          e—p =
                          {a1(l+O)-4711}(e—p)+{a2(l-I-0)-47r2}(h—p)

        Stability of        this system requires that all the coefficients of                        in

the   characteristic        equation be positive:

(A—5)          2 + Cct (1ri +                              + (l-fO)(ir1a2 —            =0
                                     rr2)—(1-I-0)a1}
                                                 12—28




A sufficient condition for stability is:


(A—6)                                 0.
               cr1<O    0271 71•2 >




APPENDIX    II
        In this appendix we sketch an alternative model that                  allows    (i) for

a direct effect of depreciation on inflation, and (ii) uses an intervention

rule geared to the rate of real depreciation. Equations A—l and A—2 show

the new spcifications:


(4—1)                 (y—) +        + (l-a)ci


(A—2)          R/H =    •-O(—)

As before,we assume here that output depends only on the real exchange

rate and    that    money growth is determined by growth of domestic credit and

by the balance of payments, R/H:


(A—3)          Ii   = v -O(4)          ;       y = a(e—p)


        With these assumptions it is readily shown that a reduction in the

growth rate of domestic credit will lead to a reduction in the rate of

depreciation, with the possibility of overshooting:


(A—4)          d/dv = (l-ct)O/             ;    1=8 (1-a) (1+n)   —   n>0

where   we assume that

        Next   we note that the real exchange rate, on                impact, will be

appreciating        as credit growth is        reduced:
                                       12—29




(A—5)        d(e—p)/dv =   n(l—ct)/i

        Finally, real balances will, on impact, be growing due to the

contribution of reduced depreciation in reducing domestic inflation:


(A—6)        d(h—p)/dv = —nTh
                                       12—30




REFERENCES



BLLCK, S., (1973) International Money Markets and Flexible Exchange

      Rates, Princeton Studies in International Finance.

BILSON, J., (1979), "Virtuous and Vicious Circles.." IMP Staff Papers,

     March.

BRANSON, W., (1976), "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange Rate

      Determination. "Unpublished Manuscript, Institute for Interna-

      tional   Economic Studies, Stockholm.
CALVO, G., and Rodrigues, C., (1977), "A Model of Exchange Rate
      Determination   Under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations."

      Journal of Political Economy, June.

DOOLEY, M. and Isard, P., (1979), "The Portfolio Balance Model of Exchange

      Rates."    Unpublished Manuscript, Board of Governors of the Federal
      Reserve.
DORNBUSCH, R. (,l976),"Expertations    and Exchange Rate Dynamics."

      Journal of Political Economy.

DORNBUSCH, R. and Fischer, S., (l978) "Exchange Rates arid the Current

      Account." Unpublished Manuscript, MIT.

FLOOD, R. (1979), "An Example of Exchange Rate Overshooting." Southern

      Journal    of Economics, July.
FRANKEL, J. (1979), "On the Mark." American Economic Review, forthcoming.
GIRTON, L. and   Roper,   D. (1977), "A Monetary Model of Exchange Market

      Pressure Applied to the Postwar Canadian Experience." American

      Economic Review, September.
                                          12—3 1




HENDERSON, D. (1979), "The Dynamic Effects of Exchange Market Intervention

       Policy: Two Extreme Views and a Synthesis." Unpublished Manuscript,

       Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.

KOrJRRI,   P.K., (1976) ,"The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in
       the   Shortrun and in the Longrun." Scandinavian Journal of         Economics, 2.
___________ (1975) Three Essays on Flexible Exchange Rates, Unpublished
       Ph.D.   dissertation, M.I.T.

LIVIATAN, N. (1979), "Neutral Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax."

       Unpublished Manuscript, The Hebrew University.

MUSSA, N., (1976), "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and Monetary

       and Fiscal Policy Under a Regime of Controlled Floating." Scandinavian

       Journal of Economics, 2.

____________   (1979),   tI1croeconomic   Interdependence   and the Exchange Rate

       Regime."    In Dornbusch R. and Frenkel, J. (eds.), International

       Economic Policy, Johns Hopkins University Press.

RODRIGUES, C. (1977), "The. Role. of Trade Flows in Excha:ga       Rate   Determina-

       tion: A Rational Expectations Approach." Unpublished Manuscript,

       Columbia University.
