NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXCHANGE RATE RULES
AND MACROECONOMIC STABILITY

Rudiger Dornbusch

Working Paper No. 473

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

April 1980

Financial support was provided by a John Guggenheim
fellowship and a NSF research grant. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Economics. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 473
April, 1980

Exchange Rate Rules and Macroeconomic Stability

ABSTRACT

This paper discusses exchange rate rules in their role as
macroeconomic instruments. Two quite different approaches are pursued.
The traditional view is that exchange rate flexibility is a substitute
for money wage flexibility so that managed money and managed exchange
rates yield the necessary instruments for internal and external balance.

An entirely different persoective is offered by the modern macroeconomics of wage contracting and the longrun trade—off between the
stability of output and the stability of inflation. In this context it
is shown that exchange rate policies that seek to maintain real exchange
rates or coinpetiveness do stabilize output but do so at the cost of in-

creased inflation instability. Exchange rate rules such as full purchasing
power parity crawling pegs are the analogue of full monetary' accoinodation

of price disturbances.

R. Dornbusch
E5 2—357

M.I.T.

Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253—3648

Revised,October 1979

EXCHANGE RATE RULES AND MACROECONOMIC STABILITY*

Rudiger Dornbusch

I. INTRODUCTION:

This paper discusses exchange rate rules in their role
as macroeconomic instruments. We abstract throughout from the
trend part of exchange rate behaviour—— a crawling peg necessitated
by differences in trend inflation-- and emphasize instead the
implications of exchayige rate rules in providing flexibility of
real wages or in affecting the stability of output or prices.

Two. quite different approaches are explored. In Part II

we study the Hahn-Meade perspective where approaches to fullemployment and external balance are considered for various
combinations of active money and exchange rate management.
Here exchange rate policy is seen in terms of the implications
for the dynamics of adjustment to situations of disequilibrium.
The conclusion is that active money and active exchange rate
policy lead to complete control of the relevant macroeconomic
instruments and thus potentially to optimal policy making.
There are as yet no costs to disôretionary stabilization policy.

Part III approaches exchange rate rules from the
perspective of modern Phelps—Friedman macroeconomics.
Policy
is set in a stochastic macromodel and the question is asked how
alternative exchange rate and money rules affect the stochastic
(steady state) properties of the economy.
Costs of reduced

output variability through non-discretionary
active money
and exchange rate policies are shown.
The costs of active
accommodation policies lie in the increased persistence in
output and prices.
*

Financial

fc1 1rwzhir

support was provided by a John Simon Guggenheim
71P
ccir.h ,-i"i—y+-

nd .

2.

There is no integration of the two approaches.
They largely represent different views of the economy.

One emphasizes the shorturn and the optimism that accommodation,
-.
just once, cannot but be a blessing. The other does not

contemplate the isolated initial condition of "obvious" need for
accommodation but rather asks how an economy behaves where .gj

average policies are accommodating. The perspective is very
much a longrun one, but needless to say,a long period of
repeated accommodation cannot but generate the expectation that
such is the policy rule.

3.

II. MONEY, WAGES AND EXCHANGE RATES

In this section we present a first pass at the problem
of exchange rate arrangements by looking at the dynamics of a
simple model of a small open economy. To keep to essentials we
look only at the interactions of money, wages and the exchange

rate, leaving aside issues of financial markets. We also set
aside for the present issues of expectations.
The Model:

The economy we study is one that produces only
exportables and faces an imperfectly elastic world demand for
these goods. In the world market importables—-intermediates and

final goods-- are available in perfectly elastic supply. Home
employment is demand determined at a given wage that responds over
time to the state of the labor market. Home prices are cost-based.
Domestic aggregate spending depends on real income and the real
value of money. The composition of home spending between imports
and domestic output depends on relative prices.
Employment at home is demand determined. With a constant.
coefficient production function employment, L, is determined by
the level of home demand, D, plus foreign demand M*:
(1)

L=a(D+M*)

where a is the unit labor requirement.

Prices of domestic output, Pare determined by unit
labor and material costs:
(2)

P =

aW +

bE

where W is the màney wage and E is the exchange rate that proxies
the domestic currency price of imported intermediate goods.

4.

We define next the relative price of domestic goods in
terms of the price level. The latter is a geometric average of
home and import prices:

PX/P(P,E) =

(3),

O(W/E)

O'..> 0

where the elasticities of P are given by the expenditure shares

of domestic goods and imports respectively.1 Using (2) it is
apparent that the relative price of domestic goods rises as the
wage rate rises relative to the exchange rate or as we have a
"real appreciation".

The relative price of domestic goods in terms of
foreign goods, PX/E, is given from (2) as:

PX/E = a(W/E) + b

(4)

and is accordingly an increasing function of the W/E

w ratio.

With the relative price definitions we can turn to the

demand side of the economy. In the home country final demand
depends on relative prices, Ps/P, real income WL/P, and real
balances, H/P:
(5)

D =

D(P/P.,WL/P,H/P);

M=M(Px/P#WL/PH/P)

Exports depend on our prices relative to those abroad:

(6)

M*=M*(P x/E)

We complete the static model with the trade balance
equation:
(7)

1

B =

xM*

— EM - bE(D+M*)

i

With a Cobb Douglas price index P= PE S, with s is the
expenditure share of exportables, the relative price is:
= (aW+bE)/(aW+bE)SEl = (aW+bE)l S/El S = (aw+b)1 =0(w)

5.

Equilibrium:

There are three state variables in our system: wages,

the exchange rate and the nominal money stock. The real equilibrium is homogeneous of degree zero in these three variables.
We thus can solve for the level of employment, L, and for the
real balance of trade, , in terms of the real wage, W/Ew, and
the real money stock,
L =•L(w,h)

(8)

< 0

Lh > 0

and

=(w,h) w< h<°

(9)

We assume in (8) and (9) that a rise in the real wage
and hence in the relative price of domestic goods lowers demand
for domestic goods and employment and worsens the balance of trade.

A rise in the real money supply expands demand, raises employment
and worsens the trade balance.

In Figure 1 we show the static model. The schedule
LL shows combinations of real wages and real money such that the
demand determined level of employment is equal to the existing
labor force. •Along LL we thus have fullemployment. Above and to
the left there is unemployment and below and to the right there
is overemployment. Along BB we have balanced trade. Above and to
the right the level of spending or the relative price of domestic
goods are too high so that there is a deficit; below and to the
left of BB there are is a surplus. At point Q we have internal
and external balance.
2

We use the term "real" here to refer not to the variables

deflated by the price level but rather by the exchange rate.

6.

W/E

)

B

L

w
0

'4

B

0

H/E

h0

FIGURE 1

7.

Dynamics:

We turn now to the adjustment process that governs the
economy when it is outside full equilibrium at . We assume

throughout that money wages adjust slDwly and in response to
labor market disequilibrium.
The remaining dynamics are then
controlled by the monetary and exchange rate policies that are
Table 1 shows the possible combinapursued.
tions of fixed settings, balance of payments determined settings
and actively managed settings.

EXCHANGE PATE
Fixed

BoP

Managed

Fixed

I

II

III

B0P

IV

V

VI

Managed

VII

VIII

MONEY
IX.

TABLE 1: POLICY REGIMES
The pure regimes are, of course, the fixed rate-gold
standard variety that is shown as IV and the flexible rate,

fixed money case of II. They are shown in Figure 2 as possible

adjustment processes. Starting from a point of unemployment and
surplus the flexible rate regime implies an immediate appreciation to restore external balance and a subsequent adjustment via
wage reduction until point Q is reached. Fully flexible rates
thus imply that the immediate appreciation will, in the first
place, worsen the employment situation since it involves an
appreciation A to A'.

Adjustment under a fixed rate with monetary discipline
is shown by the path originating at A. The path involves
wage
adjustment to achieve competitiveness
and wage and money adjust
ment to gain external balance. Wages will fall in response to
unemployment above the LL line and the money stock will rise in
response to the balance of payments surplus below and to the
left of the EB line. The adjustment here may be cyclical.

8.

• W/E
B

B

H/E

0

FIGURE 2

9.

A third possibility is a regime of managed money
and fixed rates or flexible rates with managed money. The latter
is also shown by a path along the BB schedule in Figure 2, but
it involves an adjustment process that is faster then under

fixed money and flexible rates. It thus clearly dominates
the latter regime, since it uses a "free" instrument to
accelerate the return to fullemployment.

The fixed rate with managed money is shown in Figure 3
by a path originating at A. With a monetary rule linked both
to the balance of trade and to employment we have:
(10)

h =

(w,h)

+

Ø(L-L(w,h))

so that unemployment leads to an expansion in money over and above

what arises from the automatic balance of payments process. The
case is shown in Figure 3 where h=O corresponds to zero money
growth in the managed system. The approach to the equilibrium at
Q may either be direct or, with a monetary policy that is strongly employment oriented, a clockwise half-cycle.3

3To ensure stability we require that the h=0 schedule not

coincide with the LL schedule since otherwise we would not
converge to longrun external balance.

10.

B

/
/

A

T

L

/

(=o)

/
/
B=0

h

FIGURE 3

11.

Managed Exchange Rates:

The managed exchange rate and managed money case
represents a yet improved arrangement. Here the authorities
control directly the rate of change of the-real-variables w
and h that matter for external balance. Given the adjustment
-

process fo money wages; the possibility of choosing both the
exchange rate movement and that of money implies that the
authorities can chose the
evolution of both real wages and
real money:
-

(11)

= cz(w,h)

and

=

(w,h)

The functions c*(w,h) and (w,h) can be chosen so as to maximize
social welfare and improve on the path of the mixed systems of
fixed or flexible rates with managed money. The system can be
chosen to be more employment oriented then the alternative

arrangements discussed above. That advantage arises here from the
central feature of a managed rate namely that it makes the rate
of change of the real wage apolicy instrument.
The advantage of the fully managed system can be seen,
for example, by comparison with the fixed rate- managed money
system. In the latter case a policy highly oriented toward

employment requires an overshooting of domestic demand. Given a
position of initial unemployment and surplus the policy involves
falling wagesand money creation. Money creation proceeds rapidly and continues even while the external balance goes into deficit.
The creation and maintenance of domestic demand through money
creation ultimately has to give room to employment created through
increased competitiveness; there will thus be a reversal when the

deficit becomes dominant and money is being contracted while the
continuing decline in real wages generates increasing employment
and increasing net exports.
A fully managed system could shape
the dynamics to avoid such an overshooting.

12.

Lags:

The stabilizing potential of a fully managed system
can also be appreciated if we recognize the possibility of

adjustment lags. Suppose in particular thá€the substitution
in response to a relative price change is not achieved
instantaneously but rather occurs gradually. In that event
employment and the trade balance can be written as a function
of both actual real wages, w, and the variable
which governs
substitution and can be interpreted
as the longrun expected
real wage:
(12)

L =
=

L(w,,h)

L>O, L—O,

(w,,h)

Lh>O;

w>o

h<0

<O

in (12) the income effect of a rise in the real
wage raises employment and improves the trade balance; the
substitution effect worsens employment and the trade balance. The
net effect of an equiproportionate rise in w and w is assumed,
as before, to be a reduced level of employment and a worsening
of the external balance.

We combine the employment and trade balance equations
in (12) with an adjustment rule for expectations:
(13)

W = g(w-w)
It is immediately recognized that this system under

fixed rates and monetary "discipline"flV05 the possibility
of instability. An increase in wages improves the external balance
and leads to an increase in money which raises employment and thus
contributes to a further wage inflation. With substitution slow
and induced import spending small there is a possibility of
instability. Under flexible rates the system would certainly

13.

possess the potential for instability since now wage inflation
leads in the first place to appreciation but appreciation Only
further raises real wages and widens the external imbalance.
The managed exchange rate system can be used in this
context to stabilize the system and assure convergence.; it
avoids the massive exchange rate movements implied by the
J—curve under flexible rates and the uncertainty about
stability under fixed rates.
With incomplete information on the structure of the
economy Mundell's idea of the principle of effective market
classification becomes helpful. To achieve stability we want to
gear the instrurnents,and their speeds of adjustment, in the manner
suggested by (11) ':

(11)'

i = 6(L(w,w,h) -

L);

1i =

Y(w,w,h)

Actively managed money and real exchange rates here
compensate for the potential instability arising from the J-curve.
Of course, more complicated rules, requiring more information on
the structure of the economy, can take into account balance of
payments constraints or employment objectives in the adjustment
process.

Summary:

The advantage of a managed rate system that
was pointed out concerns the gain of an extra policy instrument

involved in the managed flexibility. The authorities
gain
control over the rate of adjustment of real wages and can thus
stabilize a system that would otherwise be unstable or chose
a path that involves higher employment or smaller deficits then
would be possible under alternative managed systems.
So far the extra flexibility has come without cost.

These costs arise possibly from the incompatibility of the
rule with financial stability, from confidence
exchange rate
about the discretion that is involved or from adverse feedback
of the exchange rate path--compared with fixed or flexible

14.

III. EXCHANGE RATE RULES, PERSISTENCE OF INFLATIONARY
SHOCKS AND ECONOMIC STABILITY.

In this part we draw on the' modern macroeconomics of

contracting and rational expectations, in particular the
exciting formulation by Taylor {1979}. We approach the question
of exchange rate rules in the context of a stochastic macroeconomic setting. In that context we show that an exchange rate

rule along purchasing power parity lines PPP for short} with
an adjustment for external imbalance, will reduce the variabili—
ty of output but will also, through its effects on wage contracts,
lengthen the persistence of inflationary shocks.

The literature on exchange rate rules in a stochastic
setting started with Fischer {1976} who discussed fixed versus
flexible rates as exchange rate regimes in economies with
nominal and real shocks. Subsequent work along these lines

includes Enders and Lapan {1978}. Barro {1978} extended the
Lucas model to an open economy and contributions by Frenkel
{1976} and Weber {1978} addressed the question.of optimal intervention rules,as did Boyer {l978}. In particular the distinction
between nominal and real shocks receives emphasis in this context
and, in line with the original Lucas model, there is little

scope for persistence. An alternative approach is suggested
here by looking not only at the relation of the exchange rate
rule to stability of output and relative prices, but also at
the costs in terms of increased persistence of shocks.

Taylor's contribution is of importance in the context
of exchange rate rules because a policy of accommodating price
level disturbances, as is implied by a PPP rule, will in a
setting of overlapping longterm wage contracts imply that labor
need be less concerned with the unemployment effects of high
wage settlements and that accordingly price disturbances will be
more fully reflected in wages and therefore in future prices.

15.

A PPP policy, just as an• accommodating monetary policy in
Taylor's model, will tend to increase the persistence of price
disturbances. To the extent that the exchange rate reacts to

trade imbalance, in addition or in place of a direct PPP rule,
there will also be a contribution to the stability of output,
but again at the cost of increased persistence of inflationary
shocks.
1. The Model

The basic model is a log-linear rendition of the small
open economy that faces given world prices, but has a downward
sloping demand for her exports. Output is demand determined
given the price is set by longterm wage contracts. The model,
in terms of deviations from trend, follows:
y = f{e-p} + g[m-p} + v
{141
T = f{e-p} - ky + V
{15}
{16)

m=ep

L7}

e = op - n{f(e—p)+v}
Equation l4} shows the aggregate demand function.

Relative prices {e-p}, real balances {m-p}and a white noise shift term,v,

determine the level of demand for domestic output. Equation 15}
shows the external balance depending on relative prices, income
and again the shift term, v, which thus represents a shift in
demand toward domestic output and associated trade surplus.
The policy rules are shown in equations {16} and {17}. In

equation {3} nominal money is shown to respond with elasticity Oto
price shocks. The exchange rate, in{l7}, is set by reference to
the price level and the cyclically adjusted trade balance.1

1The cyclical adjustment is appropriate because the income
variable is a noisy signal for the appropriate direction of
exchange rate change. A trade improvement might arise from a
negative supply shock or from a demand shift of from a fall in
aggregate demand.

16.

Solving the system for the real exchange rate from
{17} yields:

{18J

e—p =

—ir{l—}p

—

nlrv

fr

1

Substituting

the real exchange rate and the money rule in the
aggregate demand functions yields the equation for output:

{19}

y = — Øp +

liv

;

f{

0

l—5}ir+g {l—O}

The output equation shows that an increase in price
will reduce output unless there is full PPP and full money

accommodation. This is, of course, a standard result for a
homogeneous system. The equation also reveals that the impact
of price shocks on demand is mitigated by the exchange rate feedback. The price drange mitigates the adverse effects directly
through the partial PPP accommodation but also through the
impact of the exchange rate on the trade balance and thus on the
exchange rate. The term ii measures the dampening effect of the
feedback of price disturbances via the trade balance on demand.
The trade balance feedback on the exchange rate serves

also to dampen the impact of demand shifts on output. A demand
shift improves the trade balances and thus leads to an
appreciation. The induced appreciation dampens the impact of the
demand shift on output.

Consider next the variability of output and relative

prices that is generated by the disturbances and their interaction with the policy instruments. The variance of output and
and

relati.ve prices are respectively

{20)

2

22+ 22
li

= 0

a

2

=

2

{l—) 22

+

222
li

17.

where 2 is the {asymptojic} variance of price to be discussed
later. From (2O} it is apparent that the variab.ility of output
will be more or less than that of relative prices depending on
the extent of monetary accominodationo , and on the relative price
elasticity of demand. Little accommodation and a high price
elasticity tend to raise the variability of output relative to
that of relative prices.
Equations Czo} suggest the possibility of choosing policy
parameters with a perspective of minimizing the variability of

output or relative prices. That approach is not pursued here
because, as {20) shows, there is no trade-off as yet. The next
step is to draw on Taylor's work to show that policies which
reduce the variability of output and relative prices are also
policies that raise the persistence of disturbances, and raise
the variability of prices.

2. Pricing a la Taylor:

Tayloi's model of output and price de€ermination assumes

two—period, overlapping labor contracts. Labor contracts current
ly entered into set the wage, x, with reference to existing

and expected
contracts, x_1, expected new settlements,
excess demand y and ÷1 during the length of the contract.
A denotes here an expectation, given the model and information
available atti.me t-l. The wage rule studied by Taylor is:
{21}

x =

bx1

+ dx1 + y{b + dy1 1+ u ;

bE l-d

The wage determination process emphasizes both the

relative wage argument and cyclical effects on wages. Rational
expectations are introduced to allow for unbiased, forecasts of

excess demand levels and future settlements. The term u is white
noise in the wage process.
Prices are determined on the basis of wages. In
particular prices are set equal to the "average",wage, .5 {x+x1}:

18.

p =

{22}

.5 {x+x_1}

Taylor shows that if aggregate demand can be written
as:

y=-p+v

{23}

equals unity less the coefficient of monetary accommoda-

where

tion, then from {21},{22} and {23 } the stochastic steady state wage

process is:

bc_1 —

{24}

c+

d1 =

0

;

c :{l+.5y}/{l—.5y}

and the price process is:
a E{l/2d}{c -

p = ap_1 + .5{u + u_1} ;

{25}

{c2-4d{l-d}

.5

a

Taylor

notes that increased accommodation, by reducing
stabilize output. But, and this is the point of his
,
paper, there is a cost in terms of an increased persistence in
the effect of a disturbance. This is so because the coefficient

will

a in the price equation is a function of the policy parameter .
For subsequent reference we note the
asymptotic variance of price:
{26}

2 =

p

1/4

2

2

{l—a}

{2 + a}a U;

a a{}; cz'< 0

3. Extension to The Open Economy:

While the structure of the model developed in section
1 above is more complicated than the Taylor economy it is still

obvious that the reduced form equation for output in {6} is of
Accordingly we can directly borrow
the same form as {23T.
Taylor's price equation. The only change we have to make is
the substitution of the parameterØ inpiace of his .

}

19.

With this adaptation, and with a as the measure of the
persistence of disturbances, the following results will hold:
First, exchange rate policy that follows a PPP pattern is
characterized by a valueof 6 close orequal to one. That policy,
just as monetary accommodation in Taylor's model, will raise
the persistence of disturbances. Second, an exchange rate feedback with respect to the trade balance,characteriZed by the
,r or r1in our model, will again tend to raise the persistence of

disturbances. Indeed, from the point of view of the persistence
of price shocks it is immaterial whether the accommodation arises
through monetary accommodation, PPP exchange rate accommodation
or throuqh the effect of trade imbalance on the exchange rate.
The persistence of disturbances in their impact on
output can be noted by substituting the price equation in {12},
with, a=a {Ø}, into the output equation in {6}to obtain:
{27}

y =

ay1

—

.5 {u+u_1}

+ v —

av_1}

We note here that demand disturbances do not have a
protracted effect on output, because they are not serially
correlated. Wages are set before their realization and with an

expectation that E {v} =0. By contrast price disturbances do
affect output over tiI[, and it takes output below normal to
depress the wage and price level if it has risen above normal.
In summary then, an exchange rate rules like {17}with
a partial PPP aspect and a feedback to the current account will

raise the persistence of disturbances overture both with
respect to output and with respect to prices; this must be
seen as the cost of an exchange rate regime that attempts to
maintain competitiveness and external balance. The regime
does—— with the qualification noted earlier—- serve to lower
the variability of output, but it does so at the cost of
increased variability and persistence of prices.

20.

There is some possibility for reducing output
variance without raising persistence, though. We can maintain
constant the term 0 in {6} by raising the reaction of the

exchange rate to the trade balance, , thus reducing , but
choosing an offsetting reduction in cS ore.With $ and hence
persistence constant we still have the benefit of a reduction
in the variance of both output and relative prices.

IV - CONCLUDING REMARKS

This paper has asked to what extent exchange rate
flexibility or rules that link exchange rates to macroeconomic
objectives can help stabilize the economy. As a first approximation we found that active exchange rate policy implies more

flexibility in competitive positions and therefore potentially
higher employment and a better trade position than would arise
along a path governed by unemployment.

The next step was to recognize that active exchange
rate policy, once it is recognized by the public, cannot but
start affecting the wage-price process itself. In this context,
drawing on Taylor's work, we showed that an accommodating
exchange rate policy will enhance the persistence of disturbances,
even though it dampens their variability. There is thus a clear

trade-off. A more accommodating policy gives rise to protracted
deviations from fullemployment and price stability.
The rational expectations perspective is an important
reminder for policy makers of an activist persuasion (the good
guys), because it draws attention to a clear—cut cost that has
not received sufficient attention in the formal literature.

21.

REFERENCES:
BARRO, R. , "A Stochastic Equilibrium Model of an Open Economy
Under Flexible Exchange Rates." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
February, 1978.

BOYER, R. , "Optimal Foreign Exchange Market Intervention."
Journal of Political Economy, December 1978.
FISCHER, S. , "Stability and Exchange Rate System in a Monetarist
Model of the Balance of Payments." in Aliber, R.A. (ed.).
-

The Political Economy of Monetary Reform, Allen and Unwin,
1973.

FRENKEL, J. , "The Demand for International Reserves."

Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago, 1977.
HAHN, F., "The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments."
Journal of International Economics, 7, 1977.
LAPAN, H. , and Enders, W. , "Random Disturbances and the Choice
of Exchange Rate Regimes in an Intergenerational Model."

Unpublished Manuscript, Iowa State University, 1979.

LIVIATAN, N., "Neutral Monetary Policy and the Capital Import
Tax." Unpublished Manuscript, Hebrew University, 1979.
MUNDELL, R.A., International Economics, Macmillan, 1978.
"Exchange Rate Margins and Economic Policy." in C.Murphy (ed.),
Money in the International Order, Southern Methodist Press,
1964.

MUSSA, M. , "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and
Monetary and Fiscal Policy Under a Regime of Controlled

Floating." Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2, 1976.

22.

PARKIN, M., "The Transition from Fixed Exchange Rates to
Money Supply Targets." Journal of Money, Credit and Bankincj,
February, 1977.

PURVIS, D., "Wage Responsiveness and the Ifisulation Properties
of Flexible Exchange Rate System." Unpublished Manuscript,

Queens University, 1977.
TAYLOR, J., "Staggered Wage Setting in a Macro Model." American
Economic Review, May 1979..

WEBER, W., "Output Variability Under Monetary Policy and Exchange
Rate Rules in a Rational Expectations International Trade
Model." Unpublished Manuscript, University of Virginia, 1979.

