                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INTERACTIONS BETWEEN INFLATION AND
    TRADE-REGIME OBJECTIVES IN STABILIZATION PROGRAMS


                     Anne 0.   Krueger



                  Working Paper No. 1T5




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                        May 1980




This paper was prepared for the Brookings Institution
Conference on Economics Stabilization in Developing
Countries, October 25—26, 1919 in Washington, DC. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research pro-
ject in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper 475
                                                                   May, 1980




        Interactions Between Inflation and Trade—Regime
             Objectives in Stabilization Programs


                             ABSTRACT




     This   paper examines the relationship between macroeconomic objectives

of controlling inflation and trade—regime objectives in stabilization

programs of developing countries. It is seen that there need be, in

principle, no close relationship between the two, as a crawling peg

exchange—rate policy can prevent inflation from affecting the perfor-

mance of the foreign sector. In practice, trade regime objectives

have been linked with inflation—reducing objectives, often to the detri-

ment of resource allocation and growth. Differences between devaluation

under liberalized regimes and under exchange control are also examined.




                                               anne 0. Krueger
                                               Department of Economics
                                               1035 Business Administration
                                               271 19th Avenue South
                                               Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455

                                               (612) 373—3655
                                                           1




                        Table of Contents



Table of Contents                                               1

List of Tables                                                  2

Introduction                                                    3

The Price-Level Exchange-Rate Trade-Regime Relationship.        4
     Growth under Alternative Trade Regimes.                    8
     Inflation and Growth                                      13

     Altering the Trade Regime                                 14

     Costs of Reducing the Inflation Rate                      16

Interactions between Inflation and the Trade Regime            18

     Payments Deficit                                          22

     Liberalizing the Trade Regime                             25

Stabilization Programs and Long-Term Development               29

     Objectives                                                33

     Preexisting Conditions                                    35

     Policies                                                  39

Trade-Offs in Stabilization Program                            46

     Short-Run versus Long-Run                                 46

     Gradualism versus Shock                                   48

     Foreign Borrowing versus Recession                        49

Implications for Donor Countries                               50

Footnotes                                                      5
Bibliography                                                   62
                                                          2



                       List of Tables

Table 1. Characterization of Alternative Market Interactions.    6

Table 2. Financial Programs as a Component of Stabilization

  Programs, 79 Countries, 1963-72                               41
                                                                3




       Interactions Between Inflation and Trade—Regime

            Objectives in Stabilization Programs


                        Introduction

     Examination of the relationship between macro-economic

growth and the trade objectives of stabilization programs is

an exceptionally difficult assignment. There are three separate

bodies of relevant literature --   relating   to trade regimes, to

inflation and its causes and consequences, and to the determi-

nants of economic growth -- each of which is pertinent to the

analysis and each of which has numerous points of contention. This

in itself makes the assignment challenging. In addition, the sorts

of problems that arise with inflation, with trade and payments

regimes, and with development strategies in general, are sufficiently

different between countries so that no single model is appropriate

for all of them.

     To make the task manageable, I propose to start by setting

forth a very elementary framework for analyzing the relationship

between the trade regime and monetary-macro aggregates. Within

this framework, it is readily seen that, in principle, the interaction

between different types of inflation and the trade regimes can be

minimal. The costs of altering either the anticipated rate of

inflation or the nature of the trade regime, and the effects of

those states and changes on economic growth, are then briefly set

forth. The next section of the paper then examines the more
                                                           4



prevalent case in which the authorities' efforts to contain inflation

are reflected in a trade regime and real exchange rate different

from that which would be chosen in the absence of the inflationary

pressures, and traces the interaction between inflation and the

trade regime. With that background, the next section then sets

forth a classification of types of stabilization programs and

analyzes the sorts of policy issues that arise in each category and

their relationship to economic development. A final section examines

the main trade-offs that arise in deciding on the components of a

stabilization program.


   The Price Level - Exchange Rate - Trade Regime Relationship

     Depending on the question at hand, the appropriate model for

analyzing any one of the three topics indicated in the section heading

can be quite different. Determination of the price level is a macro—

monetary phenomenon, although in the short run cost—push and microeconomic

phenomena (such as a good harvest) can enter into its determination.

In an open economy with full convertibility and no quantitative

restrictions upon international transactions, the exchange rate is

likely to be a monetary phenomenon as well. If, however, quantitative

restrictions apply to a large number of international transactions, the

exchange rate will also be an important variable in affecting two

significant relative prices: that between home goods and tradable

goods, and that between the domestic prices of exportables and of

import-competing goods. Finally, the trade regime itself consists of
                                                            5



the policies and instruments used by a country to achieve two

targets, the first being the relationship between domestic prices

of import-competing and exportable goods and the second, balance in

transactions between residents and foreigners.

     In principle, appropriate use of policy instruments can achieve

total separation of the causes and consequences of the rate of prict

level increase from any impact upon the trade regime. Such a

circumstance is seldom found in the real world (although as will be

argued the sliding peg regime can provide a fairly close approximation

to it), but it is useful to establish the basic relationships. Within

that context, analysis of alternative trade regimes, and their causes

and consequences for economic growtI can be carried out.

     Table 1 provides a schematic representation of the three markets

and their relationship to trade regimes. The basic proposition

underlying the analysis is that for any price level, there correspoid.

an exchange rate which will leave the real variables in the system

unaltered. This is nothing other than an application of the dichotomy

to the international arena: if all demand and supply functions are

homogeneous of degree zero in prices and money income, then it follows

that for any rate of increase in the money supply, there is a

corresponding (and equal) proportionate appreciation or depreciation

of the currency that will leave all excess demand functions in the

system unaltered by the change)'
                                                               6




Table 1. Characterization of Alternative Market Interactions


                Flexible

                Exchange         Payments       Exchange

                Rate             Deficit        Control

Traded Goods    clears           deficit         clears
                 d =              d               d        *
Market                                =               =
                       Ep                 E*              Ep
                   =             p = E(l+t)p
                       E(l+t)p                  p >       E(l+t)p
Money Market    clears           surplus        clears
                                                mmS
Home Goods      clears at        clears at      clears at

                Ph/E = (Ph/E)o Ph/E > (Ph/E)o    Ph/E      (Ph/Eo)
                                                               7



     The three markets involved are traded goods, home goods, and

the money market.?1' Under a flexible exchange rate regime, all

three markets clear with individuals free to carry out their desirei

transactions at prevailing prices. The traded goods market clears

with the exchange rate (price of foreign exchange) E, equating the

foreign prices of the home country's importable and exportable

foreign prices of the home country's importable and exportable

(p and p) with foreign prices of the same goods, denoted with an

asterisk. The term (1 +   t)   is included in the import price relation

to indicate that flexible exchange rates are compatible with any

tariff structure and level of desired prOtection for import-competing

industries, a point to which we shall return below. Under flexible

exchange rates, the money market naturally clears, as does the market

for home goods. For later reference, it is convenient to note that

we have denoted the market clearing price for home goods under

flexible exchange rates as (ph/E)°. This notation is useful in

that the home goods market always clears: what differentiates

different regimes is the relative price of home goods (and therefore

their relative importance in domestic production): a higher market—

clearing price for home goods corresponds to greater domestic production

and, of course, consumption of those goods.-"

     Under a flexible-rate regime, any change in the anticipated

rate of inflation is reflected in a shift in the excess demand

function for foreign exchange. Abstracting from short-run phenomena
                                                               8




(such as J-curve responses of exports and imports to the changed

short-run price of tradable goods relative to home goods), the

market for tradable. goods will be unaffected in real terms.


Thus, if inflation were perfectly anticipated, the time path of the

exchange rate and the domestic price level would coincide in such a

way that the relative price of tradable and home goods remained

stable.

     To be sure, inflation is never smooth and perfectly anticipated.

Under fixed exchange rates, the real exchange rate is affected, and

to that attention will turn below. For present purposes, however,

the central point is that there is a way in which the payments

regime can be fairly well insulated from the effects of inflation:

permitting or insuring that the real exchange rate is not influenced

by changes in the domestic price level.-" For purposes of analysis,

it is useful first to proceed to discuss the costs of inflation and

the costs of alternative trade regimes on the assumption that inflation

does not affect the real rate of exchange and that the real exchange

rate does not affect the rate of inflation.


Growth under Alternative Trade Regimes

     In the context of developing countries' economies, the key link

between the trade regime and economic growth is the way in which the

trade regime is employed in relation to the domestic growth pattern.

Economic theory tells us that new resources should be allocated

among tradable-goods industries in such a way that at the margin
                                                              9



resources devoted to saving a dollar of foreign exchange should be

the same as the marginal resources devoted to earning a dollar of

foreign exchange. However, there is also a need on the part of

developing countries to provide infant industry support to many of

these activities. Such support can be of several kinds, but prominent

among the techniques used in many developing countries has been the

trade regime: it has been employed to protect domestic producers

against competition from imports. Such a policy, import substitution

(IS), has generally resulted implicitly or explicitly in discouragement

of exports. The alternative means of encouraging growth of tradable

goods industries consists of providing incentives primarily for

production, in which case it usually results that a large fraction

of incremental output is exported. Very often, encouragement is

given to exports directly.

      For a variety of reasons, most countries seem to have

industrialization and trade policies that result in a significant

bias toward either export promotion (EP) or IS. The extent of bias

is defined as the degree to which the ratio of the domestic prices of

importables to exportables diverges from their international price

ratio. Thus, using the terminology of Table 1 and assuming the

appropriate aggregation across commodity categories has been performed,

bias, B, can be defined as:


                          d    1*
(1)                 B=1/
                     P/
                                                              10



The greater the divergence of B from unity in either direction,

the more biased the regime. Bs greater than unity represent a

bias toward import substitution, while those less than unity

represent biases toward export promotion.

    Without going into the reasons in any great detail, IS regimes

tend to become increasingly biased toward IS over time as export

earnings fail to grow as rapidly as demand for imports, as the

exchange rate tends to be set at unrealistic levels, as the

incremental value of output per unit of investment decreases with

small sizes of domestic markets and as opportunities for further

[S diminish rapidly. Also, IS regimes often tend increasingly

toward quantitative restrictions upon imports, and fairly detailed

quantitative controls over domestic economic activity. All of

these phenomena seem to result in a fairly unsatisfactory rate of

economic growth for the countries undertaking the policies. A

simplistic summary of experience with rs for most developing countries

would be that, after opportunities for "easy" IS were exhausted,

growth rates have tended to slow significantly, either secularly,

or in a stop-go pattern as foreign exchange availability has

determined the rate at which the economy could grow. For present

purposes, it should be noted that one of the self—reinforcing

phenomena with IS is that the implicit discouragement of export

growth tends to increase the apparent "shortage" of foreign exchange.
                                                              11




     The built-in tendency for IS to decelerate as it continues may

be the most important long—run growth cost of IS regimes, but there

are also others that should be noted briefly. Chief among these is

that IS regimes tend to promote a fairly indiscriminate pattern of

industrial development. High-cost, inefficient industries develop

alongside lower-cost potentially efficient ones. Even where the

domestic market for the product is sufficiently large to permit

efficient-size plants to be established, low—cost firms have

difficulty expanding at a rate much faster than the rate of growth

of domestic demand. Low-cost and high-cost firms therefore tend

to expand pan passu, in part because the disincentive to export is

so great that few firms can profitably do so, and in part because

controls tend to set up quasi-monopoly positions for individual firms

that insure maintenance of market share: allocation of rights to

import scarce intermediate goods and raw materials very often rigidify

individual firms' market shares. To be sure, not all of these costs

of an IS regime are inevitable, as alternative means of fostering IS

can have significantly different results. Nonetheless, the evidence

strongly suggests significant tendencies in this direction.

     Export promotion policies can also be carried out in a variety

of ways, some superior to others. The reader should bear in mind

that the definition of bias indicates the extent to which an EP

strategy is followed: all countries have "export promotion"

strategies, but in many cases those strategies are really only a means
                                                               12




of   offsetting some of the disincentives built into the system by

IS policies, as IS industries receive stronger incentives still.

In those cases, exports often consist of "excess capacity" output

of IS industries, and do not necessarily represent industries with

long—run comparative advantage.

       The   reasons that countries which have genuinely biased their
regimes toward export promotion have tended to experience more

satisfactory    growth rates can be summed up asthe counterpart of

the IS problems: stop-go patterns do not seem to emerge due to

foreign exchange bottlenecks; efficient low-cost firms can expand

very rapidly well beyond the limits of the domestic market; and

domestic monopoly positions do not spring up as firms are forced

to compete for their customers abroad and heed quality control and

specifications.      In addition, despite bias toward EP, the extent of

the bias cannot get too great: countries adopting IS with the

domestic price of importables twice or more the international

price are frequently noted; countries with EP with a bias of more

than 25 or 30 percent towards exports are rare.

       From this brief glimpse of the factors differentiating growth

patterns under EP and IS,.1 it is evident that there can be significant

impacts upon economic growth rates by the choice of strategy adopted.

But, in the presence of a fairly convertible exchange rate permitted

to move with changes in the rate of inflation, it is not evident

that the rate of inflation need be a factor in the choice of trade

strategy: the two are or can be independent.
                                                            13



Inflation and Growth

     There is presently in economics a revival of interest in the

costs of inflation, and little time need be spent on them here.

As inflation accelerates, transactions costs rise and individuals

seek stores of value to replace money in that function. These can

be costly activities, as potentially productive resources (such as

those producing gold and real estate), are diverted to providing a

store of value with little increase in society's real product

resulting. In addition, to the extent that countries have geared

their spending and taxing policies to stable prices, the costs of

the distortions introduced by the tax system may be quite large.

Finally, in cases where there is credit rationing and borrowers

are paying negative real rates of interest, as has occurred in

many LDCs, significant resource misallocation can arise on that

account.

     These costs may be highly significant, and it is not intended

to minimize their importance. There is little hard evidence,

however, that the rate of inflation itself affects the rate of

growth via these channels. Given the structure of production in

most developing countries, it is likely that the biggest impact

of inflation on growth in LDCs has arisen when the underlying premise

of this section has been violated: a major and detrimental impact

of inflation has been the erosion of the real exchange rate with

significant results for the country's trade and payments position
                                                             14



and the nature of its trade regime. It is these costs which must

be analyzed in order to evaluate the impact of stabilization programs

upon economic growth.


Altering the Trade Regime.

     If bias toward IS were provided only by tariffs or export

subsidies, alteration of the trade regime could be accomplished

by altering the tariff or subsidy rates. However, as already

stated, IS policies are often carried out through quantitative

restrictions,   and alteration of the bias of the regime entails
shifting from reliance upon QRs to reliance upon prices, and may
indeed involve replacing the bias imparted by QRs with a similar

bias imparted by tariffs.

     One of the difficulties of altering trade regimes is that the

extent of bias is frequently not known. Especially when QRs are

important, it turns out that a move from QRs to tariffs alters the

bias of the regime much more than intended by the authorities: they

are simply unaware of the protective equivalent of the quotas..

     Regardless of the way in which bias toward IS is reduced,Z1' re-

source reallocation will follow. Should the profitability of existinrJ

industries be reduced (as for example if there is an increase in

the value of import licenses issued) without any offsetting stimulus

to other industries, a reduction in the level of economic activity

is the likely outcome. This is especially the case if expansion of

the industries whose relative profitability has increased will require
                                                               15




investments to expand capacity, while output can contract innediate1y

in IS industries. For, entrepreneurs without experience in exporting

activities may be very reluctant to base large-scale investments

upon the expectation that they can profitably sell international

markets: on one hand, they may be inexperienced in those markets

and be unaware of the opportunities facing them; on the other hand,

they may be well aware of those opportunities, but fear that the

altered bias of the trade regime (with a more favorable real

exchange rate) may not last, thereby rendering investment unprofitable.

     These considerations pinpoint two aspects of any adjustment

process which involves a shift in the bias of the regime: on one

hand, there is likely to be something of a disparity between the

rate at which existing industry cuts back production and the rate

at which potentially new industries increase output;' on the other
hand, the role of expectations is crucial in determining how significant

and long-lived the disparity is. If entrepreneurs are convinced that

the change in incentives is permanent, the disparity may not last long.

If, on the other hand, there are significant doubts about the ability

of the authorities to maintain the new relative price structure, output

of industries encouraged by the former bias of the regime may contract

while there are few moves made to start increasing output along new

lines. It is this latter case in which the growth costs of a shift

in the trade regime can be potentially substantial.

     It seems evident, therefore, that an attempt to alter the bias

of a trade regime should be accompanied by some stimulus to activity
                                                           16



in the newly-profitable industries, and perhaps also some increase

in the general level of aggregate demand to offset whatever decline

will come about in the adversely-affected industries. The severity

of the downward pressure on the level of economic activity depends

upon a number of factors, including the degree to which bias is

being altered, the height of the protective barriers being reduced,

the degree of uncertainty as to the permanence of the altered

incentive structure, and the length of time the incentive structure

has been in place. Even in the absence of any inflationary pressures

or other objectives, a policy shift with regard to trade strategies

is likely, therefore, to entail some short—run costs in terms of the

rate of economic growth. If the shift is successful, however, the

short-term loss may be earning a relatively high rate of return in

the form of improved resource allocation and more rapid growth in

future periods. A major question, of course, is how the costs of

such a shift may be minimized and, simultaneously, the extent to

which policies can be introduced to offset part or all of the short—

term losses. It seems best, however, to consider that question in

the context of a total stabilization policy package.


Costs of Reducing the Inflation Rate

     Little needs to be said here about the difficulties involved in

reducing the rate of inflation in developing countries. There have

been a few notable instances of successful, and fairly painless, sharp
                                                           17



drops in the rate of inflation, but they are the exception rather

than the rule. Israel in the mid-l950s, Turkey in 1958-59, and

South Korea in the late l950s and early 1960s are three countries

that were able successfully to bring about a reduction in their

inflation rates of two-thirds or more. In those instances there

was little retardation in the rate of economic growth.!'
     A more prevalent pattern appears to be one in which "stabi1izatio

programs are adopted, and some deceleration of inflation occurs.

That deceleration, however, is accompanied by recession. In some

instances, such as Brazil in the mid-1960s, the costs of stabilization

in the form of below-capacity output were borne for several years,

until the inflation rate had been significantly reduced. Even more

frequently, however, recession and its effects have put such

pressure on the political authorities that the stabilization attempt

has been abandoned. The Chilean experience of the 1950s and 1960s

seems to have been characterized by this sort of stabilization)-W

The cost of reduced inflation was recession, and resumption of

economic growth occurred only after the stabilization effort was

abandoned; with resumed growth, the rate of inflation (and the bias

toward import substitution) once again increased.

     For later reference, there is one aspect of attempts to reduce

inflation that should be noted. That is that there is one type of

deflationary policy which can simultaneously assist in altering

the bias of the regime and reducing the inflation rate: increasing

the flow of imports. To the extent that financing can be found
                                                             18



to achieve such an increase, purchasing power is absorbed while the

implicit or explicit bias toward import substitution is substantially

reduced. This feature is of special significance in considering

stabilization policies and ways in which measures can be taken to

improve the likelihood of their success and reduce their short-term

costs.


     Interactions Between Inflation and the Trade Regime

     As already mentioned, determinants of the rate of inflation

and of the bias of the trade regime are, in principle, largely

separate. One of the policy measures that can be taken to reduce

the distortion and growth costs of inflation is a sliding peg

exchange rate regime. To be sure, the optimal real exchange rate

which is itself a function of the desired bias in trade strategy

and other variables will not under all circumstances remain the

same. As Carlos Diaz noted for Colombia, with the fluctuations

that country has faced in the price of coffee, there is probably

no exchange rate that was not an equilibrium rate at one time or

another)" Nonetheless, while alterations in the real exchange

rate may prove desirable in response to altered prices for the

country's exports on the world market or for other reasons

(including a desire to shift the bias of the trade regime) there

is little likelihood that rates of inflation will reflect only

those changes.
                                                              19




    Thus, if a country with a fixed exchange rate found that its

price level was beginning to increase more rapidly than that of its

trading partners, the best policy in the absence of willingness to

allow freely-fluctuating exchange rates would most likely be some

form of indexation (sliding peg) of the exchange rate. Various

formulae are possible: the exchange rate can be set relative to

a major trading partner in conformity with the differential between

the country's and the trading partner's inflation rate; a weighted

average of the rates of inflation adjusted for exchange rate

changes of several major trading partners can be deducted from

the country's own rate of inflation. In different circumstances,

the number of countries it is desirable to include in the calculus

can differ but in all cases adjustment must be made at fairly

short time intervals. Under any of these formulae, changes in

the rate of inflation will not have a significant impact upon the

nature of the trade regime. Such an indexation works best when

inflation rates are fairly stable or declining; there is some

tendency toward balance of payments deficit when inflation generate

by excess demand is accelerating over into the foreign exchange

market. Nonetheless, contrasted with the maintenance of a fixed

nominal rate of exchange under inflation, a sliding peg policy is

vastly to be preferred.

     The difficulty, and one which results in the important

interaction between trade regimes and inflation, arises in countri
                                                               20



that fail to adopt such a strategy. In those cases, inflation

tends to increase the purchasing power of domestic currency when

spent abroad relative to its value when spent at home. As a

consequence, domestic nationals tend to increase their purchases

abroad and reduce their sales abroad. In the absence of capital

controls, they also try to exchange domestic assets denominated

in domestic currency units for foreign assets denominated in

foreign currency units.

     In those instances, countries have three choices: to incur

open balance-of-payments deficits; to alter the price paid and

received for foreign exchange defacto or de jure; or to impose

quantitative restrictions upon international transactions. In

practice, the response is usually to adopt some price measures,

such as surcharges upon imports and subsidies for minor exports,

to impose some QRs, and to permit a deficit in the balance of

payments to emerge, financed by running down foreign exchange

reserves or borrowing from abroad. Indeed, one characteristic

of many inflation—prone countries attempting to maintain a fixed

exchange rate is the proliferation of fairly detailed, ad hoc,

measures designed to curb excess demand for foreign exchange

side-by-side with the continued need to borrow from abroad to

finance deficits that emerge despite measures taken. This welter

of detailed and fairly specific measures itself has economic
                                                            21




costs, and can be one motive for a stabilization operation --

"tidying   up" the regime.

     For purposes of analysis, however, it is convenient to set

aside the use of price measures and mixed responses. If sufficient

price measures were undertaken on an across-the-board basis to

remedy the underlying tendency toward excess demand for foreign

exchange, such measures would amount to a sliding peg exchange-

rate policy. It is the absence of sufficient pricing measures

that forces countries experiencing inflation at fixed exchange

rates to adopt alternative measures.

     The alternatives consist of incurring open balance—of-payments

deficits, financing them by running down reserves or borrowing

from abroad, or of imposing quantitative restrictions. Each of

these measures has costs and affects the nature of any subsequent

stabilization program. For purposes of analysis, it is useful to

analyze each type of response separately, although as already

indicated the two are often found in combination.

    Table 1 is again useful as a frame of reference. It will be

recalled that the sliding peg (if pegged at the appropriate level) or

flexible exchange rate case was one where each market cleared and

participants were free to carry out desired transactions at the

prevailing prices. Incurring an open payments deficit is equivalent

to permitting an excess supply of money in the home market to
                                                              22



spill over into realized excess demand for goods and services from

abroad (which is reflected in the payments deficit). By contrast,

exchange control is a case in which individuals are not permitted

to carry out their desired transactions: the domestic price of

importables exceeds the foreign price-cum-tariff, and the money

market consequently clears. The precise mix of these two policies

in use is a critical factor in determining the effects of policies

that are undertaken in a stabilization program.


Payments Deficit

     The key characteristics of a response to excess demand by

permitting a payments deficit are two: on one hand, there is an

excess supply of money, and on the other hand, the relative price

of home goods is "too high," as aggregate consumption is above

sustainable levels, consumption of home goods increases, and the

failure of the price of tradables to use induces production to

shift toward home goods.

     The excess supply of money is in part a reflection of the

fact that the fixed exchange rate acts as a suppressant to the

inflation that would otherwise result from aggregate demand

pressures. In the case of a sliding peg exchange rate policy,

the entire inflationary stimulus is passed through both the home

goods and the traded goods sector: both prices increase nominally

and there is no relative price change. In the case of a fixed
                                                                  23



 exchange rate, home goods prices rise (although not by as much

 as they would under a sliding peg because consumers are permitted

 to substitute traded goods for home goods in their consumption

 bundle while producers shift production away from traded and toward

 home goods), but traded goods prices are stable. The payments

 deficit can be thought of as a reflection of that part of the

 inflationary pressure which did not get reflected in price

increases.

     A straightforward way of viewing the problem of a country

experiencing inflation and a payments deficit at a fixed exchange

rate is to recognize that the inflation rate is held below that

which would otherwise be realized as long as the exchange rate

can be maintained, both because the price of tradable goods does

not rise and because the increase in the price of home goods is

less than it would otherwise be. Under those
                                                circumstances,
devaluation is inflationary: it permits the inflationary impulse

to be passed on to the domestic market.   Devaluation would therefore
accomplish little if a country could continue
                                                indefinitely to
finance its payments deficits!?!

     The fact is, however, that countries cannot indefinitely

run down reserves or borrow from abroad for purposes of financing

their deficits. Just as an individual consumer can live well beyond

his means by running up credit card charges, borrowing from his bank,
                                                            24



and depreciating his consumer durables, so too can a country live

beyond its means. In both cases, the situation is not sustainable.

     It is for this reason that analysis of the costs, in terms of

growth prospects, of measures taken to eliminate an unsustainable

deficit is extremely difficult.   In a sense, the economy incurring

a deficit and then reducing its expenditures relative to its income

is on a non-optimal path: its early level of expenditures and

outlay is too high, at the cost of a later reduction in that level.

For purposes of analysis, the best that can be done is to pose the

question in the following way: given an economy which has incurred

an unsustainable deficit, what is the lowest—cost way of altering

its expenditure-income relationship to reattain a sustainable future

expansion path? Consideration of this question is deferred until

the third section of this paper. At this point, it should merely be

noted that the line of analysis sketched out here applies to any

country's attempt to reduce the size of its payments deficit, actual

or in prospect. In many instances, stabilization programs have

objectives pertaining both to reducing the size of the prospective

deficit and to liberalizing the trade regime. Before analysis of

those programs can be carried out, therefore, it is necessary to

examine the differences between the goals and the problems implicit

in the two alternatives.
                                                              25



 Liberalizing the Trade Regime

      As already mentioned, inflation at a fixed exchange rate

 cannot long be sustained without incurring a payments deficit.

That is unsustainable, and the alternative is alteration of the

exchange rate or the imposition of quantitative restrictions

once access to further foreign credits becomes limited, as it

eventually must. They key characteristic of using QRs to keep

foreign exchange payments in line with receipts, as shown in

Table 1, is that the money market is permitted to clear while

the domestic price of importables rises above the imported price

(inclusive of landing costs, tariffs and surcharges). Thus,

whereas an open payments deficit is characterized by the

inappropriate relative price of tradable to nontradable goods

(for any chosen tariff structure), •the quantitative restrictions

equilibrium is characterized by a greater bias of the trade and

payments regime toward import-competing activities domestically

than would be chosen simply on the basis of the industrialization

strategy. Whether home goods relative prices are likely to be

higher or lower than in the flexible-exchange rate alternative

is not clear-cut: depending on the nature of the structure of

production and the degree of substitution between exportables,

importables and home goods in both consumption and production,

that relationship can go either way.
                                                             26



    The difference between the price that prevails for an import

in the home market if individuals were allowed to import all they

wished at the prevailing price and the price that would prevail

in the presence of quantitative restrictions upon imports is referred

to as the premium on an import license. The very fact that there

are premiums on import licenses is usually sufficient evidence to

indicate that quantitative restrictions are binding. Under those

circumstances, the bias of the trade and payments regime toward

IS is almost always greater than intended, and resource allocation

costs can mount well above those associated with the tariff—

generated protection.1"
     Thus, although   either an open payments deficit or the tightening
of quantitative restrictions can result from inflationary pressure
at a fixed exchange -ate, the symptoms and resource allocation
effects   of the two alternative responses are quite different: the
realized   rate of inflation for a given monetary stimulus will be

greater under a QR response than under a deficit response; the degree

of bias of the regime will be greater under the QR response than

under the deficit response; and the home-goods sector will likely

expand more under the deficit response than under the QR response)--"

When stabilization programs are adopted, therefore, it depends

crucially what mix of the two policies has been chosen, and of

course, how severely restrictive' the QRs have become or how

sizable the deficits are.
                                                              27



      When the response to potential deficits has been the imposition

of quantitative restrictions, increasing the price of foreign exchange

will operate rather differently than it will in the case of open

deficit. Suppose, for example, that an open deficit has been

incurred. Raising the price of foreign exchange while holding

tariffs constant will, in the absence of quantitative restrictions,

raise   the price of tradable goods relative to the price of noritradables.
For a small country with no monopoly power in trade, the relative
price   of exportables and import-competing goods will remain unaltered:

the   bias of the regime is unaffected, although production of both

import-competing   and exportable goods becomes more profitable
relative to the profitability of   producing home goods)-' If,
instead, QRs are in effect   prior to the increase in the price of
foreign exchange, part of the increase in price will go to absorbing

the premiums on import licenses (thereby perhaps reducing the

variance in effective exchange rates across commodity categories).

If,as is usually the case, export subsidies are much smaller than

premiums on import licenses, a far higher fraction of the increased

price of foreign exchange will be reflected in the domestic price

of exportables than it will be in the domestic price of import-

competing goods. At the limit, in cases where the size of the

devaluation is less than the size of the preexisting premium on

import licenses, there is no reason to expect the domestic price

of importables to rise following a devaluation)1-"
                                                             28



     Several points should be noted.    First, as a consequence of

premium absorption, the increase in the price level following a

devaluation in the context of preexisting QRs should be considerably

smaller than the recorded price increase following a deficit—

reducing devaluation.    In a sense, this is the counterpart to

the statement that a given inflationary stimulus will result in

a larger rate of inflation under QRs than it will under an open

deficit given a fixed exchange rate: the devaluation has more work

to do correcting the relative prices of exportables and import—

competing goods and less work to do in adjusting the price level.

Second, in the absence of other policy moves, any devaluation Is

still likely to result in a reduction of the restrictiveness

of whatever quantitative restrictions are in effect. That is,

for given quantitative amounts of permitted imports, devaluation

automatically liberalizes a given trade regime, unless other

measures are taken to offset the increase in the price of foreign

exchange.' Third, because devaluation absorbs premiums upon

imports, it automatically alters the bias of the regime and thereby

induces the resource reallocation mechanisms discussed in the first

section of this paper.

     Finally, there is the question of the macroeconomic impact of

a pure libera1izing" devaluation. Unlike the open deficit case,

where expenditures clearly have to be cut relative to income, the

"liberalizing" devaluation has no such imperative, except insofar
                                                               29



as it was underlying the erosion of the real exchange rate which

led to the necessity to impose QRs in the first place. In

principle, therefore, if a QR regime were the result of past

inflationary pressures which had subsided, leaving the exchange

rate overvalued by a stationary amount, no deflationary stimulus

or reduction in the level of aggregate demand would be called for.

Indeed, in the pure QR case, it can even be argued that the

absorption of the premium by   the   exchange rate increse, combined

with the benefits from resource allocation resulting from the change

in the bias of the regime, might well result in a mild deflationary

pressure on the economy)-.9! Quantitatively, however, it is not

evident that this deflationary pressure is likely to be significant.


      Stabilization Programs and Long—Term Development

     As the foregoing has indicated, there is no one action that

can be described as a "stabilization program." The policies

undertaken, and their effects, vary depending on the underlying

situation and the goals of the policy makers.

     It has already been indicated that the task of reducing the

rate of inflation is an exceptionally difficult one: almost

inevitably there is a short-term reduction in the rate of growth

of output, and in many cases, recession. In these circumstances,

deflationary policies are sometimes reversed so that few, if any,

benefits are realized. Likewise, the resource reallocation that

must accompany a successful effort to liberalize the trade regime
                                                             30



and alter its bias away from import substitution cannot be achieved

without inevitable adjustments of resources within the economy.

     For these reasons, there are bound to be short-run adjustment

costs of any stabilization program, whatever the nature of the

policy package and regardless of the degree to which it is

successful. There are, of course, ways of reducing those costs,

but it is doubtful whether stabilization can be accomplished in

the presence of unwillingness or political inability to withstand

some short-term disallocations. The first and most important

conclusion that can be drawn, therefore, is that it is senseless

to incur the costs of adjustment, only to reverse policies before

they have had any chance to affect resource allocation and growth.

Yet, the evidence is that a significant number of stabilization

programs have foundered precisely because the authorities have

been unwilling or unable politically to survive political pressure

during the adjustment period.?P1

     A second conclusion, which follows readily from the first, is

that the reallocations will take longer and be more difficult the

greater are expectations that the realigned structure of relative

prices and incentives will not continue. If it is expected that

the devaluation and liberalization will be short-lived, businessmen

and consumers are likely to stockpile foreign goods in anticipation

of possible future reiniposition of QRs. In doing so, they increase

the current account deficit and therefore the foreign exchange
                                                                31




outflow required to sustain the liberalization program through the

adjustment period. In the context of a situation in which foreign

exchange has earlier been in excess demand because of the trade

regime, increases in imports and current account deficits may

stimulate further speculation against the exchange rate, in turn

tending to force the reimposition of controls. In addition,

expectations of reversal discourage resource reallocation thus

blunting the increase in exports that might otherwise be experienced.

     Thus, one objective of policy should be to insure that a

stabilization program, once undertaken, can be sustained long

enough to provide an opportunity for its results to be felt. This

in turn suggests that a desirable feature of any stabilization

program is that it should be designed in such a way as to suggest

to economic agents that it will succeed: expectations are likely

to be self—fulfilling. This conclusion has numerous implications

for policy, especially for the evaluation of the optimal lending

strategy for donors in connection with stabilization programs.

     For the   longer term, the effects of stabilization on   the rate

of growth are a function of the objectives of the program (and

especially the extent to which the bias of the regime is shifted

away from undue emphasis upon import substitution) and the degree

to which they are accomplished. If, as was the theme of Section II,

stabilization policies are undertaken in the first place because

existing policies are unsustainable, it is difficult to talk about
                                                              32



the growth effects of alternative packages except in the context

of the alternative stabilization packages: continuation of the

status quo ante is infeasible.   It is for this reason that one

can regard the biggest growth cost of stabilization programs as

lying in their failure: when a program does not succeed, it is

generally inevitable that another program, with the same sort of

short-run costs, will have to be adopted in the future. To the

extent that every failure of such a program intensifies expectations

of failure of the next one, an unsuccessful stabilization program

may itself have growth costs, not only in the current slowdown

in economic activity which by definition has no payoff, but also in

the heightened cost of achieving the same objectives at any future

date, when memories of past failures make expectations more

skeptical about the likelihood of success. The Colombian experience

of the late 1950s and early 1960s is perhaps an excellent example:

after devaluation attempts which were unsuccessful in 1956, 1959,

1961 and 1966, the authorities successfully began altering the bias

of the related policies in 1967. Carlos Diaz—Alejandro concluded

that one of the major impacts on Colombian growth was that the

consequent growth of foreign exchange earnings from increasing

exports meant that the stop-go cycle of fiscal and monetary policy

surrounding stabilization efforts finally stopped, which in turn

permitted a more rapid rate of growth of the entire economy.-11
                                                               33




     It therefore seems appropriate to attempt to categorize

stabilization programs in terms first, of the primary objectives of

the program, then of the preexisting situation, and finally, the

policy measures taken.


Objecti yes

     Despite the fact that almost all stabilization programs by

definition have some bearing on both inflation and balance of

payments objectives, the relative importance of the two objectives

can differ. In some instances, stabilization programs are geared

primarily toward reducing excess aggregate demand, with balance of

payments targets secondary.-" In other instances, the infeasibility

of continuing to incur indebtedness or of further tightening QRs

makes the primary target an alteration in the trade regime."

     One fundamental lesson that seems to emerge from examination

of the cases in which devaluation did not succeed in relaxing the

foeign exchange constraint is that it does not make sense to tie

the success of the measures aimed at the foreign trade sector to

success in reducing the rate of inflation. It appears to be the

case that it is significantly easier to alter the real exchange

rate and to increase the rate of growth earnings than it is to reduce

the rate of inflation permanently. This is perhaps the strongest

argument that can be made on behalf of a sliding peg policy: it

permits the success of the trade component of a stabilization program

independently of whether the rate of inflation drops or not. In light
                                                               34



of the already-stated result that one of the significant costs of

inflation lies in the distortions introduced by a fixed exchange

rate, it is difficult to understand countries which attempt to

alter their trade and payments regimes and inflation rates by

adopting a new, fixed exchange rate: if the rate of inflation does

drop, a sliding peg will not significantly alter the exchange rate,

and both objectives of the program will be met; if, however, inflation

is not successfully controlled, both objectives of the package are

bound to fail if a new, fixed exchange rate is set.

     Because controlling inflation is inherently the more difficult

objective in most circumstances, and because those primarily concerned

with bringing the rate of inflation down are likely to object to a

sliding peg as being more inflationary than a new fixed exchange rate,

it seems to be the case that stabilization programs motivated more by

a desire to alter the trade and payments regime have a somewhat

greater probability of partial or total success than do programs aimed

primarily at the rate of inflation.

     To be sure, neither sort of change --   alteration   of the trade

regime or changing the inflationary nature of the economy ——    is
likely to be easy, for reasons already mentioned. Nonetheless, there

are degrees and degrees of difficulty, and controlling inflation does

seem much the more difficult of the two objectives.
                                                                35




Preexisting Conditions

       A number of circumstances in the preexisting situation also

have a bearing on the probable outcome of the stabilization package.

Among the most important are "chance" elements, the set of

macroeconomic influences currently operating on the economy, the

extent to which the trade regime has been characterized by QRs or

by open deficit, and the magnitude of foreign short-term indebtedness.

       Turning to the chance factors first, two especially should be

noted. On one hand, favorable harvests can significantly increase

the probability that a stabilization program will prove successful.

This is because good harvests tend to keep the domestic prices of

foodstuffs relatively low, thereby exerting downward pressure on

the overall price index, and also because bumper crops tend to

increase quantities available for export, thus increasing foreign

exchange earning. The latter results either in increased foreign

exchange reserves, and thus conviction that the altered incentives

will continue or in an enhanced flow of imports, which in turn

permits a relatively greater degree of bias toward exportables

than would otherwise be possible. The other event that can

positively affect the outcome of a stabilization program is favorable

movements in the terms   of   trade. Such an outcome has the same

sort   of impact as the increased export earnings that can be

attained with a good harvest, although the impact is less favorable

on the inflation rate, and appropriate policies must be followed
                                                               36



to   prevent increased prices of key exports from resulting in large

increases in domestic money supply and purchasing power. There

have been instances of stabilization programs which, on the

historical record, appear to have had a good chance of success

which have foundered on unfavorable movements in the terms of

trade. The Brazilian devaluation-and-stabilization effort of

1957 appears to have been one such case: the volume of exports

increased almost fifty percent over the ensuing twenty-four months,

but export earnings rose hardly at all.-'

       Macro influences are several-fold. First, there is the nature of

the monetary and fiscal policies in effect in the six to twelve months

prior to the stabilization effort. When those have been highly

expansionary, the   difficulties   entailed in successfully carrying

out stabilization are likely to be much greater than when monetary

and fiscal stimuli have been moderate. Indeed, it can even be

contended that, in the presence of highly expansionary monetary

and fiscal policy over the preceding year, a country would be better

off to postpone (if possible) altering the trade regime (especially

if a sliding peg is not a realistic alternative) until monetary and

fiscal magnitudes have been brought under control. Second, there

is the extent to which price controls have prevented excess demand

pressures from being realized. When those factors have been of

importance, it is usually necessary to remove those price ceilings

at the time the stabilization package is inaugurated. As prices

must rise from their formerly-controlled levels, any cost-push
                                                            37



responses within the economy will be triggered by those increases

as well as the increase in the price of tradable goods thereby

making the task of reducing the rate of inflation more difficult.

Nonetheless, when price controls have been operative pre-stabilization,

their removal can be an essential part of the stabilization package.

When those controls are over public—sector products, they may have

been a significant factor in contributing to the public—sector

deficit and thus increases in the money supply. Such was the case

in Turkey in the late 1950s, when public sector enterprises were

required to maintain prices well below costs of production. Deficits,

financed by Central Bank credits, were a chief source of inflationary

pressure. Raising the prices of public sector enterprise outputs

resulted in a once-and-for-all increase in the price level by

20 percent, but simultaneously eliminated the further extension of

Central Bank credits. The consequence was that, after several years

of inflation recorded at 25 percent annually or more (despite the

price controls iiich had suppressed it), prices actually fell in

the two years following the increase in public sector enterprise

prices.

     Finally, there is the preexisting situation with respect to

the trade regime and the balance of payments. For reasons outlined

above, it makes a significant difference which stabilization program

is aimed primarily at reducing or correcting an existing or prospective

open deficit, or whether instead it is intended to liberalize the

trade and payments regime and to reduce or eliminate quantitative
                                                                   38



restrictions as a means for keeping foreign exchange receipts in line

with payments. In addition, the degree to which debt—servicing

difficulties are being experienced and imports have been curtailed

prior to the stabilization program is also significant in influencing

the nature of the package and the probable effect of any given set of

policy changes.

       In general, if imports have been sharply curtailed in the months

or   years prior to stabilization, the prospects are that an increased

import     flow   can significantly affect real output, even in the short—
      27
run.---      If, on the other hand, imports are running at high levels,

a stabilization program which curtails imports will likely be

necessary. Import curtailment is in itself inflationary, aid may

also impair doniest4c production levels if imports of intermediate

and capital goods are used more or less in fixed proportions in

domestic production.

      The extent to which debt-servicing commitments exist prior to the

stabilization package, and the ways in which rescheduling is needed

and handled within it, are also important. The existence of debt—

servicing obligations which cannot be met      reflects,   to be sure,

the fact that the country has in the past lived beyond its means.

The fact that stabilization packages are often postponed until

debt—servicing obligations force governments into negotiations

with consortia of creditors is also a reflection of governments'

unwillingness to take the short-term costs of stabilization.
                                                                39



       The difficulties that can arise as a result of bargaining over
debt-rescheduling can be important, both politically and psychologically,
in    affecting a stabilization program. Pressing debt—service obligations

can induce governments to accept conditions from consortia of creditors

as a prerequisite for debt rescheduling. In some instances, this

may enable politicians to take measures they would not otherwise

politically be able to take. In other cases, politicians may not

accept the necessity for those measures, in which case they may

carry them out only belatedly and begrudgingly. In the latter

case, prospects for the longer-term success of the stabilization

program    are small: the objectives are   really those of the creditors

and   not those of the debtor country.?W When debt—service
rescheduling   becomes critical, however, donors as well as debtors

are caught: failure to impose some conditions upon borrowers at

that time will force them to lend more later in the absence of

policy measures and, if a government is unresponsive, creditors

will eventually use the country's prospective default as a means

of correcting the situation.


Policies

       As already stated, there is no single set of policies that

constitutes a "stabilization program." Programs can range all

the way from fairly minor adjustments of exchange rates and

macroeconomic policies with only limited objectives to attempts

to correct high rates of inflation and severely restrictive QRs.
                                                               40



In terms of their effects on economic growth, the successful

stabilization programs are those that succeed in one or more of

the following: 1) significantly altering the bias of the trade

and payments regime away from import substitution; 2) moving the

economy away from reliance upon quantitative restrictions and

toward pricing measures; and/or 3) permitting a movement away from

stop--go cycles of growth resulting from a foreign exchange

"bottleneck."

     Here, we discuss the policies that can constitute part of

such a program. First, there are the already—mentioned monetary

and fiscal policies. These often entail a reduction in the extension

of credit within the economy, ceilings upon levels of government

expenditures, and measures to increase tax collections. In addition,

they may involve the removal of price ceilings and other measures

which may have contributed to government deficits and increases in

the money supply. Reichmann and Stillson' have tabulated the

"financial programs" implemented as part of stabilization programs

for the 79 instances in which higher credit tranches were utilized

during the 1963-72 period. These cases involve both developed and

developing countries, but are nonetheless instructive. Their

classification of cases is reproduced in Table 2 below. In their

terms, "no deceleration" refers to cases where credit expansion

was to be permitted to continue at its present rate. As can be

seen, the single largest group of countries resorting to higher credit
                                                              41




Table 2. Financial Programs as a Component of Stabilization

Programs, 79 Countries, 1963-72 (number of programs)



                                      Credit Policy to be Implemented

Main Purposes                         Deceleration   No Deceleration


Correction of overly expansionary          26

  demand policies

Modification of exchange system and        4

  correction of overly expansionary

  demand policies

Modification of exchange system             7                 13

Other                                       3                 26

  (of which:)

    (Anti-recessionary program)            (—)                 (5)
    (Cope with temporary shortfall         (—)                (11)
    in exports)

Total                                     40                   39




Source: Rekhmanr and Stilison, p. cit., p. 297.
                                                               42



tranches in IMF Stand-bys were categorized as having "overly

expansionary demand policies" and their rate of credit expansion

was to be reduced as part of their stabilization programs. There

were, however, 13 cases in which the objective was to modify the

exchange system and deceleration of credit expansion was not called

for. In some of these cases, the authorities had begun instituting

restrictive credit policies prior to the stand—by agreement, so no

further   deceleration was warranted.
     In   some developing countries, notably Korea, a significant

component   of the   altered growth structure of the economy has

originated from interest-rate reforms undertaken in conjunction

with the reform of the exchange system. In Korea, inflation had

made the real interest rate significantly negative, and interest

rate reforms raised the nominal rate of interest from 5-8 percent

to 25-30 percent       (with an inflation rate of about 20 percent).

Although other factors also contributed, the Korean savings rate

rose dramatically after the interest rate reforms and this factor

was one contributor to the large jump in the growth rate achieved

subsequently.

     With the exception of the interest-rate reforms, however,

most macroeconomic policies adopted as part of a stabilization

program do not impact directly upon the three variables listed

above as being significant for growth prospects. Rather, they

constitute part of the background setting for alterations in the
                                                             43



trade and payments regime and their chief significance lies in

determining whether the chosen nominal fixed exchange rate can

remain realistic in real terms for a significant period of time.

     The trade-and-exchange--rate components of stabilization programs

are even more varied than their macro-monetary counterparts. The

sorts of policies adopted can be loosely categorized under four

main headings: exchange rate changes; liberalizing the import

regime; altering the bias of the regime; and debt rescheduling.

     Exchange rate changes have been discussed. As indicated, a

part of the change in the nominal exchange rate is often absorbed

by the removal of export subsidies, import surcharges, and other

partial measures taken prior to devaluation, and it is "net,"

and not gross, deva1ution that affects individuals' decisions. To

be sure, there is probably some improvement in incentives resulting

even from this tidying up, as the replacement of surcharges and

subsidies with the exchange rate usually results in greater uniformity

of incentives and effective exchange rates across transaction categories

than exists prior to the change.

     The preceding analysis also demonstrated that the impact of a

net devaluation can be quite different depending on whether the

preexisting situation was one of a QR-achieved balance in payments

or of an open deficit. In the former case, alteration of the

exchange rate automatically results in some liberalization of the

regime and, insofar as export subsidies were not as large as import
                                                               44



premiums, a reduction in the bias toward import substitution. In
an open-deficit prior situation, devaluation is more likely to result

in an equiproportionate rise in the domestic prices of tradables, and

the   chief relative-price effect is the relative price of tradables
in terms of home goods.
      Liberalizing the import regime can come about not only through
exchange rate changes when import premiums on licenses are absorbed,

but   also   through alterations in the control mechanism itself..?'
Many stabilization programs have been accompanied by a revision of

the licensing system, often with the introduction of a group of

"priority" or "liberalized" imports, for which licensing procedures

are streamlined if not abandoned. A variety of techniques for

achieving liberalization have been used. In some countries, a shift

from a "positive" list (only items listed are permitted to be

imported) to a "negative" list (all items not listed may be freely

imported) has resulted in significant liberalization. In other

countries, removal of "guarantee deposit" requirements, under which

would-be importers deposit amounts equal to some multiple of their

import license with the central bank pending receipt of the import,

can represent a sizable liberalization. In Chile, for example,

the authorities have imposed guarantee deposit requirements of

10,000 percent in periods of severe foreign exchange shortfalls

prior to devaluation, and removal of those requirements has defacto

permitted a resumption of imports." Even moving from monthly

to quarterly or semi-annual import programs can result in liberalization
                                                                   45



of the regime, as can such measures as permitting the resale of

import licenses and removing restrictions on currency areas in

which licenses are utilized.

       Alteration of the bias of the regime comes about through the

exchange rate change itself (insofar as it is net), with absorption

of premiums on import licenses as the regime is liberalized, and

also through policies designed directly to encourage exports.

Especially important can be assurances to exporters that the newly—

achieved real exchange rate for exports, and other incentives for

exports, will continue. In some instances, this has been accomplished

in   part by   the removal of domestic taxes on export production. In

Brazil, for example, removal of state and federal taxes on exports

made seliinq dmestcally        and selling   abroad at two-thirds the price

approximately equally profitable.P/

      Finally,   there is the matter of debt—rescheduling and borrowing
to   finance an increased flow of imports. Debt rescheduling is often

a prerequisite for any degree of liberalization of the regime and

continued economic growth because, by the time of the stabilization

program, the country's existing debt-service and repayment obligations

are so large that the alternatives are default or an import bill so

small that domestic economic activity will have to be severely

curtailed. In     addition   to rescheduling, creditors, and especially aid

donors,   have often extended additional credits to the country at the
time of stabilization to permit an immediate increase in the import
                                                           46




flow before export earnings and other foreign exchange receipts

respond to the altered incentives provided by devaluation and

its accompanying measures.


             Trade-Offs in Stabilization Programs

     Enough has been said already to pinpoint the chief areas of

trade-off in deciding upon the nature of a stabilization program.

Essentially, there are three crucial, and interrelated, areas

where significant trade-offs exist. The first is between the

short-run and the long-run. The second is between gradual but

continuing small changes and large changes. The third is between

more foreign borrowing and greater deflationary pressure as part of

the stabilization program.


Short-Run versus Long-Run

     If one were to pinpoint the most significant trade—off

in stabilization programs, it is clearly the trade-off between

short-term cost and longer-term benefits. For reasons already

spelled out, stabilization programs are almost inevitably going

to entail some short-run costs as a necessary price for achieving

longer-run benefits. Especially when the changes that must be

brought about involve both the rate of inflation and the bias of

the trade regime, short-run adjustment is inevitable. Two or three

additional percentage points per year of growth of GNP can be

achieved by countries successfully altering their trade bias and

payments regime. For those countries, the short-term costs, which
                                                               47



 are probably on the order of one or two percentage points of GNP

 for a year or eighteen months, are greatly exceeded by the discounted

 value of higher GNP at later dates.'

      The difficulty, of course, is that politicians must inevitably

 face the short term before reaching the long term. The myopic nature

of the political process is well understood.   Thus, one can well imagine

situations in which alteration of the bias of the regime might well

yield a social rate of return in excess of 15 percent on the short

term costs and yet be rejected by the political process.

     The fact that the politics of stabilization are difficult makes

matters worse than they would otherwise be. Not only are politicians

likely to use higher rates of discount than may be warranted, but the

fact that they may be unwilling to withstand the pressures that arise

during the transition period raises the possible costs of embarking

on a stabilization program. For,while the benefits to be achieved

by a successful stabilization program involving moving away from

import substitution are not likely to be affected, the fact that

politicians may decide to abort a stabilization program before its

benefits begin to be realized raises potential costs. A donor,

considering whether to push for a stabilization program and shift of

trade orientation, must weigh the possibility that the program may

be aborted (which will raise costs for the next attempt) as well

as the costs of a successful program against the
                                                   potential benefits.
In large part, such a judgment is of necessity political, but that

makes the calculus no less necessary.
                                                           48




Gradualism versus Shock

     The fact that there are likely to be short—run costs associated

with any change makes the case for some degree of gradualism: it

may diminish the costs of adjustment. On the other hand, the fact

that there are likely to be built-in resistances to change (especially

among successful import—substitution establishments) and that

entrepreneurs must perceive changes in incentives makes a powerful

case for a fairly rapid shift in relative prices and in the trade

and payments regime.

     Here again, the trade-off is much like that between the short run

and the long run. There is no doubt that a gradual shift in signals

is the more desirable policy if such gradualism does not affect the

chances of success of the policy package. If, however, gradualism

provides more of an opportunity for failure, as it almost surely

does, than a once-and-for-all reversal of signals, then the case for

a sharp, once-and-for-all shift in policies is stronger.

     As with the short-term long-term trade—off, there are

differences between countries in the likelihood that gradual

alteration of the regime can be sustained. However, there is

undoubtedly some critical minimum initial shift that is essential

in order for businessmen and others to perceive that the regime is

really altered, and it probably a mistake to accept too gradual an

approach. Indeed, there is not a great deal of evidence available

as to the different costs of larger once-and-for—all changes and

smaller ones spread out over a longer period of time. Nonetheless,
                                                               49



 in view of the political difficulties that are likely to arise if

 there is a long time period during which adjustment is taking place

 with few visible signs of success, there is a presumption in favor

 of a once—and—for-all sharp adjustment.


 Foreign Borrowing versus Recession

     To achieve a given degree of liberalization of imports (and

consequent alteration of bias of the regime), either the level of

imports must be increased or income must be reduced in such a way

that the demand for imports shifts downward.   Thus, liberalization

can be achieved either by increasing the size of the flow of imports

or by domestic recession. If, as is usually the case,.?I an

increased flow of imports can be financed during the initial

stabilization period only by foreign credits, an immediate question

arises: under what conditions is a country justified in borrowing

from abroad in the present (to finance increased domestic consumption)

rather than accept a reduction in the level of economic activity?

     Again, an answer to the question is partly related to the

probability of success of the stabilization program: if the country

will, in any event, revert to exchange controls and a strong bias

toward import substitution within a short period, it seems to make

little sense to borrow currently and to mortgage the future for

that purpose. On the other hand, to start out with the view that

the program is likely to fail is not acceptable, either.

    Assuming that a program is started, therefore, it seems worthwhile

to borrow from abroad in order to sustain the increased flow of imports.
                                                                50




This can be seen in several ways. Suppose a country has a marginal

propensity to import (with respect to income) of m. Then, for every

dollar borrowed from abroad, domestic income can be greater than it

otherwise could (for the same degree of liberalization) by 1/rn.

Unless the marginal propensity to import is extremely high, this

would suggest that borrowing from abroad may have a very high social

marginal   productivity, in terms    of the additional level of domestic

income   it will permit.
      Another way of viewing the importance of foreign credits during
the   stabilization period is to recall that increased    flows of imports

simultaneously   liberalize the regime faster than would otherwise be

possible (except with recession) and are deflationary in that they

absorb   excess agreqate   demand.    Contrasted with the alternatives of

cutting    back on the level of economic activity or of less liberalization,

financing larger import flows appears to be superior, as long as the

stabilization program appears to have a good chance of success.


                 Implications for Donor Countries

       The implications for aid-givers are several. First and most

 important, aid to support a sustained flow of imports at the time of

a stabilization program may, if all goes well, have a very high

marginal product if an objective of the stabilization program is to

 alter the bias of the trade and payments regime. Such aid can be

 used not only to finance an enlarged flow of imports, but also to

 reassure potential speculators that the new policies are permanent.

 Aid that simply increases reserves can be extremely productive.
                                                                51




      Secondly, despite the fact that a country should devalue,

 considerations pertaining to the domestic political situation are

not irrelevant to the decision to undertake a stabilization
                                                                package,

especially its timing. Particularly since the failure of a given

stabilization policy makes the next attempt more difficult, there

is something to be said for waiting, if at all possible, for domestic

political sentiment to support the package. While increasing demands

for new loans may force aid donors' and creditors' hands, in cases

where it is feasible, postponement of pressure to stabilize may be

warranted. In this connection, it should also be remembered that

other fortuitous circumstances may affect the outcome of the

stabilization effort: especially if signs are for a below—average

crop. or   for   deteriorating terms of trade, postponement of pressures

on the debtor country may be wise.

     Finally, it should be remembered that a successful stabilization

program will have its significant growth impact through the resource

reallocation and restructuring of the economy that can result. Those

achievements, in turn, can occur only insofar as countries are able

successfully to compete in world markets. On one hand, that requires

that the countries altering their regimes provide appropriate

incentives and support for their enterprises attempting to export.

On the other hand, it also requires that donors be willing to permit

entry of exports from LDCs into their markets. In terms of the

prospects for increased growth through alteration of the bias of

the trade regime, the most significant determinant in the long-run
                                                           52




will be the growth of world markets. For developed countries, the

creditors, as a group, maintaining free access to their markets for

the products of LDCs may be the single most important policy they

can undertake to insure the success of stabilization programs with

positive effects on the rate of economic growth.
                                                               53



                             Footnotes

     1.      For economy of language, I am throughout assuming that the

rest of the world is stationary, and there is no inflation or other

change abroad. An alternative would be to phrase every statement

in terms of maintaining a constant difference in the rates of

price increase between the country under consideration and the rest

of the world. In the context of economic growth, of course, real

exchange rates may have to alter even in the absence of changes

in the inflation rate.


     2.      In principle, there is also a bond market in the system.

But in keeping with conventional macroeconomics, I follow the time—

honored tradition of assuming that if the money market clears or

if all three other markets taken together clear, then the bond

market must clear. In practice, among countries with convertible

currencies, it can and has been argued that the excess supply of

money is more likely reflected in an excess demand for bonds than

it is in the goods market. For present purposes, however, that

set of questions is well away from our central concern.


     3.      At first sight, it seems paradoxical that a higher

relative price of home goods is associated with greater production.

The paradox is resolved if one considers the move from a "full

equilibrium"    under flexible exchange rates to a new "equilibrium"
with the exchange rate held constant but with aggregate demand
increased:     an upward shift in the demand of home goods means
                                                           54



the price of home goods must rise and production of home goods

increases. Production of traded goods falls while consumption

rises, thereby generating a payments deficit in the new "equilibrium."

Increased demand for home goods, in turn, usually arises because

of excessive money creation or fiscal policy.


     4.   This is not to state that the real exchange rate should

remain unaltered under all circumstances: the proposition is that

the underlying determinants of the real exchange rate that will

clear the market for traded goods are probably independent of the

determinants of the rate of inflation and changes in it.


     5.   For a fuller discussion of these issues, see my Foreign

Trade Renies and Economic Development: Liberalization Attempts

and Consequences,(Ballinger Press for the National Bureau of

Economic Research, 1978), especially Chapters 11 and 12.




     6.   There are at least two historical instances which are

well-documented and where the authorities were apparently surprised

by the preexisting level of protection prevailing. See Michael

Michaely, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Israel

and Robert Baldwin, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

Philippines, both (Columbia University Press for the National Bureau

of Economic Research, 1975).
                                                                55



     7.   The analysis is similar, although not entirely symmetric,

for increasing bias toward IS. The reason for the difference is

that entrepreneurs can be expected to be more familiar with the

domestic market when IS strategies are adopted or intensified than

they can be for moving toward EP. The reason for couching the

discussion in terms of a move toward EP is that most stabilization

efforts, discussed below, entail a reduction, or an attempted

reduction, in the extent of bias toward IS.


     8.   If the existing bias of the regime has been relatively
shortlived at the time of the policy shift, it   is   possible that
excess capacity might exist in EP lines to pick up the slack from

reduced IS activities. That outcome is less likely, the longer

IS policies have been in place. A more frequent pattern is that

IS industries find that they can cover marginal costs in exporting

out of existing capacity once incentives change. The commodity

composition of exports in the year or two after shifting strategies

therefore may bear little relation to the longer—run mix of exports.


     9.   All three have reverted to relatively high inflation rates

in the rnid-l970s, and seem to be encountering much more difficulty

at the present time in reducing their inflation rates than they

had earlier experienced.


     10. See Jere R. Behrman, Foreign Trade
                                              Regimes and Economic

Development: Chile (Columbia University Press for the National

Bureau of Economic Research, 1976) for a full account.
                                                            56




     11. Carlos Diaz-Alejandro, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic

Development:   Colombia (Columbia University Press for the National

Bureau of Economic Research, 1976).


     12. It is important to recognize that foreign lending and

aid, motivated by prospects of a reasonable rate of return or for

development purposes, can sustain a current account deficit and

contribute, as long as it lasts, to development objectives. In

those cases, the current account deficit is offset by "autonomous

capital inflows. Deficits, as used in the text, refer to payments

imbalances in which the desired transactions by individuals result

in an excess demand for foreign exchange which must be met by

the authorities by running down their reserves or seeking foreign

financing which they wculd not seek simply for long—run developmental

objectives. While the distinction is conceptually clear, there are

often significant difficulties in practice of identifying particular

types of transactions as being "autonomous and others as being

uaccommodating.i In practice, however, few worry about the "deficit"

of Korea, as the financing is motivated by long—term commercial

prospects, while it is straightforward to identify countries whose

borrowing needs originate from their efforts to sustain an infeasible

exchange-rate. At the time of writing this paper, Turkey represents

a classic case of a country attempting to maintain an unrealistic

exchange rate, borrowing for that purpose in excess of the amount

she would otherwise borrow. It should be noted, however, that in an
0'


                                                                     57



     alternative economic context, Turkish net capital inflows might be

     much larger than they currently are. The reason, of course, is that

     commercial lending and investing has virtually ground to a halt

     as expectations of an exchange rate alteration lead potential

     creditors with commercial motivations to delay their activities.


          13. There are exceptions, of course. Notable among them is

     the Korean case. The Koreans appear to have maintained quantitative

     restrictions upon import of luxury consumer goods which were not

     domestically produced. Interestingly, licenses to import those

     goods were awarded to exporters, thereby linking QRs (which were

     not intended as a balance of payments measure in the first place)

     to profitability of exporting.


          14. This is because the higher price of import—competing goods

     under QRs will likely pull some resources out of the home goods

     sector.


          15. A regime is said to be more restrictive, the larger the

     aggregate value of premiums expressed as a percentage of the landed

     cost of the import bill.


          16. This statement assumes that raising the price of foreign

     exchange is not accompanied by a sufficient increase in aggregate

     demand so that the domestic price level increases still further.

     Obviously, a devaluation of x percent, followed by an increase in

     the domestic price level of ax, with a >   1,   will lead to a decline
                                                                  58



in   the relative price of tradable goods and should intensify
either the restrictiveness of the regime or the size of the
deficit.

       17. The empirical results from the Foreign Trade Regimes and
Economic Development project tended to confirm the results. See
Chapter 8 of my Liberalization_Attemp and the individual studies,
especially Colombia and Chile, for analysis of this phenomenon.

       18.    If for example, surcharges on imports and export subsidies

are removed simultaneously with the devaluation, the changes in the

effective exchange rates perceived by producers and consumers will

be considerably smaller than the size of the devaluation. It is

useful   to refer to net devaluation"   as being   the change in the

price    of foreign exchange once account is taken of the removal of

export subsidies, import surcharges, and the like.


        19. Egon Sohmen, in "The Effects of Devaluation on the PriceLevel,"

Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1958, made      this point.

        20.   The difficulties are very real. Richard Cooper, in his

"An Assessment of Currency Devaluation in Developing Countries,"

Chapter 13 of Gustav Ranis, Editor, Government and Economic Development

(Yale University Press, 1971) documented these problems neatly. A

sizable fraction of Finance Ministers at the time of devaluation

have lost their jobs within 18 months afterwards. There is no

 doubt also that luck is an element. As Cooper showed, perhaps the
                                                              59



 best indicator of the likelihood of success is the quality of the

 harvest: a good harvest provides a buffer which makes the

 reallocation vastly easier. Of the 22 devaluations in the NBER

project on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development, in 15

cases the inflation in the ensuing two years was larger
                                                          proportionately
than was the initial devaluation. See my Foreign Trade Regimes and

Economic Development, pp. 82-83 and Table 5-3.


     21. Diaz-Alejandro, op.cit, pp. 237 ff.


     22. Many Latin American programs, especially those of Chile

and Argentina) seem to have been geared primarily toward inflation.


     23. Turkey and India are examples of this type.


     24. See Al Fishlow, "Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

Brazil, paper prepared for Bogota Seminar, April 1975, mimeo.


     25. This clearly happened in Turkey following the 1958

devaluation.


     26. For an analysis of the political implications of donor

behavior with respect to one devaluation, see Jagdish Bhagwati and

1. N. Srinivasan, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

India (Columbia University Press for the NBER, 1975), Chapter 10.

Diaz-Alejandro, pp. cit., reports that, prior to undertaking its

own liberalization program in 1967, the Colombian president even went

on television to state that he would not abide by the wishes of

Colombia's creditors
                                                            60




    27. Thomas Reichman and Richard Stilison, "Experience with

Programs of Balance of Payments Adjustment: Stand—By Arrangements

in the Higher Tranches, 1963_72,u IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 25, 2, P. 297.


     28. Liberalizing the regime cannot be carried very far without

increasing the flow of imports. In the short run, that can usually

be achieved only when financed by foreign credits, which are discussed

below.


     29. Removal or reduction of guarantee deposit requirements can

have a   significant effect on the money supply. For this reason,

it sometimes makes sense to provide for their gradual removal,

rather than to abandon them at the time of devaluation.


     30. See Jose Carvaiho and Claudio Haddad, "Brazil," Chapter

2 of Anne 0. Krueger, Hal B. Lary, Terry Monson, and Narongchai

Akrasanee, Editors, Trade and Employment in Developing Countries -—

Strategies   and Results in Ten Countries (University of Chicago Press

for the NBER),forthcomiflg.


     31. See my Liberalization Attempts, Chapter 11, for the

statistical evidence on this point for a pooled time—series cross-

section of devaluations in the NBER project countries. See also

Bela Balassa, "Exports and Economic Growth: Some Further Evidence,"

Journal of Development Economics, June 1978.
                                                            61



     32.   In some instances, expectations of an exchange—rate

alteration induce exporters to withhold their goods and importers

to stock up. Reverse flows after devaluation can then finance

increased imports. While that can happen, it is difficult to

rely on it.
                                                                 62




                         Bibliography

Balassa, Bela, "Exports and Economic Growth: Some Further Evidence,"

     Journal of Development_EConOr!1c., (June 1978).

Baldwin, Robert, Foreign Trad             and Economic Devjppnient:

     Phijjppines.   New York: Columbia University Press for the

     National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.

Behrman,   Jere R., Foreign Trade   Reqjmes   and Economic Developmen:

     Chile. New York: Columbia University        Press for the NBER, 1976.

Bhdgwati, Jagdish and T. N. Srinivasan, ForeTrade          Regimes and

     Economic_Development: India. New York: Columbia University
     Press for the NBER, 1975.
CarvaTho, Jose, and Claudio Haddad, "Brazil," Chapter 2 in Anne 0.
      <rueqer, Hal B. Ldry, Terry Monson, and Narongchai Akrasanee,

     Editors,   Trade and Employment in Developjng Countries ——

     Strattes and Results in Ten       Countries.    Chicago:   University

     of Chicago Press for the NBER, forthcoming.

 Cooper, Richard, "An Assessment of Currency Devaluation in Developing

      Countries,"   in Gustav Ranis, Editor, Government and Economic

      Development. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1971.

 Diaz-Alejafldro, Carlos, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

      Colombia. New York: Columbia University Press for the NBER, 1976.

 Fishlow, Al, "Foreign Trad Regimes and Economic Development:         Brazil ,"


      paper prepared for Bogota Seminar, April, 1975.
 Krueger, Anne 0., Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

      Liberalization Attempts and Consequences. Cambridge: Ballinger

      Press for the NBER.
0

                                                                63



    Michaely, Michael, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:

         Israel. New York: Columbia University Press for the NBER, 1975.

    Reichman Thomas and Richard Stilison, "Experience with Programs

         of Balance of Payments Adjustment: Stand-By Arrangements in

         the Higher Tranches, 1963—72." IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 25,

        2, p. 297.

    Sohmen, Egon, "The Effects of Devaluation on the Priceheird,"

        Quarterly Journal of Economics, (May 1958).
