                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




I
                SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS AND THE
              ACCUWJLATION OF PRERETIREMENT WEALTH



                        Martin   Feldstein



                      Working Paper No. 1477




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            May 1980




    This paper was prepared for presentation at the
    International Economics Association Conference on "The
    Determinants of National Saving and Wealth," at Bergamo,
    Italy, in June, 1980. The research reported here is part
    of the NBER's study of Capital Foramation. I am grateful
    to Douglas Bernheim and Anthony Pellechio for assistance
    with this work and to the NBER and the National Science
    Foundation for financial support. The views expressed in
    this paper are my own and should not be attributed to any
    organization.
                                                           NBER Working Paper 477
                                                                             1980




           Social Security Benefits and the Accumulation
                      of Preretirement Wealth


                              ABSTRACT



     This paper uses a new and particularly well—suited body of data to

assess the impact of social security retirement benefits on private savings.

The Retirement History Survey combines survey evidence on the wealth of

couples in their early sIxties with detailed information from the administra-

tive records of the Social Security Administration on the lifetime earnings

of those individuals and the social security benefits to which they are

entitled. The present paper uses these data to estimate a model of the de-

termination of preretirement net worth. On balance, the estimates developed

in this study favor the extended life cycle model as a theory of asset

accumulation and indicate a substantial substitution of social security wealth

for private wealth accumulation.




                                               Martin Feldstein
                                               National:Bureau f Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, Massachueetts 02138

                                                (617) 868—3905
                       Social Security Benefits and the Accumulation
                               of Preretirement Wealth

                                 Martin Feldstein*


          Social security benefits have become the principal method of financing

retirement consumption in the United States and probably in most other

industrial countries. For the majority of American families, the actuarial pre-

sent value of social security benefits exceeds the value of all other household

wealth. Measuring the effect of anticipated social security benefits on the

accumulation of wealth by individuals is therefore of fundamental importance for

both the verification of key economic theories and the analysis of major issues

of economic policy.

          The principal idea in the economic theories of household consumption

and aggregate capital accumulation is the life cycle model suggested by Harrod

(1948) and developed by Modigliani (1954, 1957, 1970). The social security

program introduces large and exogenous variations from the traditional life

cycle pattern of income. The response of households to this lifetime redistri-

bution of income provides a potentially powerful test of the life cycle model.

Moreover, the incentives that the social security program provides for


*Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper
was prepared for presentation at the International Economics Association
Conference on t1The Determinants of National Saving and Wealth1' at Bergamo,
Italy, in June 1980. The research reported here is part of the NBER study of
Capital Formation. I am grateful to Douglas Bernheim and Anthony Pellechio for
assistance with this work and to the NBER and the National Science Foundation
for financial support. The views expressed in this paper are my own and should
not be attributed to any organization.
                                      -2-


earlier retirement1 make it important to extend the traditional life cycle model

to make the age of retirement endogenous and then to test the savings implica-

tion of this extended theory.

          The desirability of expanding or reducing the role of social security

in the financing of retirement consumption depends crucially on the extent to

which social security displaces private saving. If social security benefits

have no efffect on individual saving, the provision of substantial benefits can

eliminate poverty in old age with little or no adverse side effect.2 In the

opposite case in which the provision of social security benefits simply displa-

ces equivalent private annuities, the only effect of social security would be

the adverse one of reducing national saving.3 More generally, to the extent

that social security benefits reduce private saving, the loss from this must be

balanced against the gains in reducing poverty.

          This present paper uses a new and particularly well-suited body of

data to assess the impact of social security benefits on private saving. These

data combine survey evidence on the wealth of individuals in their early sixties


1 Evidence of the powerful effect of the social security rules on retirement is
  given by Boskin (1977), and Pellechio (1979).

2 This depends on the way in which benefits arefinanced and the extent to
  which they distort retirement decisions.

  Even a small reduction in saving involves a welfare loss if taxes on invest-
  ment income place a wedge between the pretax marginal rate of return on capi-
  tal and consumers' marginal rates of time preference. More generally, there
  is a welfare loss on each dollar of reduced net saving if the marginal social
  return on capital exceeds the marginal rate of time preference. See Feldstein
   (1977a).
                                       —3—




with detailed information from administrative records of the Social Security

Administration of the lifetime earnings of those individuals and the social

security benefits to which they are entitled.


           The first section of the paper develops the implication of the

extended life cycle theory and indicates the types of inferences that can in

principle be made by analyzing the current set of data. Section 2 describes the

data and specification in more detail. The statistical estimation problems are

discussed and the results presented in the third section. There is then a brief

conclusi on.



1. Implications of the Extended Life Cycle Theory


           The theoretical relationship between social security retirement bene-

fits and saving has been discussed in detail elsewhere (see Feldstein 1974,

1977b, 1979) and can be summarized here very briefly.

           According to the traditional life cycle model, the individual maximi-

zes the utility of lifetime consumption subject to a lifetime budget constraint.

The solution to the individual's optimization problem implies a pattern of

saving during working years and of dissaving during retirement. The particular

time pattern depends on expected interest rates, the time path of labor income,

and the individual's preferences. An "actuarially—fair lump—sum" (AFLS) social

security program imposes a tax that reduces disposable labor income during the

individual's working years and returns those tax receipts during retirement

years with an increment equivalent to the interest that the individual would
                                      -4-




have earned. By definition, an actuarially—fair lump-sum program leaves the

individual's lifetime budget unchanged and also leaves all relative prices

unchanged. The solution to the individual's optimization plan therefore con-

tinues to imply the same lifetime path of consumption. The social security tax

reduces saving dollar-for-dollar as it is paid and the social security benefits

finance the consumption that would have been paid for by dissaving.

          Relaxing the assumption that the program is actuarially fair modifies

the conclusion only slightly. If the actuarial present value of the benefits is

less than the present value of the taxes, the lifetime budget constraint is

reduced. Individuals will in general consume less in every year. The reduction

in saving would therefore be less than one-for-one. Conversely, a better than

actuarially fair program would induce even greater dissaving during the early years.

          A more basic challenge to the prediction of reduced private saving

comes from those who reject the life cycle model of rational saving. According

to this alternative view, individuals are myopic and save irrationally if at

all. Saving reflects a delayed adjustment of consumption to rising income, a

satisficing level of consumption based on the imitation of a reference group,

the result of mortgage repayment or other contractual obligations, or the out-

come of following arbitrary rules of thumb. The implication of this view is

that only social security prevents individuals from reaching old age with insuf-

ficient resources.1 Katona (1965), Pechrrian et. al. (1968) and others have even


1 Diamond (1977) presents evidence on the low level of private assets of the aged
  but does not distinguish between the assets that exist in the presence of
  social security and the assets that would otherwise exist. See Kotlikoff and
  Summers (1980) for a critical analysis of the Diamond argument and evidence
  on the relation of total retirement assets to preretirement consumption levels.
                                       - 5-.




argued that social security, by reminding people of the importance of providing

for old age, may induce them to save more.

           Some aspects of this view can be tested explicitly with the data that

are available for the current study. The analysis presented below shows how the

assets accumulated by a couple in their early sixties is related to their life-

time earnings and the social security benefits to which they are entitled.

According to the "myopic and irrational" view of saving, a higher level of

social security benefits should have no effect on lifetime asset accumulation.

A significant negative effect of anticipated social security benefits on asset

accumulation would be clear evidence in favor of the life cycle theory.1

           Even within the framework of the traditional life cycle model, there

are at least four reasons why the actual impact of social security may differ

from the one-for-one replacement implied by the simplest form of the life cycle

model ':   (1) Social security is a restricted asset: it is illiquid, cannot be
given away or bequeathed, and cannot be used as collateral for a loan. For

these reasons, social security wealth is likely to replace less than an equal

value of private wealth. (2) Social security provides a real annuity and may

therefore be a more effective replacement. (3) Anticipated social security

benefits are not contractual and may be revised by legislative action;


1 Of course, individuals may differ in the extent to which they are rational
  life-cyclers. The estimated coefficient measures the overall net effect.
  Note also that the coefficient of the social security benefits variable
  measures the effect of inter-individual differences in social security and does
  not preclude the possibility that the provision of social security per se
  induces a recognition of the need for individual retirement planning which
  increases saving.

2 These ideas are discussed more fully in Feldstein and Pellechio (1979).
                                       -6-

pessimists will regard the current legislation as an overstatment of likely benefits

while optimists will expect further increases in benefit levels. (4) Induced

changes in private intergenerational transfers may offset the public transfers of the

social security program.'

          Although these characteristics can influence the magnitude of the effect of

social security on private wealth accumulation, they do not alter the expected direc-

tion of that effect. However, if the traditional life cycle model is replaced by a

more general "extended life cycle" theory, even the direction of the effect of

social security becomes theoretically ambiguous. In particular, as I have noted in

earlier writing (e.g., Feldstein, 1974), dropping the assumptions that the period of

retirement is fixed and that social security benefits and taxes are of a lump-sum

character nakes the effect of social security ambiguous. In particular, the provi-

sion of social security benefits may induce earlier retirement2 which in turn

increases the incentive to save. The net effect of social security in this extended

life-cycle model depends on the balance between the induced retirement effect and the

asset substitution effect. Because the asset substitution effect may be weakened by

the four factors rioted in the previous paragraph, the induced retirement effect might

possibly be the dominant influence.3


1This point has been emphasized by Barro (1974, 1978) and discussed in
 Feldstein (1978, 1979). New evidence on the limited empirical relevance
 of offsetting private transfers is presented in Feldstein (1980).

2The incentive for earlier retirement is obvious when the provision of social
 security benefits is conditional on retirement or reduced earnings as it is in
 the United States. But even if there is no "retirement test", the provision of
 substantial benefits will induce earlier retirement if it is not possible to
 borrow against such benefits; the U.S. law prevents the use of social security
 benefits as security for a loan.

3More generally, the extended life cycle model with endogenous labor supply
 also recognizes that labor supply and earnings during preretirement years may
 respond to the social security program. The nature of this response will
 depend on the extent to which the additional earnings cause higher tax payments
 and the extent to which those tax payments lead to higher retirement benefits.
 The incentives for earlier retirement raise the relative reward for work at
 younger ages and may increase labor supply during those years.
                                       —7—

          In considering this possibility, however, it is important to

distinguish between the total effect of social security and the effect of

niarginal changes in social security benefits. The social security program as

a whole may have induced a substantial increase in retirement while the current

extent of variations in benefits among individuals has a much smaller effect on

retirement. To the extent that the marginal effect on retirement behavior is

small relative to the average effect, the negative asset substitution effect is

likely to dominate.1

          Because of these sources of ambiguity, empirical analysis of the

relation between social security benefits and household wealth accumulation

cannot provide clear evidence against a general extended life cycle model. An

empirical finding that social security had no effect on households' accumulation

of private wealth would not imply that individuals are irrational or myopic but

might simply reflect the offsetting effects of countervailing factors. Despite

these limitations, the empirical analysis can potentially provide evidence in

favor of the extended life cycle model. If the data imply that social security

depresses household wealth accumulation, this provides strong evidence in favor

of the life cycle hypothesis and against the view that saving is irrational or

myopic. Evidence that total wealth accumulation is an increasing function of

both age and lifetime income would also support the life cycle model.


 11t is, of course, the marginal effect of changes in benefits that is
  relevant to the policy issue of the optimal size of the social security
  program.
                                         -8-




            Quite apart from its   contribution   to clarifying the theory of saving,

measuring the impact of potential changes in social security is of substantial

practical importance because of the large magnitude of the Social Security

program.    For the majority of American households, the present actuarial value
of future social security benefits exceeds all other net wealth combined. In
the aggregate, this social security "wealth" reached $4 trillion in 1977,
more than two-thirds of all other private wealth. Moreover, the total tax
collections of the social security program ($97 billion in 1979) nearly equal
total private saving in all forms ($106    billion in 1979).

            No   single study can provide a definitive estimate of the impact of
social security or of the appropriateness of the extended life cycle model.
My previous studies imply that social security does replace private wealth
accumulation by somewhere between 50 cents and one dollar for every dollar of
"social security wealth," i.e., for every dollar of actuarial present value of
future social security benefits.1 These studies thus provide        substantial

support    for the life cycle approach. Although some other researchers have
reported smaller or non-existent effects       of social security, I believe   that
their   conclusions are generally based on misspecified models; these analyses

are examined in Feldstein (1979) and need not be discussed again here.

The current study, based on a new and different type of data, provides


1   These studies are summarized in Feldstein, (1979).
provides further support for my earlier conclusions about the impact of social

security and, because of the much more complete information on lifetime earnings

than was available in previous studies, further evidence about the

appropriateness of the life-cycle model.

2.   The Data, Specifications and Definitions

           In 1969, the Social Security Administration and the Census Bureau

collected extensive information on a sample of individuals who were born between

1905 and 1911. The individuals in the sampling universe excluded married women,

i.e., information was collected on unmarried men and women and on couples in

which the man was between the ages of 58 and 63. The Social Security

Administration then augmented each survey record with information from the

Social Security Administration files on annual earnings in each year since 1951

and the total of earnings between 1937 and 1950.1

           The analysis in this paper focuses on married couples only. Since

most of the unmarried individals in the sample are widows or widowers, a

separate specification of their wealth accumulation behavior would be required

to reflect such things as life insurance proceeds, the earnings of the deceased

spouse, remarriage, etc.

          The sample is also restricted to couples in which neither spouse was

self-employed or employed by the government. Self-employed individuals are


1 The data are officially known as the Longitudinal Retirement History Survey
  and are described in (U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
  1976). Each individual in the sample was reinterviewed every other year
  through 1979. The data that I had when this study began included only the
  survey of 1969 and the administration records through 1974.
                                      -10-




likely to save very differently, particularly if their self-eniploynient involves

a business with significant physical assets. Employees of the federal govern-

ment and of many state and local governments are not covered by social security

but have separate public pensions instead. This exclusion was made if either the

husband or the wife was classified as self-employed or a government employee in

1969, in his or her previous job, or in the job that he or she had held for the

longest period of time.

           A relatively small number of additional couples were eliminated

because of inadequate records; e.g., because the earnings record was incomplete,

the age was apparently incorrect, the "value of house" question was not answered

in an acceptable way, or the number of quarters required to reach the maximum

covered earnings was not feasible. The final sample contains 2087 couples.

           The traditional life cycle model implies that the net worth (NW) of

individuals at retirement age should be a function of lifetime earnings, or,

more precisely, of the accumulated value of lifetime earnings as of that

date (LE)) Under certain more restricted conditions, it can be shown that

the net worth of individual (or couple) i will be a linear function of this

accumulated value:

 (1) NW1 =      + i LEi   +   e1

where e1 is    a random variable that reflects differences in investment

 experience,   tastes, etc.

 'The "accumulated value" is the analog of a discounted value; earnings at
  earlier dates are accumulated with interest to the date of retirement. In
  applying this concept in the current paper, since everyone has not reached
  retirement age the variable LE includes both the
                                                   accumulated value of previous
  earnings and the discounted actuarial value of earnings until age 65. The text
  that   follows provides more information   on the construction of this variable.
                                                —11-.




            The extended life cycle model implies that the accumulation of

private net worth is "reduced" by some fraction of "social security wealth"

(SSW), i.e.,, the actuarial present value of the benefits to which the couple

is entitled at age 65:1


(2) MW =        +    LE1
                           +
                               2   SSWj +   e
If the wealth replacement effect of social security outweighs the induced

retirement effect, 2 will be negative and presumably between zero and minus

one. Of course, as Section 1 explained, other values of 2 are theoretically

possible.

            Three modifications of this specification are worth considering.

First, the accumulation of net worth may depend on the time sequence of

earnings and not just the accumulated value. This will be true when the rate

of return on assets differs over the individual's lifetime or when the actual

evolution of earnings differs from what was expected when the individual entered

the labor force. Although it is not possible to incorporate all this informa-

tion, some indication of differences in the time patterns of earnings can be

allowed for by including the ratio of current earnings to accumulated life-

time earnings (CE/LE) as a factor influencing the fraction of lifetime earnings

that is saved to finance retirement consumption and bequests:2



1 The calculation of social security wealth for each couple in the sample
  is   described below.
2 It   would in principle be possible to do more by comparing each couple's
  earnings history with a standard lifetime evolution of earnings and then
  examining how "surprises" influenced the final accumulation of wealth.
  Alternatively,the LE variable of equation 2 might be replaced by several
  accumulated values corresponding to different portions of the individual's
   life.
                                             -12-


(3)   NW1 = 13U +    + 133 (CE/LE)] LE1 +           2 SSWj + e
           Second, among those who are not yet at retirement age, the ratio

of net worth to accumulated earnings should be an increasing function of age.

Since everyone in the sample is not exactly the same age (although all of the

men are between 58 and 63 years old) the specification should be generalized to

permit variation with age:


(4) NW1 =      +     + 133 (CE/LE) +   13y     AGEH +   135    AGEW] LE1 +        2   SSW1 +   e
where AGEH is the husband's age and AGEW is the wife's age.

          Finally, the assumption that the relationship between net worth and

lifetime earnings is linear can be relaxed in favor of a more general second-

order specification of the form:


(5) NW =        +    + 133   (cE/LE) +   134
                                               AGEH     +
                                                              135
                                                                    AGEWi +   6   LEi] LE +    2   S5W +


Of course, even this more general specification may not reflect the proper non-

linear relation between net worth and lifetime earnings. Since social security

wealth is itself related to lifetime earnings in a nonlinear way, there is

always the possibility that the estimated coefficent of social security wealth

reflects in part the spurious effect of incorrectly specifying the relation

between lifetime income arid net worth. This problem of underidentification or

nisspecification is, of course, a very common one in all empirical analysis

since the explicit functional form can rarely if ever be specified with

certai nty.
                                        -13-




           The value of net worth (NW) used to estimate this equation is the

sum of the values of all assets net .of the values of all liabilities as

reported in the survey questionnaire. Assets include financial assets, real

estate   and other investment property but exclude the value of cars and other
household articles. Unfortunately, the      survey collected no information on the

value    of private pensions.   For some couples, this asset is substantial and its

omission   may bias the estimated coefficients of the other variables   in general

and of the social security wealth variable in particular. The sign of the bias

in the coefficient of SSW depends on whether there is a positive or negative

partial correlation between private pension wealth and social security wealth

(given the values of the other variables in the equation.)

             If the partial correlation between social security wealth and private

pension wealth (given lifetime earnings and age) is negative, the estimated

coefficient of social security wealth will be biased toward zero.1 since social

security benefits are based on income up to a limit while private pensions

coverage tends to be greater for high income workers, the partial correlation is

likely to be negative. Unfortunately, the information on the joint distribution

of lifetime earnings, pension wealth and social security wealth that is needed

to resolve this question fully is not available. It is perhaps reassuring

therefore that the bias is likely to cause an underestimate of the effect of

social security and that the typical values of private pension benefits among

individuals born around 1910 were much smaller than for more recent cohorts.


'This assumes that social security wealth and private pension wealth affect
 the accumulation of fungible net worth (NW) in the same direction; i.e.,
 both discourage or both encourage the accumulation of other forms of net
 worth.
                                         -14-




            Unlike previous survey data which contained only current or recent

earnings, the Retirement History Survey has the earnings histories of the

husband and wife based on Social Security Administration records for each

year between 1951 and 1974. Although this represents a much richer body of

information than has previously been available, there are still several

serious measurement problems in evaluating the accumulated lifetime earnings

variable.       First, earnings in each year are reported only up to   the taxable

maximum   under the Social Security law. More than 80 percent of individuals
have earnings below this limit. For the remaining individuals, the
administrative      record shows the quarter of the year in which the maximum is

reached and this information is used to estimate total annual earnings.1

This process introduces a random error in the measurement of high incomes and

causes a systematic understatement of the highest incomes. There is a further

problem of misestimation for individuals whose earnings exceeded the taxable

maximum and who also had more than one employer.

            A   second source of bias is introduced by the restriction of earnings
to   the amount obtained in employment covered by the Social Security program.

For individuals who worked temporarily for the government or in other un-

covered sectors (not all private occupations and industries were covered

in the first decade of the earnings history information), the calculated value

of LE underestimates the true value of accumulated earnings.



'This method estimation is described in Fox (1976).
                                     —15—




          A third problem is that the detailed earnings history is not

available for years before 1951, a year in which the men in the sample were

between the ages of 40 and 46. The only information on earnings in previous

years is the sum of all covered earnings between 1937 when the social security

program was established and 1950. Because of the importance of military service

during this period, there is no way to distribute these earnings among

individual years. The total pre-1951 earnings are therefore included in the

lifetime earnings variable as if they were earned in 1951.

         Finally, there is no information on the bequests or gifts that

individuals receive. Although this is likely to be a small amount for most

individuals, it represents a further source of measurement error in the

lifetime budget constraint.

         The earnings for each year were restated in 1969 dollars and accumu-

lated (or discounted) to 1969 using a three percent interest rate. Differences

in the actual real rate of return that couples obtained over their lifetime is

a further source of substantial error in measuring the true lifetime budget

constrai nt.

           Finally, lifetime earnings are calculated on the basis of earnings

through age 65, i.e., everyone is assumed to retire at age 65 unless he or she

has already stopped working before that age. Since the actual earnings history

through 1974 is available in the Retirement History Survey record and the

youngest man is then 63, relatively little extrapolation is needed to complete

 earnings profiles through age 65 for the entire sample. The required extra-

 polation assumes that earnings grow at a rate of five percent a year.
                                        -16-




         Despite these problems in measuring the accumulated value of

lifetime earnings, the detailed earnings histories provide sufficient information

to calculate quite precisely the real social security benefits to which each

couple would be entitled at age 65 and beyond. With this information, social

security wealth (SSW) was defined as the present actuarial value as of 1969 of

the benefits to which the couple would be entitled if both were retired when

the man reached age 65 net of the social security taxes to be paid between

1969 and retirement at age 65 or before. These benefits include the potential

survivor's benefit as well as the regular retirement and dependent's benefits.

Since benefits are automatically adjusted for changes in the price level, in-

flation was ignored and the benefits were discounted at a real rate of three

percent. The    calculation   of benefits uses the Social Security law as of

1971 (when the youngest beneficiary reached 65) and therefore reflects the quite

substantial increase in future benefits that was enacted in 1969.        Since this

increase represented a departure from previous benefit-income ratios, the

calculated social security wealth values are probably higher (by 10 to 20

percent) than most individuals would have anticipated on the basis of the

previous history of this program.

          Before turning to the estimated equations, it is useful to review

the characteristics of the sample couples. The mean net worth of these couples

in 1969 was $23,682, or approximately seven times disposable income

per capita for the population as a whole in that year. The standard deviation

              indicates   very substantial variation around this mean.   The average
 of $62,445

 value of social security wealth was approximately twice as large, 45,194,
                                     —17—




with a relatively small standard deviation of $7,068. Total wealth available

to finance retirement consumption therefore averaged $68,875, plus the unobserved

value of private pension wealth.

          It is interesting to compare this retirement wealth with lifetime

earnings. The average accumulated value of lifetime earnings was $244,566 with

a standard deviation of $132,926. The average value of net worth plus social

security wealth therefore equaled about 25 percent of accumulated lifetime

earnings. Thus more than one-fifth of total lifetime resources was available

for consumption after the normal retirement age.

          Finally, the current 1969 earnings per couple averaged $7,9l0 with

a standard deviation of$7,003; this variability reflects the fact that some of

sample were already wholly or partly retired.

3. Parameter Estimates

         This section presents estimates of the parameters of equations 4 and 5.

These estimates imply that higher levels of social security wealth reduce the

accumulation of ordinary wealth. In the specification of equation 4, in which

the accumulation of ordinary net worth is proportional to lifetime earnings,

each extra dollar of social security wealth reduces private wealth accumulation

by approximately one dollar. With the nonlinear specification of equation 5,

in which the accumulation of ordinary net worth is a quadratic function of

 lifetime earnings, the greater colinearity between social security wealth and

the lifetime earnings variables makes precise inference more difficult. The point
                                     -18-



estimates with this specification also imply that higher levels of social

security wealth reduce the accumulation or ordinary wealth but each extra

dollar of social security wealth reduces private wealth accumulation by

approximately 50 cents.

          In addition to ordinary least squares estimates, this section also

presents both instrumental variable estimates and estimates with a heteroske-

dasticity transformation. Table 1 presents the OLS and I.V. estimates of the

untransformed specification o.

          Equation 1.1 implies that each additional dollar of social security

wealth reduces the accumulation of ordinary net worth by 1.11 dollars. The

standard error of 0.24 implies that the substitution is not significantly

different from one-for-one. Conventional inference rules imply that there

is less than one chance in ten that each additional dollar of social security

wealth replaces less than 75 cents of ordinary wealth.

          The other coefficients of equation 1.1 are plausible and consistent

with a priori expectations. An additional dollar of lifetime earnings raises

net worth by -0.54 + 6.84   l0 AGEH + 4.58     i° AGEW; evaluating this at the

mean values of AGEH (61 years) and AGEW (57 years) implies that each dollar

of additional lifetime earnings raises net worth by 14 cents. An additional

year of age for the husband or wife has a positive but small effect. Adding

a year to the ages of both husband and wife raises net worth by   11.42 per

 1,000 of lifetime earnings. Since net worth averages about 250 per 1,000

of lifetime earnings, the increase is relatively small. Finally, the

coefficient of current earnings indicates that recent earnings are likely
                                                         Table    1


                                  Parameter Estimates of the Net Worth Equations

                        Constant        LE      SSW          CE       AGEH x LE   AGEW x LE    LE2         R2    N

                                                                       (103)       (13)        (106)
           Estimation                                                    4
Equation    Met hod

  1.1       0.L.S.       26907         -0.54    —1.11        1.46        6.84       4.58                 0.16   2087
                         (9851)        (0.19)   (0.24)      (0.24)      (3.05)     (0.89)



  1.2       0.L.S.       15421         —0.24    —0.35        1.11        0.35       3.96       0.18      0.17   2087
                         (9956)        (0.19)   (0.27)      (0.24)      (3.21)     (0.89)      (0.03)


  1.3       I.V.         27973         -0.78    -1.04        1.80       10.56       4.34                 0.13   2087
                        (10993)        (0.23)   (0.28)      (0.27)      (3.74)     (1.08)


  1.4       I.V.         21123         —0.35    -0.42        0.60        2.62       3.07       0.25      0.13   2087
                        (11218)        (0.28)   (0.36)      (0.52)      (4.74)     (1.17)      (0.009)



The dependent variable in each equation is the net worth of the couple.
Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The instrumental variable equations
use SSW, CE, AGEH, AGEW and the dummy variables as the instrument set.              See text
for definitions of variables. Equations 1.1 and 1.3 correspond to equation 4 in
the text while equations 1.2 and 1.4 correspond to equation 5.
                                          -20—




to   have a bigger effect on wealth accumulation than earlier earnings that

made the same contribution to the accumulated value of lifetime earnings.

           Equation 1.2 adds the quadratic term in lifetime earnings. Its

coefficient is statistically significant and has an economically plausible

value. The new specification implies that each additional dollar of lifetime

earnings raises net worth by 9 cents at the mean value of lifetime earnings.

For a couple with lifetime earnings equal to the mean plus one standard

deviation, this increases from 9 cents to 14 cents; with lifetime earnings

one standard deviation below the mean, the 9 cents drop to 4 cents.

            The coefficient of social security wealth is now substantially lower,

only -0.35. The standard error implies that a 50 percent confidence interval

stretches from -0.27 to -0.53; there is approximately one chance in 10 of

observing this estimate if the true value of the coefficient is positive.

            The errors in the measurement of lifetime earnings that were discussed

in the previous section could make these OLS estimates biased and inconsistent.

Even though the social security wealth variable itself is measured quite

accurately, the estimate of its coefficient can be inconsistent if the lifetime

earnings variable is measured with error since the two variables are correlated.

This    inconsistency can in principle be eliminated by instrumental variable
 estimation. Since there is no natural instrumental variable in the available
 data (i.e., a variable that is highly      correlated with true lifetime earnings

 but   uncorrelated with the measurement error in the constructed       measure of

 lifetime   earnings), I   have   used an extension of Wald's (1940)   method.
                                        -21-


    More specifically,    the range of the lifetime earnings variable is divided into

four sections and binary variables are used to denote each section; three such

binary variables are then included in the instrument set. If the division into

four sections corresponded to the true lifetime earnings, this procedure would

be fully consistent. In reality since the classification is not perfect,

the estimates are still inconsistent but should have smaller assymptotic bias

than the O.L.S. estimates. The other variables in the instrument set

are social security wealth, current earnings and the two age variables.

Excluded from the instrument set are therefore lifetime earnings, the product

of lifetime earnings with each age variable, and the square of lifetime

earni nys.

             The instrumental variable estimates are presented in equations

1.3 and 1.4 of Table 1. The absolute size of the lifetime earnings coefficents

are increased, suggesting that the O.L.S. estimates were subject to the usual

type of errors in variables bias (toward zero). The coefficients of the social

security wealth variable change relatively little with both estimates moving

in the direction of minus one.

             The very substantial variation in all of the key variables suggests

that the residuals are likely to be heteroskedastic and, more specifically,

that the variance of the residuals is likely to be an increasing function of

lifetime earnings. This implies that O.L.S. estimation gives too much weight

to the couples with high lifetime earniigs. The reasonable assumption that
                                         -22-




the standard deviation of the residual is proportional to accumulated lifetime

earnings implies that the heteroskedasticity can be eliminated by dividing all

of the variables (including the constant term) by accumulated lifetime earnings.

         Unfortunately, this transformation is likely to exacerbate the errors

in variables problem. In particular, dividing social security wealth by

accumulated lifetime earnings introduces a correlation between that variable

and the error in the other variables that depend on lifetime earnings. The

use of a consistent alternative to 0.L.S. estimation may therefore by important

with this transformed specification even though the use of instrumental

variables had relatively little effect with the undeflated specification of

Table 1. Two approaches to instrumental variable estimation were tried. The

first method extends the Wald -   type   procedure by creating three additional

binary variables on the basis of the ratio of social security wealth to life-

time earnings. More specifically, these variables indicate whether the ratio

is: less than 0.15; 0.15 to 0.20; or 0.20 to 0.35. The appropriateness of

these six binary variables (i.e. the three based on lifetime earnings and the

three based on the social security wealth ratio) depends on the extent of

measurement error. Unfortunately, the ratio of social security wealth to

lifetime earnings might well be misclassified. Although these estimates should

have a smaller asymptotic bias than the OLS estimates, the remaining bias could

still be large.

         The second method, which also builds on Wald's procedure, sacrifices

efficiency in order to achieve essentially complete consistency. The sample

 is divided into three groups according to the ratio of social security wealth
                                               -23-


to lifetime earnings: less than 0.15; 0.15 to 0.35; and greater than 0.35.

The observations in the middle group are then discarded. A single binary

variable   corresponding to the low group is then used as an instrumental
variable. Since there is only          a very small probability of misclassifying

a   couple with a low true ratio of social security wealth       to lifetime earnings

as   a high   ratio couple or vice versa, the estimates produced in     this way should
have a substantially smaller asymptotic bias. Although a substantial fraction

of   the sample is sacrificed by this procedure, the remaining sample has 806
observations.
              Table 2 presents     results for the three kinds of estimators:

ordinary      least squares; instrumental     variables; and the third method, which

I    will refer to as the Wald procedure. The column captions show the
variables      as they appear in equations 4 and 5 of the text and then, in

square brackets, the actual regression variables in the deflated estimation

equati on.

              The   basic   ordinary least squares estimates in equation 2.1 are

generally very insignificant and have very little explanatory power. Only the

coefficients of current earnings and of the wife's age exceed their standard

errors. The other coefficients generally differ in order of magnitude or sign

from the corresponding coefficients in Table 1. The same discrepancy and lack

of statistical significance prevail in equation 2.2 when the quadratic effect

of lifetime earnings is introduced. Since deflation to correct for heteroske-

dasticity is intended to incease the efficiency of the estimates and not to

correct for biases, the change in coefficients between Tables 1 and 2 indicates

that something more than heteroskedasticity is involved. In particular, it

suggests the errors in variables problem that I described above.
                                                      Table 2

                                Parameter Estimates of Deflated Net Worth Equations


                      Constant      LE        SSW         CE   AGEH x LE    AGEW x LE   LE2       R2      N

                       [1/LE]      [1]      [SSW/LE]    [CE/LE] [AGEH]        [AGEW]    [LE]

                                                                  (10-3)     (i0)       (10-6)
         Estimation                                                 84         85         86
Equation   Method
  2.1      0.L.S.      1387        —0.09      0.01        0.51      0.46      2.17               0.01   2087
                       (3719)      (0.17)    (0.11)      (0.19)    (2.70)    (0.81)

  2.2      0.L.S.      2044        -0.03      0.16        0.41     -1.80      1.80       0.27    0.03   2087
                       (3689)      (0.17)    (0.11)      (0.19)    (2.71)    (0.80)     (0.05)

  2.3      I.V.        27732       —1.37     —0.91        4.23     16.87      6.08               0.01   2087
                      (15792)      (0.52)    (0.45)      (2.11)    (6.72)    (1.73)

  2.4      I.V.        12186        0.10     -0.03       -1.13     -3.21      1.40       0.36    0.02   2087
                      (14974)      (0.59)    (0.46)      (2.33)    (7.86)    (1.95)     (0.09)

  2.5      Wald        46718       —1.38     -1.34        0.17     18.12      7.66               0.02    806
                      (13448)      (0.44)    (0.39)      (0.28)    (6.62)    (1.97)

  2.6      Wald        28818       -0.85     -0.72        0.17     10.04      5.43       0.14    0.03    806
                      (18060)      (0.57)    (0.58)      (0.27)    (8.54)    (2.46)     (0.10)

  2.7      0.L.S.       1879       -0.24     -0.03        0.27      2.74      3.11               0.01    806
                       (4844)      (0.30)    (0.14)      (0.27)    (4.79)    (1.44)

  2.8      0.L.S.       2423       —0.12      0.13        0.20     —0.54      2.43       0.25    0.03    806
                       (4806)      (0.29)    (0.14)      (0.27)    (4.83)    (1.44)     (0.06)



The dependent variable in each equation is the ratio of the couple's net worth to their accumu-
lated lifetime earnings. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The instrumental variable
equations use SSW, CE, AGEH, AGEW and the dummy variables as instruments. See text for defini-
tions of variables and discussion of the I.V. and Wald estimation methods.
                                      -25-




           The instrumental variable estimates presented in equation 2.3 tend

to confirm this diagnosis. The coefficients of this equation are quite similar

to the coefficients of the undeflated equation 1.3 that is also estimated by

the method of instrumental variables. Although the explanatory power of the

equation remains low, each of the coefficients is more than twice its standard

error. The coefficient of the social security wealth variable, -0.91, is quite

similar to the -1.04 obtained in the undeflated specification.

           Adding the extra lifetime earnings variable causes substantial changes

in the other coefficients. The coefficient of the social security variable

drops   in absolute value to a trivial -0.03 with a standard error of 0.46.
The coefficient of the current earning variable becomes implausibly negative
and insignificant. The husband's age variable also becomes negative and
insignificant.    Indeed, the only coefficient that exceeds its standard error

is the new accrued lifetime earnings variable itself. One interpretation is

that this is the correct specification, i.e., that age, current earnings and

social security wealth are all irrelevant and that the ratio of net worth to

lifetime earnings is determined primarily by the level of lifetime income.

My own belief is that such a specification is implausible on a priori grounds

and that the parameter estimates of equation 2.4 are the result of either

inadequate instrumental variables or the fact that the lifetime earnings

variable is the only variable in the transformed specification with a

substantial range of variation.
                                     —26-




        The Wald estimators, presented in equations 2.5 and 2.6, support

this view. These coefficients imply a significant role for age and social

security wealth as well as lifetime earnings as determinants of accumulated

net worth. The coefficients in equation 2.5 are generally similar to those

of the instrumental variable estimates of equation 2.3.   The coefficient of the

social security wealth variable is -1.34 which, with a standard error of 0.39,

is not significantly different from minus one. When the quadratic effect is

introduced in equation 2.6, the other coefficients remain qualitatively similar.

In particular, the social security coefficient becomes -0.72 with a standard

deviation of 0.58. The age variables remain positive and are only slightly

diminished in magnitude. The impact of a change in lifetime earnings also

remains similar when evaluated at the mean value of lifetime earnings.

         The two final equations of Table 2 are based on the same censored

sample that was used with the Wald procedure but the estimation is by ordinary

least squares. These coefficients confirm that it is the consistent instrumental

variable aspect of Wald's procedure and not the nature of the sample that

produces the estimates of equation 2.5 and 2.6.

4. Conclusion

           This paper has examined a very rich body of data on social security

 benefits, lifetime earnings, histories, and net worth accumulation. The

 estimated net worth equations provide quite strong support for the extended

 life cycle model in general and for the specific hypothesis that increased

 social security benefits reduce private wealth accumulation.
                                       -27—




         The estimated magnitude of the effect of social security wealth

depends on the specification of the equation and the method of estimation.

In the most basic linear specification, the data imply that each dollar of

additional social security wealth reduces private wealth accumulation by

approximately one dollar. This is true of both the ordinary least squares

and instrumental' variable estimates; when the variables are all deflated

to reduce heteroskedasticity, the same dollar-for—dollar substitution is

found when the coefficients are estimated by an instrumental variable method

or a iriethod based on Wald's procedure.

         A more general specification, with a quadratic effect of lifetime

earnings, was also estimated. The increased colinearity makes it more

difficult to estimate the coefficients of the other variables, particularly

when all of the variables are deflated by lifetime earnings. Moreover, the

deflated estimates seem particularly subject to the problem of measurement

error and the estimates of all the coefficients are quite sensitive to the

method of estimation. The estimated coefficient of social security wealth

was also unstable but varied between -0.35 and -0.72 in the equations in

which the other parameters had plausible values. More generally, the estimates

show the importance of using a consistent estimation procedure that is quite

robust with respect to substantial measurement error.
                                    -28



        On balance, the estimates in this study favor the extended life cycle

model as a theory of asset accumulation and indicate a substantial substitution

of social security wealth for private wealth accumulation. It is unnecessary

to repeat all of the caveats that were discussed in earlier sections. The

nonexperimental character of economic research makes it almost inevitable that

no single study can provide a decisive test of a theory or a conclusive

measurement of a key parameter. Only by combining evidence from several studies

can uncertainty be reduced and a conclusion reached with confidence.


Cambridge, Massachusetts
May, 1980
                                  —29—

                              Bibliography


Barro, Robert (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Worth?" Journal of

          Political Economy (November/December), vol. 82, no. 6, pp.1095—117.

____________ (1978), "The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving,"

          The American Enterprise Institute Studies, No. 199.

Boskin, Michael J. (1977), "Social Security and Retirement Decisions,"

          Economic Inquiry (January), Vol. 15, No. 1.

Diamond, Peter (1977), "A Framework for Social Security Analysis," Journal

          of Public Economics, 8:3, December, pp.275—98.

Feldstein, Martin (1974), "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate

          Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 82,

         No.5, September/October, pp.905—926.

________________   (l977a),   "Does the U.S. Save Too Little?" American

         Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 1, February 1977, pp.116—21.

________________   (l977b),   "Social Security and Private Savings: International

         Evidence in an Extended Life—Cycle Model," in The Economics of

         Public Services, an International Economic Association Conference

         Volume, M. Feldstein and R. Inman (eds.).

_______________    (1978), "Social Security and Private Savings: Reply to
         Barro,"audies in Social Security and Retirement Policy, American

         Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C.

________________   (1979), "The Effect of Social Security on Saving," The
         1979 Frank Paish Lecture to the British Association of University

         Teachers of Economics, forthcoming.

_______________    (1980), "Social Security, Government Debt and Inter-
         generational Transfers: Some Direct Evidence" (forthcoming).

______________ and Anthony J. Pellechio (1979), "Social Security and
         Household Wealth Accumulation: New Microeconometric Evidence,"

         Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXI, No. 3, pp.361—68.
                                —30—



Fox, Alan (1976), Alternative Measures of Earnings Replacement for Social

          Security Benefits, from Reaching Retirement Age, Research Report

         No.47, Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security

          Administration, Government Printing Office. (Appears as part of

          Appendix F, Methodology for Chapter 14.)

Harrod, R, (1948), Towards a Dynamic Economics. London: Macmillan.

Katona, C. (1965), "Private Pensions and Individual Saving," Survey

          Research Center, Institute for Social Research, University of

          Michigan.

Kotlikoff, Laurence and Lawrence Summers (l980),"Do People Save Adequately

          for Their Retirement?" National Bureau of Economic Research

          Working Paper (forthcoming).

Modigliani, Franco (1970), "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and

          Intercountry Differences in the Saving Ratio," in W. A. Eltis

          etal. (ed.), Induction, Growth and Trade, Essays in Honor of Sir

          Roy Harrod, Oxford.

________________ and A. ndo (1957), "Tests of the Life Cycle Hypothesis of
          Savings," Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics

           (May), Vol.19, pp.99—104.

________________ and R. Brumberg (1954), "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
          Function:    An Interpretation of Cross—Section Data" in K. Kurihara

           (ed.), Post Keynesian Economics, New Brunswick.

 Pechman, J., H. Aaron and M. Taussig (1968), Social SecurityL Perspectives

           for Reform. Washington: The Brookings Instituttion.

 Pellechio, Anthony J. (1979), "Social Security Financing and Retirement

           Behavior," American Economic Review, Vol.69, No. 2, pp.284—87
                                  —31—



U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (1976), Almost 65:

          Baseline Data from the Retirement History Study. Washington, D.C.

Wald, A. (1940), "The Fitting of Straight Lines if Both Variables are

          Subject to Error," Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp.284—300.
