                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       LABOR MARKETS AND EVALUATIONS OF VOCATIONAL
      TRAINING PROGRAMS IN THE PUBLIC HIGH SCHOOLS
            -   TOWARD A FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYSIS



                      Alan L. Gustman
                   Thomas L. Steinmeier


                   Working Paper No. 18




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                          May 1980



The research reported herein was supported by the ASPE
Office of Welfare and is part of the NBER's research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research or the HEW. We would like to thank
our colleagues Meir Kohn and Robert Plotnick for their
comments, and Lawrence Brown for his help and encourage-
ment throughout the proj ect • The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Economics.
                                                            NBE1 .Woridng Paper 47,8
                                                                            tay, l9O



       Labor Markets and Evaluations of Vocational Training Programs
        in the Public High Schools — Toward a Framework for Analysis


                                  ABSTRACT



      A simplified model is constructed to analyze the role played by vocational

training programs In high schools. The model assumes that there are two kinds

of educational programs in high schools, vocational and general. It also

assumes that there are two types of jobs for high school graduates. One job

requires training that either can be obtained from a vocational program in

high school or as general training on the job. The other job has no special

training requirements.

      The model is used In two ways. First, it is used to examine how the

equilibrium outcome is affected by limitations on the number of places in the

vocational training program and by the minimum wage. Second, it helps to

determine   what can   be. laarnea: fionistudis that take Wiat has become a. standard

approach    to   evaluating high school vocational training programs —   attempting
to   estmate. th,e productIvity o thsa    program by cornparing. the earnings o'f

vocational   and nonvocational program graduates.
      We conclude that whether or not limitations on enrollments In      vocational
programs   and minimum wages influence the wage difference between vocational

and nonvocational program graduates, findings based on the standard approach

to cost—benefit analysis of high school vocational training programs may

prove to be highly misleading guides for policy.
                                                          Alan L. Gustman
                                                          Thomas L. Steinmeier
                                                          Department of Economics
                                                          Dartmouth College
                                                          Hanover, New Hampshire 03755
                                                           (603) 646—2641
                                                           (603) 646—2531
      Vocational training is a frequently elected program in high schools. Of

the more than 22,000 high school seniors included in the National Longitudinal

Survey of the high school class of 1972, fully 24 percent followed this course

of study. As may be expected for a large public program, there have been a

number of studies attempting to evaluate vocational education programs in the

public schools. Commonly, the evaluation consists of measuring the difference

in earnings and employment experience between those who enroll in vocational

programs and those who do not, and making a comparison of the appropriate dif-

ferential with program costs. Considerable effort has been made by some re-

searchers to standardize for differences in students' backgrounds, abilities

and non—observable characteristics, and for variation in program quality.1

However, few of these studies question whether earnings or employment differ-

entials are really an appropriate measure of the value of vocational programs.

      Presumably, the principal issue is the effect of a vocational program on

economic welfare. To measure the effect of a vocational program, one must

compare economic welfare in the presence and absence of such a program. It is

not sufficient simply to measure the differences in circumstances between

those who enroll in the program and those who do not. Indeed, we will show

that under some circumstances a program may be associated with a narrow or

even no differential, and yet it may have a large positive effect on the over-

all economic welfare of all students.2



         Earlier studies of this type include Taussig (1968) and Corazzini
 (1968). Meyer and Wise (1979) conclude that high school vocational programs
are not productive after finding no difference in earnings or employment ex-
perience between those who had enrolled in the program and those who had not.
       2
         We do not focus in this analysis on social as well as private returns
to vocational programs. Our main focus is on how to measure the benefits from
vocational training programs accruing to high school graduates. A complete
discussion would consider the effects of the program on the returns to other
factors, and would also consider the effects of taxes used to finance any ad-S
ditional costs of vocational training in high schools.
      These ideas will be further explored in the remainder of the paper. A

simple model with two kinds of jobs and two kinds of high school programs will

serve as a basis of analysis. The economic welfare of the students will be

approximated by the present value of their earnings. It will be seen how

various features of the labor market——e.g., the demand for vocationally

trained workers and for other workers, the cost of alternative on—the—job

training programs, and the size of the vocational training program itself--all

help to determine the level of these earnings. In addition, the analysis

will investigate how these same features influence the earnings differentials

between those who have completed a vocational course of study and those who

have not. This will help to illuminate the relationship between the level of

earnings and the earnings differentials measured by many studies. There is

also an interesting sidelight to our analysis. Feldstein (19731, Mattila

(1978) and Mincer and Leighton (1979) have all noted that minimum wages may

limit the extent of general on—the-job training because such training is fi-

nanced by a reduction in wages during the training period, and a floor on

wages limits any wage reduction. An expected result is that jobs will be less

available to those who are untrained, opportunities for on—the—job training

will be reduced in the face of a minimum wage, and there will be some tendency

to prolong schooling.3 Our model permits an analysis of the impact of the

minimum wage in a setting which has not been considered previously. We find

that an effect of a successful vocational training program in the high schools

would be to mitigate the adverse impact of the minimum wage.

      Before turning to a discussion of the basic model, one point should be

emphasized. This paper simply assumes that the vocational education program

       3
         For evidence consistent with this scenario, see also Custman and
Steinmeier (1979).
                                                —3—



        is effective and then analyzes its potential impact in the labor market. It

•
        provides no evidence on whether the program is actually effective. Such evi—
    •

        dence may   be   provided by subsequent empirical tests of the model. The analy-

        sis does imply, however, that negative findings of earlier empirical studies——

        findings of no difference in earnings between vocational program and other

        high school graduates (e.g., see Meyer and Wise, 1979)——need not imply that

        vocational training is ineffective.

              Section I explores the impact of vocational education in a model with an

        inelastic supply of high school graduates and with no effective minimum wage.

        The possible effects of having the alternative of dropping out of school or

        continuing beyond high school is introduced in the form of a positively sloped

        supply curve in Section II. Section III analyzes the effects of a vocational

        program in the face of a minimum wage. An issue which needs to be considered

        when estimating the returns to vocational training is discussed in Section IV,

        while V contains some concluding comments.



                                                 I

              To keep the model as simple as possible, while retaining essential ele-

        ments of behavior, we assume that high school students may enroll in only two

        kinds of programs, called here vocational training and other high school

        training. Upon graduation, they may work in two kinds of jobs, denoted as T—

        type and 0—type jobs. The T-type jobs require training which may be obtained

        either on-the-job or by enrolling in a vocational program in high school. The

        training is general rather than specific——i.e., it is of use to more than one

        firm (Becker, 1975). The 0—type jobs require only a traditional high school

        education. Young people with similar training are assumed to be equally pro-

        ductive when employed in similar jobs, and on-the-job training and high school
                                        —4--




vocational training are assumed to be equally effective preparation for T-type

jobs.

        Consider first a model in which there is a fixed number of students, N,

who will be graduating from high school and entering the labor market. These

students are presumed to prefer very slightly nonvocational programs and to be

indifferent between the two types of jobs available after graduation.4 A fur—

ther important simplification is that the role of uncertainty is ignored. Fu-

ture wages are known with accuracy, and no account is taken of the possibility

that a student might want to change his or her mind after enrolling in one

high school program or the other. Thus any difference in the tioptionhi value

of the two programs associated with the greater acceptability of graduates of

one of the programs to institutions of higher education is ignored. Finally,

perfect capital markets are assumed. This implies that students are concerned

with the present value of their earnings streams and not with the distribution

of those earnings over time.

        For students choosing the vocational training program, the present value

of their earnings streams is given by


                                wV =fwe_Ytdt

where wT is the annual wage in T—type jobs, S2 is the time period over which

the student expects to work, and y is the net effect of real wage growth and

the discount rate over time. Throughout this paper, upper case W's refer to



         We assume the difference in preference is so small it will create an
imperceptible compensating differential in the wage. While it would not be
difficult to incorporate explicitly a strong differential preference for gen-
eral or vocational schooling, the presentation would be complicated without
changing the thrust of the analysis. The very slight preference is enough to
insure that in the model students do not elect a vocational program while
never intending to use the training.
                                               —5—




discounted earnings streams, and lower case w's refer to annual wages. Defin-

ing the constant k as


                                           k =fe'tdt,


the discounted earnings stream for a student electing the vocational training

program is


                                            Wv =   kw
                                                     T


For students enrolled in other high school programs, the discounted earnings

stream in 0—type jobs is similarly given by


                                 W0 =      I w0eYtdt     kw0,


where w0 is the annual wage in 0—type jobs.

      Students in other high school programs who later engage in on-the-job

training for T—type jobs must divide their working life into two parts. Dur-

ing the first part, denoted by 21, they must accept an annual wage below
                                                                           WT
reflecting both the direct costs of training and the reduced productivity dur-

ing the training period. If this amount is given by an amount "a" per year,

then the net annual wage to these workers during the period of on—the—job

training is WT -   a.   During the remainder of their working life, denoted by 2'

they receive the usual wage for people working in T—type jobs, WT. Thus, the

present value of wages for people electing on—the—job training is


                         =   I   (wT
                                       —   a)e Ytdt + I   wTedt.

Defining the constant k' as
                                         —b-




                                 k' =    f eItdt,

the present value may be rewritten as


                           Wt =kwT —k'a=W v-k'a.

Note that, by construction, k' < k.

      Now consider the determination of the wage levels, WT and w0, for the

two types of jobs. On the demand side, wages for workers of the generation

under consideration are given by the net demand equations


                                wT = dT(N      + Nt)


                                     =


where N0 is the number of workers in 0—type jobs and where N and Nt are the

numbers of workers in T—type jobs who have had vocational and on—the-job

training, respectively. Lower case d's indicate demand functions in terms of

annual wages, while the upper case D's used later represent demand functions

in terms of discounted wage streams. On the supply side, workers are presumed

to choose their participation in vocational or on—the—job training to maximize

the present value of their earnings. This is subject to the constraint that

the number of workers who have undergone vocational training cannot exceed the

capacity   of the vocational training program, given by C.
      Let   us begin the analysis with two extreme cases. The first case sup-

poses that vocational training is available to all who desire it. Under such

circumstances, it is clear that no one will opt for on—the—job training, since

the present value for earnings for vocationally trained persons is higher by

an amount k'a   than for on—the—job trained persons. Students will elect
                                            —7—




vocational training until wages for vocationally trained persons are driven

down   to the same level as those for students in the other high school pro-
grams.
         Figure   1 illustrates the result. D0(N0) =
                                                       kd0(N0) is the demand func-
tion for high school graduates in 0—type jobs, expressed in terms of the dis-

counted earnings stream.5 With Nt= 0, D(N) =
                                                      kdT(N) is the corresponding
demand function for vocational training graduates. Students elect the voca-

tional training program until wages there are equalized with the earnings of

other program graduates. This occurs at a present value earnings level of

       with a corresponding yearly wage of           N** students elect the voca-

tional training program and N** students the other high schbol programs, with

N** + N** = N.
 V     0
         The other extreme case occurs when vocational training is not available

at all in the high schools. Under such circumstances, N = 0, and the demand

curve D for vocational training graduates is irrelevant. The demand by em-

ployers for workers in T-type jobs must be fulfilled by on-the—job training.

Expressed in present value terms, the demand for on—the—job trained persons is

Dt(N) = kdT(Nt) —      k'a,   which must lie below the corresponding curve D for

vocational training graduates. Here, workers elect on—the—job training until

the earnings advantage for such training is eliminated. This occurs at an

earnings level W, with N        workers   remaining in 0-type jobs and N   engaging   in

on—the-job training and going into T-type jobs. In comparison to the unlimited

vocational training case, wages and employment in T—type jobs are both less

here, and employment in 0-type jobs is higher.




         This relationship between yearly wages and discounted earnings streams
implicitly assumes that the analysis is of the "steady state" variety.
                                          —8—


                                         Figure 1


                Market for 0-type employees         Market for T-type employees




   w
       **




        Now consider the cases falling between the extremes, cases in which the

number of vocational places is positive but limited to some number less than

the number who would attend if there were no limits.6 First, let vocational

training be introduced in the high schools at any level C between 0 and N.

These C workers will fill T—type jobs, and an additional N -, C other program

graduates will undergo on—the—job training to work in T—type jobs. This again

equalizes the wages of general training graduates whether they remain in 0—

type jobs or undergo on-the-job training for T-type jobs. The wages of other

program high school graduates remain at W so long as C is less than N.            The



            6
         Newspapers (e.g., New York Times, Survey of Education, January 6,
1980) and available scholarly material (see the discussion in Nelson [1977];
e.g., pp. 132—133) suggest that there has been a dramatic turnaround in the
vacancy—enrollment situation in vocational programs. Instead of vocational
programs consituting a lower track to which those at the bottom of the class
are assigned, many schools have to contend with excess applications for availa-
ble places in vocational training programs. It appears in practice that the
vocational track in a comprehensive high school may provide a program that is
less desirable than the program available in regional vocational centers. The
basic organization of these programs differs from state to state.
                                            —9—




wages of vocational training graduates are W, which is higher than W by an

amount k'a. This amount       reflects   the fact that vocational training graduates

need incur no additional training expenses to engage in P-type jobs.

          If more than    but fewer than N** vocational training positions are

available, then the wage for vocational training graduates will be given along

the demand curve D and will be less than W. The number of other program
                 v                       v
graduates remaining to fill 0—type jobs falls below N*, and wages for 0-type

jobs rises above W* according to the demand curve D. The wage differential

between 0—type and P—type jobs narrows to less than k'a, and no one undergoes

on—the-job training if C > N*.

      The preceding analysis indicates that there is a relationship between

wages for other program and vocational program graduates and the size of the

vocational training program. Figure 2 illustrates this relationship. Wages

for the two types of graduates are constant at W and W as long as the voca-

tional training program has fewer than C* positions, where C* =             If there
                                                                       N.
are more than C positions, the wages for the two groups narrow until equality

is reached at C positions. C** corresponds to the quantity N** in Figure 1.

          Many studies of vocational training programs seek to establish the dif-

ferential between the discounted wage streams of vocational and other program

graduates. In terms of Figure 2, they seek to establish the difference

W —   W        This difference is related to the current actual size of the voca—
 V        0.
tional     training program, but the possibility of a relationship between the

wage differential and the size of the vocational training program is almost

universally ignored.

          The wage differential found by these studies measures the value of the

vocational training program to the marginal enrollee in the program. In other

words, it answers the question: If the program were to be cut back (enlarged)
                                       —10—




by one position, what would happen to the wages of that person dropped from

(added to) the program? More importantly, it does not answer the question:

What is the effect of the vocational training program on the wages paid to the

N graduates of both programs?7




                                    Figure 2


   Wages as a Function of Vocational Program Capacity
                      *                                           Legend
                          _____________________

                                                                   —-----Wa




       This point may be illustrated by referring to Figure 2. If the voca-

tional training program has C positions, the measured wage differential be-

tween vocational training and other program graduates will be zero. And yet

with     openings, wages are W, versus the figure of W" which would occur in

the absence of any vocational training program. Hence, the value of the Voca-

tional trainingprogram to the N workers is W** — W per worker, in spite of

the fact that the measured wage differential between vocational training and




         The reader is again reminded that our discussion focuses on the value
of private returns to high school graduates rather than social returns to vo—
cational training.
                                      —11—



other program graduates is zero.

       The effects of the vocational training program on the N workers may be

summarized by looking at the total wage bill of the workers. Figure 3 depicts

the relationship between this wage bill and the size of the vocational train-

ing program. The wage bill is found simply by adding the wages of the general

training and vocational training graduates separately:


(1)                      WB = CW(C) + (N —         C)W(C),

where W and W are the functions of C indicated in Figure 2.
       V      0
       For levels of the vocational training program less than C*, the wage

bill reduces to:


                                = * v+     (N -    C)w*
                                                      0

                                = * +      (W* —   W*)C.
                                    0          v    0




                                    Figure 3


      The Wage Bill as a Function of Vocational Program Capacity
               WB




                                           *             **
                                       C             C
                                     —12—



This is a straight line with intercept NW* and slope W —   W,   as indicated in

Figure 3. Note, however, that as the vocational training program is increased

in this range, the resulting increases in the wage bill are not being shared

equally. Rather, they accrue to the students who manage to win positions in

the vocational training program.

      Beyond C, the wages of the vocational training graduates begin to de—

dine, but the wages of the other program graduates increase. The net effect

on the total wage bill is indeterminate in this area. The slope of the wage

bill as a function of vocational training program size is found by differen-

tiating equation (1), and substituting D and D0 for W and W.


                 dWB/dC = (1 + _!_)D(c) - (1   + —)D(N — C).


In this equation, DV and D 0are the labor demand functions in Figure 1, and E
                                                                             V
and    are the elasticities of these demand functions. Depending upon these

values, the wage bill may either rise or fall to the right of C*, as indicated

by the alternative functions in Figure 3. In any case, it is clear that the

wage bill at C must exceed that at C =   0,   since W   > W.
      The principal point of this discussion is that the overall value to the

workers of a vocational training program of size C must be found by comparing

the wage bill at C with the wage bill which would have been observed in the

absence of the program. Merely calculating the difference in present dis-

counted wages between vocational training graduates and other graduates will

give the value of the program to the marginal enrollee, but it may give very

misleading estimates of the total value of the program.
                                         —13—



                                          II

        In this section, we drop the assumption that the total number of high

school graduates is fixed at N, thus implicitly introducing the option of se-

lecting some level of schooling other than terminating education after comple-

tion of high school. Instead, the amount of labor supplied to jobs requiring

a high school degree is taken to be a function of the wage rate available to

the workers:


(2)                           N = L(W), where L' > 0


A new complication arises when a positively sloped supply function is intro-

duced into the analysis because all workers do not receive the same wage. In

most cases, the discounted wage is higher for a person enrolling in a voca-

tional training program than for one who does not. Since different individuals

have different reservation wages and also receive wage offers that differ, the

exact number who choose a high school degree depends on which wage offers those

with different reservation wages receive——i.e., on the mechanism which allo-

cates positions in vocational training programs to those with different reser-

vation wages. To pursue the analysis further, we specify the labor supply

function in more detail.

        Let W, be the wage prevailing to vocational training graduates, and let

L(W) be the labor supply that would come forth if everyone were to be paid

this wage. Assuming that the probability of securing a position in a voca-

tional training program is independent of the reservation wage, the probabil-

ity   of obtaining a position in the vocational training program (and the wage

that goes along with it) is C/L(W), and the probability of failing to get

into the program is 1   -   C/L(W).   Now let L(W) be the number of people who

would choose exactly a high school education at the lower wage of other
                                       —14—




 graduates. Of this number, L(W) C/L(w) of those who apply for admission

 into the vocational training program succeed in getting in. The remainder,

 L(W).[l - C/L(W)J, apply to the vocational training program and fail to get

 in, but are willing to work anyway at the lower wage. The total number ending

 up with a high school degree is this number plus the C persons who did succeed

 in obtaining positions in the vocational training program:


 (3)                      N = C + L(W).[l -   C/L(w)]

It can be readily verified that at constant levels of the two wages W   and   W,
participation will increase as the number of vocational training positions C

increases.

       The effect of substituting this new labor supply equation in the model

can be summarized by the wage functions in Figure 4, which is analogous to

Figure 2 of the last section. While the detailed derivation of these results

below is a little tedious, they can be explained heuristically rather easily.

The increasing vocational opportunities tend to draw additional participants

into the market for high school graduates, which in turn depresses wages gen-

erally in this market.8 This accounts for the downward sloping segments of

both W and W to the left of C*, whereas in the previous section these seg-

ments had been horizontal. To the right of C*, vocational training has ex-

panded to the point where no more on—the—job training takes place, and, as be-

fore, further vocational training positions make the two wage rates converge.

       To demonstrate these results more rigorously, consider the regions to

the left and to the right of C separately, and construct a simple model for

each. To the left of C*, some amount of on-the—job training takes place. In

       8
         This same effect will raise wages in labor markets fo those attain-
ing some level of education other than a high school degree.
                                        —15—




this region, the wage differential between W and W must be just sufficient




                                     Figure 4

      Wages   as a Function of Vocational Training Capacity


                                                                  Legend



                       :;1TIII,
                             /           ——      I




to compensate for the costs of training:


(4)                               WV —W 0=k'a.

The two wage rates are determined by the demand function defined in the previ-

ous section.


(5)                              Wv =kd(N
                                       Tv +N)
                                           t
(6)                                W0 =kd(N)
                                         0 0




          Since a variable N implicitly introduces the possibilities of pursu-
ing higher education after graduation and of dropping out before graduation,
and the wages of those in other markets, may be affected by their numbers, any
changes in wages for these people that do occur may in turn affect the demand
for high school graduates. This indirect effect is not treated in the present
analysis.
                                          —16—



If we now add the labor market clearing equation


(7)                                N=N V +Nt +N0

the five equations (3)—(7) may be regarded as a simple model with endogenous

variables N, N0, Nt, W0, and W. These equations may be totally differenti-

ated with respect to N to find out how the endogenous variables behave as N
                      V                                                    V
(which is equal to C, the number of positions in the vocational training pro-

gram) increases. The results, all of which are unambiguous, are as follows:


                   dN/dN > 0          dN0 /dN > 0          dN /dN < 0
                        V                   V                t V
                             dW/dN
                              0  V <0            dW/dN
                                                  V  V <0


          The negative total differentials for W and W justify the downward

slope of the two wage functions to the left of C* in Figure 4. Furthermore,

these results show that the number of workers engaged in on—the—job training

decreases monotonically as the number of vocational training positions in-

creases. If this number reaches zero at C, it cannot become nonnegative

again to the right of C*, implying that C is unique and totally separates the

region where it does not. Finally, it is of interest to note that the number

choosing exactly a high school education increases monotonically as C in-

creases up to C.

      When the number of vocational training positions increases beyond C*, no

on—the—job training will occur. Corresponding to this, the wage differential

W —   W       will narrow to a figure less than k'a. In terms of the model just
 V        0
discussed, these changes to the right of C* require that equation (4) be re-

placed with the bonstraint:


(8)
                                        NtOi
which simply asserts that no one is receiving on—the—job training in this

case. With this modification, the total derivatives of the model have the

following signs:

           dL/dNV   indeterminate
                                                              0v
                                                           dN /dN < 0


           dW/dN
            v  V <0                                         0 V >0
                                                           dW/dN

       To the right of C, wages of vocational training graduates must be de-

clining, simply because there are more of them. The additional vocational

training graduates reduce the supply of other program graduates; however, the

effect on the number of other program graduates may be partially offset by ad-

ditions to the labor force. In any case, the reduction in other program gradu-

ates raises the wages of those graduates according to the demand schedule, and

hence it narrows the wage differential between the two types of graduates.

       At C**, the wages of vocational training and general training graduates

are equalized, and any further increases in vocational training positions will

remain unfilled. It is of interest to ask whether         the wage rate associ-

ated with C** vocational training jobs, is greater or less than W, the wage

rate that would prevail were there to be no vocational training at all. This

question may be answered by a fairly simple argument.

       Suppose that W < W*.     From Figure 1, it is easy to see that this could

happen only if the labor supply at      were greater than at 0. However, by

equation (3), the labor supply must be less at       than at 0 if W** <
                                                                          W.
This   establishes a contradiction and implies that in fact W > W. Jience,
the existence of a vocational training program operating   at   a level C** in-
creases wages for all workers above the wage level which would prevail if

there were no such program. A corollary result is that the labor supply is

greater at C** than at C = 0 due to the higher wages there.
                                       —18—




        As in the previous section, the analysis may be continued by construct-

ing the relationship between the total wage bill and the size of the voca-

tional training program. Since both the wage per worker and the size of the

labor force have been shown to be higher at C** than at 0, the total wage bill

must be higher at         However, it is impossible to establish the slope of

any specific segment of this relationship between 0 and       without specific

values for the parameters. Note also that, to use the wage bill as some indi-

cator of the welfare effects of the vocational training program for those who

attain a high school degree, explicit allowance should be made for the oppor-

tunity wage for those who were attracted into this labor market from elsewhere.



                                       III

        This section extends the analysis of Section I in a slightly different

direction by considering how the labor market outcome is affected when there

is both vocational training in the high schools and a minimum wage. In this

analysis, high school graduates entering the labor force is fixed at N.

        The impact of the minimum wage will be seen to depend on its level and

on the enrollment capacity of the vocational education system. In the lowest

range, the minimum does not constrain anyone's wage and hence has no effect on

the analysis of the first section. The first panel of Figure 5 illustrates

the situation in this range; this panel is the same as Figure 2 before. So

long as the minimum is below the critical level w1, it doesn't have any im-

pact.

        At the critical level w1, the minimum begins to constrain the wage dur-

ing the period of training for workers engaged in on—the—job training. Where

does this impact begin? To answer this question, let w* and w* be the annual

wages associated with W and Wi', respectively. Since W and W' differ by the
                                                     —19—


                                                 Figure 5


                  Effects of Various Levels of the Minimum Wage




                                                                                           2
                (i) wrain <wm1                                      (ii) wm1 <wrain        m




                                                 k(wmm +a)
           *                                                    *
       WV                                                   WV
           **
       W
                                           I/I              W



       Wo
           *



                                           *   IC
                                               **
                                                                    -------
                                           CC                                          Cl
                                                                                               C
                                      **
                (iii) W2m <Wrain <W
                                                 k(wflu_n +a)

k(wRu-n +a)




       W
           *
     kw.
      mi


                                                 C                                                   C

                                 C2        C3C                                   C4             C5



                                                                    Legend   —        WV       __Wo
                                                —20—




training costs kta, w* and w must satisfy the relation


                                    wV =   w0   + (k'/k)a.


      The annual wage during the training period for workers engaged in on—

the—job training is w* —   a.       This is the critical minimum wage       at which the

minimum just begins to constrain training period wages:


(9)
                       1
                      Wm =      w   - a =   w    -     [(k   -   k')/k]a.

      Within the next higher range for the minimum wage, from w1 to w2, the

minimum wage constrains training period wages but does not constrain wages

generally in either the 0—type or the T—type jobs. The situation in this case

is illustrated in the second panel of Figure 5.

      If workers are trained on—the—job at the minimum wage, then the general

annual wage in the T-type jobs must be higher by the training costs a. At

this wage level, the firms desire to hire C1 workers for T-type jobs. If

there are fewer than C1 positions in the vocational training program, then the

firms will hire C1 — C workers for on—the—job training programs, where C is

the number of positions in the vocational training program. If there are more

than C1 vocational training positions, then there will be no on—the—job train-

ing, and the wages of vocational training graduates will move downward along

the demand curve D
                  V
      If there are fewer than C1 vocational training graduates, then these

graduates must be receiving a discounted wage stream equal to k(w. + a). By

using the relationship w. > w1 along with equation (9), it is easily shown

that this discounted wage stream is greater than the W' that the vocational

training graduates would have received in the absence of the minimum wage.

Hence, the demand curve implies that the C1 workers desired by T—type
                                         —21—



employers will be less at this wage than the C* workers desired at a wage of

W*.
 V
        With fewer than C* workers demanded by T—type employers at the wage

k(W + a),        more of the high school graduates from other programs remain in

0—type jobs, and wages in that sector are reduced below the W that they would

achieve in the absence of a minimum wage. Hence, a minimum wage which con-

strains training for T-type jobs, but which falls below the wage in jobs not

requiring such training, increases the wage gap between vocational training
                                                                 10
graduates and other program graduates working in 0—type jobs.

        Two other   interesting features of the model emerge when the minimum   wage

lies   between   w1 and w2, where w2 is the level at which the minimum would just

equal wages paid to those in 0—type jobs. First, other program graduates may
receive different wages depending on whether or not they get into on—the—job
training programs. Because the wage differential between 0—type and T-type

jobs has widened, the higher wages in T-type jobs more than offset the reduced

wages necessary during the period of training. Because of this, more people

would like to enroll in on-the-job training programs than the firms are will-

ing to take, and positions in on—the—job training programs become rationed in

much the same manner as vocational training positions.

        Secondly, if the minimum wage is in this range, the effect of the mini-

mum wage may be eliminated if the vocational training program is large enough.

If more than C* vocational training positions are offered, then no training

would have occurred even without the minimum wage. Since the minimum wage in

this range interferes only with on-the—job training, it will have no effect if

no    on—the—job training would have   taken   place anyway.

        10
             This type of effect of the minimum wage has been previously noted by
Mincer    (1976).
                                     —22—




      If the minimum wage rises above w2, it begins to interfere with wages in

0—type jobs as well as with wages for people undergoing on—the—job training.

This situation is illustrated in the last two panels in Figure 5. As before,

on—the—job training can take place only if W is at least k(w. + a), so that

wages during the training period may at least be at the minimum. For this to

occur, there can be no more than C2 vocational training graduates in the third

panel or C4 such graduates in the fourth panel. If there are more vocational

training graduates than these, then the wages for T—type jobs will fall accord-

ing to the demand curve DTI and no on—the—job training will take place.

      With a minimum wage above w2, wages in 0-type jobs may not be able to

fall far enough to create enough demand for all the workers seeking employ-

ment. Some unemployment among other prograni graduates would result. However,

if the minimum wage is below w (the annualized wage corresponding to W**).,

it is possible for a vocational training program to eliminate the unemployment

by providing the training for more people to enter T-type jobs. In the third

panel of Figure 5, this occurs if at least C3 positions are available in the

vocational training program. If, however, the minimum wage is at a level

above wr, then it is impossible for any vocational training program to re-

store full employment.11

      The precise relationship governing wage determination is thus a function

of both the size of the vocational training program and the minimum wage.

Figure 6 summarizes the manner in which W ,            and W are determined for
                                            V Wt   ,
                                                           0


         It is straightforward but tedious to analyze behavior in the face of
queuing and unemployment. We would need to explore the market clearing mecha-
nism in the face of queuing and the labor supply response to lack of job
availability. We do not introduce these added complications here. Note, how—
ever, that if there is both queuing and relatively free access to vocational
programs, overenrollment in vocational programs may become a problem. For re-
lated analyses dealing with these issues, see Gramlich (1976) , Mincer (1976),
Mattila (1978), Leighton and Mincer (1979) , and Gustman and Steinineier (1979).
                                          —23—



various combinations of vocational program size and the minimum wage. A total

wage    bill figure could be formed by adding these three figures with the appro-
priate weights. Note that the functional form in each area of the diagram
gives the    expression   determining the particular wage under consideration for
the, appropriate combination of vocational training program size and minimum

wage.

        The principal implication of Figure 6 is that the wage determination is

an extremely complicated affair in the face of both a minimum wage         and a limited
vocational    training program. Not only is the function governing wages not the

same throughout the diagram, but the functions in various parts of the diagrams

have different arguments. Consider, for example, the determination of wages

of vocational training graduates in panel (i) of Figure 6. In one of the re-

gions of the panel, the wage depends only upon the size of the vocational

training program, while in two other areas it depends only on the minimum

wage. In the fourth area, it does not depend upon either C or w.. Similar

complexities arise in the determination of wages, for on—the—job trainees and

for other program graduates who remain in 0—type jobs.

         In sum, a vocational training program in the high schools which produces

a substitute for training on the job will mitigate and in some cases overcome

the adverse    effects of the minimum wage on on—the—job training and in creating
unemployment. The exact effects depend upon the size of the vocational educa-
tion program and    the   level of the minimum wage.   To   evaluate benefits from vo-
cational education    programs that arise because the program overcomes some ad-

verse impacts of the minimum wage, we would need to make strong assumptions

about whether constraints resulting from a minimum wage can, realistically, be

removed——e.g., by instituting a youth sub—minimum wage. Such an analysis would

place us well within the world of second-best.
                               Figure 6




                          Wage Determination




            (i) Determination of W
w
 mm                                                           'min
                              D(C)



          k(w         + a)
            mm                                     D(c)



                    D ( c*)

                                                                     **   C
                                               *
                                           C                     C


                      Determination of
w.
 mm ri


                                     no on—the—job
                                       training occurs
                                                   is are a

          k(w.
            mm n
                 +a)
                      -k' a
 w1
  m
                —        *
          D (N - C
           0
                                               *                          C
                                           C

            (iii) Determination of
w.
 mm
                                                                              a
     **
 W




                                                                          C
                                           C                     C
                                                                   **
                                      —25—



                                       Iv

      The previous results have strongly suggested that to estimate fully the

impact of a vocational training program, it is necessary to include the size

of the program as an explanatory variable. Even here, one must be extremely

careful about the functional form of the relationship between the size of the

program and the wages, especially in the presence of a minimum wage. Most

studies, however,, have not considered the size of the vocational training pro-

gram in assessing the impact of the program. What have these studies actually

measured?

      Consider a study which draws a random sample from a population scattered

over several labor markets. The labor markets themselves differ in the size

of the vocational training programs serving them. Let the size distribution

of these programs be given by f(C). For simplicity, we will assume that all

the labor markets are of equal size N, but it would be straightforward to al-

low for varying labor market sizes too.

      The probability that a randomly drawn individual will be a vocational

training graduate from a program of size C is given by


                            pCC) = (C/N)f(C)dC.

The f(C) is the probability of finding a program of the specified size, and

C/N is the probability of finding a vocational training graduate within the

specified labor market. The expected wage in a randomly drawn sample is found

by weighting the wages by the probability of finding graduates with those wages:


                                      1w (C)p (C)dC
                            E(Wv) =
                                        fp(C)dC

                                      1w (C)Cf(C)dC
                                  —
                                        V
                                        fCf(C)aC
                                           —26—



The denominator of this express is the mean size C of the vocational training

programs. Hence, the expected wage may be rewritten as


(10)                        E(W) =     1w (C) (c/c)f(c)dc.



A similar procedure finds the expected wage for other program graduates to be


                     E(W) =                -   C)/(N   -   C)]f(C)dC.
(11)                          fw0(c)I(
       A note of caution is in order about these expected wages. There wages

represent the average wages for the two groups in a random sample of indi-

viduals. They may not, however, be used to measure the size of the wage dif-

ferential   which might be associated with an "average" or "typical" labor mar-
ket.
       To measure the differential in an average labor market, it would be ap-
propriate to weight the differentials in specific             labor markets by the relative
frequencies   of those markets:


(12)                E(W -
                            w0)
                                  =   f[w(C)   —   w(C)]f(C)dC

                                  =   fw(c)f(c)dc    -     JW(C)f(C)dC.

In comparing equations (10), (11), and (12), it is evident that E(Wv) in equa-

tion (10), by virtue of the factor (C/C), gives more weight to labor markets

with large vocational training programs than does the corresponding quantity

in equation (12). Similarly, E(W) in equation (11) gives more weight to

labor markets with small vocational training programs. Hence, neither E(Wv)

in equation (10) nor E(W) in equation (11) uses weights that are appropriate

for finding wages in an "average" or "typical" labor market. In other words,

in ignoring the effect of the size of the vocational training program

on the wage differential between vocational and other high school program
                                        —27—




graduates, the typical study oversamples wages from vocational graduates from

cities with large vocational programs and oversamples wages for nonvocational

graduates from those with small vocational programs.



                                         V

        The basic message of this paper is that a proper evaluation of voca-

tional training must do more than simply look at earnings differentials be-

tween vocational training and other high school program graduates. These

earnings differentials indicate the value of the program to the marginal per-

son, but they do not indicate the overall value of the program to all high

school graduates, or even to all vocational training graduates. Even worse,

it is possible that the earnings differential may give very misleading indica-

tions of the value of the program, indications that are the opposite of the

truth. For instance, we have seen that a vocational training program may pro-

duce maximum benefits to the workers at precisely that point where earnings

differentials are narrowed to zero.

        A proper evaluation of vocational training will encounter several diffi-

culties. Two sections of this paper have explored the complications intro-

duced   by a consideration of minimum wages and of a variable labor supply.
These complexities imply that great care must be taken if estimates of wage
relationships are to be accurate and unbiased. Otherwise, the estimates may
confound the effects of the programs under varying     circumstances   and make   it

difficult   if   not impossible to reach conclusions about the impact of the pro-

gram.

        In addition,   we have examined how the impact of the minimum wage is af-
fected by   the existence of vocational training in the high schools. After ex-

ploring   the relation between the level of the minimum   wage,   the capacity of
                                       —28—




the   high school vocational training program, and wages, employment, and train-

ing of high school graduates, we conclude that vocational training programs

mayreduce or eliminate any adverse impact of the minimum wage, both on the

level of training and on unemployment.

       As the title of this paper suggests, we believe the preceding material

constitutes only a framework for analysis. This framework may be expanded in

a number of ways.

        1. The model assumes that vocational training in the high schools sub-

stitutes completely for general on—the—job training. Implications of the

existence of some general on-the—job training not provided in public schools,

specific training which may or may not be complementary with general training,
                                                      12
and private vocational training should be explored.

        2. Vocational training programs differ in quality. The analysis may be

modified to consider the role that the quality of vocational programs plays.

        3. The model specifies a particular role for vocational training-—

namely, as a substitute for general on—the—job training. By introducing into

the analysis federal subsidies to on—the—job training, wage rate subsidies,

and other related policies, one can explore the interrelations between labor

market programs typically supervised by the Department of Labor and voca-

tional education programs which are the responsibility of the new Department

of Education.

       As we noted at the outset, we have assumed throughout the paper that vo-

cational training provided in the high schools is indeed useful on the job.

While in the absence of an empirical analysis, we cannot tell whether this

assumption accords with the facts, our analysis has indicated that current



        12
         For an analysis of private vocational training, see Freeman (1974)
and Olson (1977).
                                     —29—




approaches for evaluating the contribution of vocational training programs in

the high schools may be seriously flawed. Our discussion suggests an approach

to estimation which should remedy these shortcomings.
                                     —30—



                                 REFERENCES


Becker, G. S., 1975, Human Capital: Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with

      Special Reference to Education, 2nd ed. (Columbia, New York).

Corazzini, A. J., 1968, "The Decision to Invest in Vocational Education: An

      Analysis of Costs and Benefits," Journal of Human Resources, III, sup-

      plement, 88—120.

Feldsteiri, M., 1973, "Lowering the Permanent Rate of Unemployment," Joint Eco-

      nomic Committee.

Freeman, R. B., 1974, "Occupational Training in Proprietary Schools and Tech-

      nical Institutes," Review of Economics and Statistics, 56, 310—318.

Gramlich, E. M., 1976, "Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages, Employment,

      and Family Income," Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 2, 409-461.

Grasso, J. T., and J. R. Shea, 1979, "Effects of Vocational Education Programs:

      Research Findings and Issues in National Institute of Education," The

      Planning Papers for Vocational Education, Vocational Education Study

      Publication, No. 1, 101—194.

Gustman, A. L., and T. L. Steinxneier, 1979, "The Impact of the Market and the

      Family on Youth Enrollment and Labor Supply," National Bureau of Eco-

      nomic Research Working Paper Number 415.

Leighton, L., and J. Mincer, 1979, "Effects of Minimum Wages on Human Capital

      Formation," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Number 378.

Mattila, J. p., 1978, "Youth Labor Markets, Enrollments and Minimum Wages," In-

     dustrial Relation Research Association Proceedings, 134—140.

Meyer, R. H., and D. A. Wise, 1979, "High School Preparation and Early Labor

     Force Experience," mimeo, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mincer, J., 1976, "Unemployment Effects of Minimum Wages," Journal of Political

     Economy, 84, pt. 2, S87—S104.
                                     —31—




Nelson, V. I., 1977, "Public Provision and Private Markets: A Case Study of Vo-

      cational Education," unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Yale University.

Olson, L., 1977, "The Allocation of Time to Private Vocational School Train-

      ing," mimeo.
Stromsdorfer, E. W., 1972, Review and Synthesis of Cost—Effectiveness Studies

      of Vocational Technical Education (The Ohio State University).

Taussig, M. K., "An Economic Analysis of Vocational Education in the New York

     City High Schools," Journal of Human Resources, III, 59—87.
