                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF UNFUNDED
                 VESTED PENSION BENEFITS



                     Mark Gersovitz


                  Working Paper No. 1430




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC kESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Aveiue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                        May 1980




I would like to thank participants at the NBER Social
Insurance and Pensions Conference, January 7—9, 1980,
especially Benjamin M. Friedman, for valuable coimnents.
Financial support for the research reported in this paper
was received from the S.S. Huebner Foundation for
Insurance Education, Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Pensions. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                               NBER Working Paper 480
                                                                           :May,   1980




                Economic Consequences of Unfunded
                      Vested Pension Benefits



                              ABSTRACT



     This paperexamines the relationship between unfunded vested pension

liabilities and the market value of a firm's skarés. This relationship

has important Implications for the mechanism by which private pensions

influence aggregate savings. Attention is paid to modeling the institutional

determinants of thIs   relation   implied by ERISA legislation. These consi-

dErations require a nonlinear regression model with very special properties

which are developed and discussed. Estimation results suggest that ERISA

has had an important effect on the relation between unfunded benefits and

firm value that previous investigations have neglected.




                                                   Mark Gersovitz
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Princeton University
                                                   Princeton, New Jersey 08544

                                                   (609) 452—4794
          This paper examines the effect of unfunded vested pension liabili-

ties1 on the market value of a firm's shares..- The nature of-this relationship

has important implications for several aspects of the policy debate on the

private pension system and its reform. As Feldstein (1978) has stressed,

the extent to which unfunded pension liabilities affect stock market values

(MV) is a critical linkage in the mechanism by which private pensions influence

aggregate saving. If, for instance, pension liabilities lower the stock value

on a dollar for dollar basis, then the disincentive to save given to potential

pensioners by an additional dollar of unfunded benefits is exactly offset

by the incentive to save given to stock holders by the loss of a dollar in

stock value. Aggregate saving is not altered. At the other extreme, unfunded

liabilities may have no impact on stock values. In this case there is no

incentive for additional saving to offset any decrease in saving by pensioners.

          Another important concern involves the, large potential liabilities

undertaken by a U.S. government agency under the ERISA pension reforms legi-

slation. Beyond certain limits, the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation

(PBGC) relieves private employers of their responsibility for unfunded vested

pension benefits (UVB). An examination of the market valuation effects of

these LJVB can yield evidence on the opinion of stock market participants

about the potential financial drain on the badly undercapitalized PBGC.

          Finally, there has been considerable concern over the accuracy of

reporting by firms of their pension liabilities. The relation between MV

and IJVB can be used to infer the view of market participants about the reli-

ability of financial reporting. This evidence has   implications   for the reform

                                  -
of pension reporting.
                                       —2-




          In Section 1 of the paper I discuss the institutional and theore-

tical determinants of the relation between unfunded pension liabilities and

-thestock-market.value of a firm's shares. Section. 2 develops aneconometric

method appropriate to the estimation of this relationship. Section 3 presents

and discusses the empirical results.
                                       —3—




1. The Effect of Unfunded Vested Pension Benefits on the Market Value

    ofFirm

          Prior to 1974, firms were not legally liable for unfunded vested

pension benefits. A firm could terminate a plan and employees with vested

pension benefits would receive payment only insofar as the pension fund was

adequate. Termination, however, would imply the need to

compensate employees in another form over the long-run if the firm   were to
stay attractive in the labor market. Since compensation through pensions has

tax advantages (Tepper, 1974) and helps control labor turnover costs (Schiller

and Weiss, 1979) most firms continued their plans. In situations

where there was no need to undertake alternative compensation, termination

of a plan could be an attractive option. The Studebaker..Corporation,

for instance, terminated its under-funded plan at the same time it ended auto-

mobile production. Thus the funding decision embodies elements of risk

sharing and implicit contracting between the owners of a firm and its employees

(Arnott and Gersovitz, forthcoming).

          In 1974, ERISA established a limited legal responsibility on the

part of firms for their unfunded pension benefits. An employer became liable

for the minimum of its total unfunded vested pension benefits (UVB) or 30

percent of its net worth defined as the stock market value of its shares (MV).

A government sponsored corporation, the PBGC, became liable for any excess

of LJVB over .3MV up to certain limits beyond which employees were left unpro-

tected. The PBGC was also given the right to terminate any plan which it

felt might involve the PBGC in additional liabilities. Further, the PBGC can
                                       -4-

                S


determine the value of the firm for purposes of calculating the employer's

liability at any point within a 120 day period around the termination date
                2
(the window).

          Against this background it is possible to develop an equation for

the market value of a firm with unfunded pension liabilities. If .3MV> UVB,

it is almost certain that the firm will eventually pay the full value of UVB

into the pension fund. If the market value of the firm begins to deteriorate

so that .3MV approaches IJVB, the PBGC will either terminate the plan or

negotiate with the firm to fund enough of the UVB to maintain .3MV > UVB.

Using the 120 day window, the PBGC should have no difficulty making the firm

satisfy this condition. It would be impossible to realize the full value of

UVB only if the firm's value plunged past the .3W! = UVB threshold, to a

situation where UVB > MV, before the PBGC could act. Except for this highly

unlikely situation, a firm with .3MV > UVB should have the valuation equation:



(1)                 MV = PVE   - UVB                   .3MV >   IJVB




where PVE is the present value of earnings after all other charges (interest,

preferred dividends etc.) other than UVB.

  -
         For firms with UVB > .3W!, however, the situation is more compli-
cated. These firms have the option of terminating their own   plans    for a

payment of .3W!. The firm need not be bankrupt in any sense to exercise this

option. Further, the PBGC may wish to terminate these plans to avoid further

losses. If the plan were definitely known to be on the verge of termination,

the value of the firm's shares would be given by
                                           —5-




(2)            MV = PVE   - UVB   + (UVB - . 3MV)                      .   3MV < UVB




where UVB - . 3MV appears as an implicit asset.

          At present, however, there are many plans satisfying .3MV < UVB

which do not seem to be in imminent danger of termination. For these firms

there is always the chance that PVE will stochastically move so that

.3MV > UVB in the future. To take this possibility into account requires

an option pricing approach in specifying the market value equation (Sharpe,

1976) which is so complicated as to be intractable (Smith, 1976). As a

practical specification of the effect of UVB on MV, I therefore adopt the

approximation of equations_(l) and (2):



                       PVE - UVB                                       if . 3MV > UVB

(3)            MV=
                       PVE - UVB + (UVB        - . 3MV)                if . 3MV    <   UVB




For estimation, this model is specified as



                       PVE +                                           .   3MV > UVB
                               y1UVB
(4)            MV=
                       PVE +
                               y1UVB
                                       +
                                           2     .   3MV - IJVB)       .   3MV <   INB



and I test the joint restriction that                 =   -1 and 2 =       1
                                                    —6—




2. Econometric Method


          Estimating the effect of pension liabilities on market value, given

the institutional structure represented by ERISA, is a complicated problem.

The use of conventional ordinary least squares is

inappropriate because the dependent variable appears on both sides of the

estimating equation. Consider the stochastic behavior described by



(4a)           y.Ax.+az.+Bw.+v.
                1   1  1   1   1
                                                                       ifw.>O
                                                                          1




(4b)           y. = Ax. + az. +
                1          1              1
                                              v.1                      if w. < 0
                                                                           1—

(4c)           w. =   z.       -
                                   tSy.




where A is 1 x k vector of unknown coefficients, x. is a k x 1 vector of
                                                  1
exogenous variables, z. is an additional exogenous variable, a and B are

unknown coefficients and 45 is a known parameter. The error term, v., is

assumed to be independently normally distributed with constant variance a2.

         Since 45 is known, the sign of the expression z - 45y. can be ascer-

tained. Any set of N observations can therefore be partitioned with the

first n known to have been generated by equation (4a) while the remaining

N - n are known to have been generated by equation (4b). If all observations

were generated by equation (4b) so that n =               0,   estimation is quite straight-

forward since the assumptions necessary for ordinary least squares are satis-

fied. Unfortunately the estimation of equation (4b) alone provides no
                                                   -7--




 estimate of the parameter 8.

              Equation (4a) by itself, however, poses one immediate difficulty.

The variable w is endogenous since it involves y, and w1 appears on the

righthand side of the equation. Consequently, (4a) could not be estimated

by ordinary least squares. To correct this problem, substitute in (4a) from

 (4c)   for w.,,   collect terms and rewrite the equation as


                            Ax. + (cz+8)z.          v.
                              1          1
                        —
                              1+ 68
                                               +     1
                                                   1+68
                                                                        ifwi >0

A second problem immediately arises if all observations satisfied w. >            0.
While equation (4a') could be estimated by ordinary least squares, the para-

meters of the model A, a and 8 would not be identified. Instead, only the

composite parameters A/(l+68) and (a+8)/(l+68) would-be identified.

             If    however, there are observations for which w.1 > 0 and for which

w   <   0, i.e. N>n>0, estimation of the model is possible and all parameters
can be identified. It is the cross-equation constraints [the fact that the

A and a are the same in equations (4a) and (4b)] which identify the coeffi-

cients. An ordinary least squares procedure is no longer appropriate and

a maximum likelihood formulation must be used. The estimation problem is

similar to that encountered in Tobit (Tobin, 1956) and switching regressions

(Goldfeld and Quandt, 1973) although it has its own unique structure.

             The likelihood of            for 0 <   i     c n is given by



(5a)                L. =
                            1 + 68         [   i   ___________
                             ria     exP[_
                                                          .1+68



The likelihood of y. for N >          i   >   n is given by
                                               -8—




(Sb)              L.
                   1
                     =             exp      -—
                                               2



Thus,   the likelihood for the entire sample is


                          n             N
(6)               L = ( ii L.)      (11         L!).
                            1
                         i=l         i=n+l       1




Maximization of equation (6) with respect to the parameters of the model
yields the estimates of these parameters. [This maximization was undertaken

at Princeton University in double precision FORTRAN. The method of maximi-

zation was the GRADX option of the GQOPT program based on the method of

quadratic hill-climbing        (Goldfeld, Quandt       and Trotter,   l966)J
           A final aspect of this econometric model which deserves special

attention is the problem of consistency. Given a set of observations on the

y and z1, w can be formed and used to classify the observations. The estima-
tion can then proceed as described. However, since the w is unknown until

the y is generated, and the y cannot be known until the w is known, the

model of (4a) -   (4c)   is not a fully satisfactory formulation. A consistent

and complete reformulation is



(7a)            y1 = Ax + az +    Bw1
                                         + V




(7b)            y2=Ax+czz+v

(7c)
                                               -9-




(7d)            w2z-6y2

(7e)            y =
                        y1                     w1
                                                     >   0 or w2 > 0



(7f)                                           w1<Oorw2<0

where the subscript i has been suppressed and the variable y corresponds

to the y. of (4).

            Consistency requirements for this model are that



(8a)            w1 > 0         iffw2 > 0


or



(8b)            w1 <     0     iff w2 <   0.



If these conditions were not met, then a situation could arise where the

model of (7) implied (7e) and (7f) at the same time, an inconsistency un-

less B =   0. To express the consistency conditions in terms of the under-
lying parameters of the model, substitute for w1 in (7a), collect terms,

solve for y1 and substitute y1 into w1 to yield



 9
(a)                 —    z-Ax-&iz-5y
                w1—          1+68



Substituting (7b) into w2 yields
                                                 -10-




(9b)           w2 = z       -   SAx -   5az - óv.



Hence



(9c)                 =            +
               w1        w2/(].


          From (9c) it is clear that a necessary and sufficient condition

for w1 and w2 to have the same sign is that



(10)




henceforth referred to as the consistency condition for the model (7). In

particular if6 and 8 are both positive, the model is consistent. In this

case, it does not matter whether y1 or y2 is used in the calculation of w.

of model (4), and so model (4) provides a complete characterization of the

estimation problem.

         To summarize,the estimation procedure is

               (a) form the w using (4c)

               (b) classify the observations into two groups with

                         the first n observations having w1 > 0 and             the
                         last N -     n observations having w < 0

               Cc)       form the likelihood function (6) using (5a) and (Sb)

               Cd) maximize the likelihood to yield estimates of the

                         model parameters

               Ce) check the consistency requirement 1 + sSB > 0.
                                                 —11—




3.    Econometric Estimates of the Effect of UVB on MV


           Following   the discussion of Section 1, the basic equations deter-

mining the valuation of a firm's shares are:



(Ha)            MV               1 e         IJVB
                                                                       ifw<O
                   r= •r0- X.+1r1

and




(llb)
                MV= r
                -r
                       LYO
                             +   le  A
                                         +
                                             l   +      UVB
                                                         A
                                                              +   1
                                                                  UJ
                                                                          i    ifw>O


where


(lic)           w = UVB - . 3MV



and


(lid)           p =p0+p1         8



MV is the year-end value of outstanding common shares obtained from the

Compustat tapes.

           Total earnings, e, are given by the 3-5 year forecast of the

Value Line Investment Survey closest to December multiplied by the total

number of common shares from the Compustat tapes. This earnings measure
                                    —13--


                                   TABLE 1
                  1976    Stock Valuation Equation


Coefficient              Variant 1           Variant 2      Variable

    10                    —.272               —.298          constant
                          (6.32)              (7.03)

    P0                     .099                 .104         discount rate
                         (12.77)             (13.02)         constant

    P1                   —.0023              —.0060
                           (.33)               (.85)

    Ii                    —2.25               —.674            UVB
                          (4.59)             (2.21)

                           2.76                                IJVB
                         (4.11)                              if .3MV>UVB

Value of                   6.22               —3.30
the Log
Likelihood



Note:    Upper row gives coefficient, lower row gives coefficient divided
         by its asymptotic standard deviation.

         Sample consists of 217 Fortune 500 companies chosen on the basis
         of data availability. Seventeen companies have UVB > .3MV.
                                    -12-



does not include charges for the amortization of unfunded vested benefits.

Results based on the Value Line forecast3 rather than an extrapolation of

current and past earnings are presented because Malkiel and Cragg (1970)

provide evidence that the market opinion approach is superior in valuation

equations. I also used current earnings with similar results to those

reported in Table 1 for the coefficient estimates but with much lower values

of the likelihood function.

          The discount rate, p, incorporates 8, the Value Line calculation

of the Sharpe Beta for the firm. This term provides the most common repre-

sentation of a risk adjusted discount rate (Fama, 1977). UVB measures

unfunded vested benefits as given by the Compustat tapes. The variables

MV, e and UVB are divided by the book-value of total assets A (from the

Compustat tapes) to correct for heteroscedasticity.4

          Turning to the estimated values of y, it is clear that unfunded

pension liabilities lower the value of a firm's shares. Further, unfunded

liabilities above the PBGC threshold of 30 percent are added back as an

asset since    is positive. Recall from Section 2 that a positive value of

   was sufficient for the stochastic system generating the data to be logi-

cally consistent. It is also roughly true that 1] +       = 0.     Consequently,

liabilities above .3MV added back in such a way that the net effect of these

additional liabilities is zero.

         All these aspects of the estimated coefficients are consistent with

the model of pension liabilities and market valuation elaborated in Section 1,

however, the absolute magnitudes of the estimated coefficients appear too high.

Thus, while one expects that liabilities would diminish   the    market value of

an earnings stream on the dãllar for dollar basis, i.e.      =    -1,   the estimated
                                    —:14—




coefficients indicate that every dollar of liabilities diminishes market

value by more than two dollars. The hypothesis that      +
                                                             2 = 0 and   l =   -l
can be rejected at less than the one percent level of significance using a

likelihood ratio test (log of the constrained likelihood =   2.19).   It appears

that the simple model of Section 1 is rejected and that additional consider-

ations must be investigated to understand the role of pension liabilities in

firm valuation.5

          First, it is important to relate these results to the findings of

an earlier study of this topic by Oldfield (1977). Oldfield looked at the

effect of pension liabilities on the stock value of firms, but failed to

consider the institutional framework of the PBGC of Section 1 assuming    2 = 0.
In other respects, Oldfield's specification is basically similar to the one

used here. Within the framework of Variant l, 2 = 0     is easily imposed

yielding the Variant 2 estimates of Table 1. The effects are quite dramatic;

the estimate of 1 falisin absolute magnitude to somewhat less than one.

This estimate is insignificantly different from one and significantly dif—

ferent from zero. This result suggests      a simple explanation for the effect

of pension liabilities as a dollar for dollar subtraction from the valuation

of earnings, as argued by Oldfield using estimates similar to those of Variant

2.

          But the Variant 1 equation makes it obvious that this simple formu-

lation is entirely unsatisfactory. It is clear that Variant 2 is indeed a

special case of Variant 1 obtained by restricting 2 to zero; Variant 2 is

nested within Variant 1 and the t-statistic on    in Variant 1 directly

tests the appropriateness of a Variant 2 specification. Given the

magnitude of these t-statistics a Variant 2 formulation must be rejected
                                      —15—



since 2 is in all cases highly significantly different from zero.

            The superficial consistency of a Variant 2 model with the dollar

for dollar penalization of the present value of earnings is nerely a statis-

tical artifact. Consider a model where         < 0 and l +
                                                             2 = 0.   For simpli-

city, represent the effects of r0, p and e by the variable PVE, the present

value of earnings. Thus the equations of the model are



(12a)           MV = PVE +                               if .3MV > UVB
                             11UVB


                                     (i1 +y2)UVB
(12b)           MV =             +                       if .3MV < UVB
                                      l+.312



or



(12b')          MV =                                     if .3MV <    IJVB




since l +
            2 = 0.
            Consider Figure 1, in which line segment ABC gives the relation between

LNB and MV if PVE is constant and assume that all firms.in a hypothetical

cross-section have the saine.PVE but different values.of UVB. Since there is

an error term in the relation between UVB and MV, the hypothetical cross

section might consist of a set of points as pictured. If 2 is assumed to

equal zero, then a regression line of the form EF will be estimated rather

than one of the form ABC. The estimated iialue of      will be biased toward

zero. The severity of this bias will depend on the number of companies for
                    —16—




    MV = UVB/.3



A



E


                                 MV PVE/(1+.312)
                             C




      'MV = PVE +     UVB




                                           UVB




                  FIGURE 1
                                                 —17—



which UVB > .3MV and the magnitude of UVB - .3MV.              It would appear that a

specification error of this form is .responsible for the otherwise seemingly

plausibIe resUlts of Oldfield.

            As mentioned above, the estimated value of                  is inconsistent

with the valuation discussion of Section 1 which incorporates a literal

reading of the ERISA provisions on unfunded benefits. Several plausible

explanations of these results can be considered.



            The simplest explanation of the large absolute values of                    and

      is that unfunded vested benefits have been systematically understated.6

Let U] < 1 be the percentage by which pension liabilities are understated.

For convenience, assume that                 is constant across companies. Further,

assume that the PBGC bases its decisions on the true value of unfunded

benefits   rather than on the reported value. The model of (11) is then
modified to


(i.3a)           S =   P\TE    +   —   INB                            if .3MV >   —
                                                                                  UVB




and



(l3b)            S =
                              I'VE
                                                                      if 3
Mistakenly estimating a model which assumes                 = 1 when        is in fact less

than one does not produce a coefficient or the form                     since the classifi-

cation of the observations is incorrect. However, there will still be a ten-

dency to overestimate the absolute magnitudes of                and
                                            —18—




             One   alternative hypothesis       is that market participants view large

unfunded     liabilities   as indicative of financial mismanagement or other

incompetent behavior by the firm's         managers.     This signalling hypothesis can

be represented by



(14)               MV = PVE   -   f(UVB)



with f' <0.    If each increase in UVB is viewed as increasingly ominous then

f'' <   0.
             On the other hand, market participants may feel that low UVB        will
ultimately be paid but increasing amounts of UVB are increasingly unlikely

to be met for reasons unrelated to the 30% rule. In this case f' < 0 but

f'' >   0.   To test this hypothesis against the signalling hypothesis, I added a term
                     2                      .
of                              .                   .          .
     the form (UVB/A) to the Variant 2 equation. This term was insignificant

but positive (log likelihood =         -2.37)   favoring a view that each successive

increase in UVB is felt to be less important in relation to previous

increases. Thus the signalling hypothesis is not supported. Further this

likelihood value is far less than that of the Variant 1 specification. Thus

the squared term may merely proxy the discrete break at the 30% rule (Figure 1).

             The most attractive interpretation of the econometric results is,

therefore, that

                   1. liabilities above some discrete level do not diminish the

                       value of a firm's shares and this effect does seem to be

                       associated with the PBGC 30% rule and

                   2. the stock market believes pension liabilities as reported

                       in financial statements are understated.
                                —19—



This paper therefore provides evidence that ERISA, by relieving

firms of the responsibility for part of UVB without providing for

alternative funding, may contribute to a fall in aggregate saving.

Equity values appear unaffected by the part of UVB in excess of

.3 MV. A clear conclusion is that one can no longer accept the

naive (Variant 2) results obtained by previous researchers and

used by Feldstein (1978) to discuss the lihkage between UVB and

aggregate saving.
                                 _2 0



                           FOOTNOTES


1. Vesting is the employee's right, on termination of employment prior
    to retirement, to all or part of the pension benefits which have
    accrued on his behalf under the pension plan's benefit formula.
    Usually the actual payment of these benefits will be deferred
    until he reaches retirement age. In rare instances there may be
    provision for a lump sum settlement at the time of termination..

    A pension plan is incompletely funded if the value of assets in
    the pension fund is less than the accumulated vested pension benefits.
    The assets in the pension fund cannot be withdrawn by the employer.

2. Details of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) are
    given in United States (1974).

3. Discussions with the Value Line analysts indicate that these pro-
    jections are based on fundamental analysis of the type advocated in
    standard texts on financial investment, e.g. Graham, Dodd and Cottle
    (1962).

4. Feldstein (1978) argues that y should be multiplied by 1/A so that
    the equations (ha) and L1b) when multiplied by A would have a constant
    term. However, the inclusion of a constant in either specification
    has little theoretical justification. The usual attempt at interpre-
    tation of a constant term in a valuation equation is as a premium for
    stock issue. This consideration would favor the specification of
    (h1 and (hib) rather than the Feldstein specification since a stock
    premium would probably be proportional to the total size of the firm.
    I tried the Feldstein specification which produced a lower log likeli-
    hood value (—7.44) but otherwise similar results to Table 1, Variant 1.

5. Similar results were obtained using data for 1974 and 1975. The
    absolute values of   and 12 fell from 1974 to 1975 and from 1975
    to 1976.

6. Ehrbar (1977) argues that under—reporting may be widespread.

7. If a general understatement of UVB explains the absolute magnitudes
    of    and 2 then it appears that either the extent of this under-
    statement or the preception of it has diminished from 1974 to 1976
    (see footnote 5).

8. In reality the extent of any understatement varies by firm. Thus
    estimating ji is only a rough solution to this measurement problem.
    I did however estimate    by choosing different values of     and
    then estimating the parameters of the model (ha) — (hic) conditional
    on each value of q. The value of i.'i yielding the highest value of
    the log of the likelihood function (22.6) was given by i'i = 10. To
    the best of my knowledge there is no method for producing a t—statistic
                              —21—




on   this   type of switching parameter. A case by case adjustment
of reported liabilities by a coon, generally accepted set of
assumptions would be    extremely difficult and time—consuming.
However, this latter approach is clearly the most desirable and
should be part of further research in this area.
                                       —22—




                               BIBLIOGRAPHY



Arnott,    Richard j. arid   Gersovitz, Mark,    "Corporate Financial Structure
          and the Funding of Private Pension Plans," Journal of Public
          Economics,   forthcoming.

Ehrbar, A.F.,       "Those Pension Plans Are    Even Weaker Than You Think,"
       Fortune    (1977): pp. 104-414.

Faina, Eugene F.,  "Risk—Adjusted Discount Rates and Capital Budgeting
       Under Uncertainty," Journal of Financial Economics, 5 (1977):
       pp. 3—24.


Feldstein, Martin,   "Do Private Pensions Increase National Savings?"
       Journal of Public Economics, 10 (1978): pp. 277—293.


Goldfeld, Stephen M. and Quandt, Richard E.,  "The Estimation of Structural
       Shifts by Switching Regressions," Annals of Economics and Social
       Measure, 2/4 (1973): pp. 475—485.


Goldfeld, Stephen M., Quandt, Richard E., and Trotter, Hale F.,  "Maximization
       by Quadratic Hill—Climbing," Econotnetrica, 34 (1966): pp. 541—551.


Graham, Benjamin, Dodd, David L. and Cottle, Sidney with the collaboration
       of Tatham, Charles, Security Analysis, New York: McGraw—Hill, 1962.


Malkiel, Burton G. and Cragg, John C.,  "Expectations and the Structure of
       Share Prices," American Economic Review, 60 (1970): pp. 601—17.


Oldfield, George S.,   "Financial Aspects of the Private Pension System,"
       Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 9 (1977): pp. 48—54.


Sharpe, William F.,   "Corporate Pension Funding Policy," Journal of
       Financial Economics, 3 (1976):. pp. 183—193.


Smith, Clifford W.,  "Option Pricing: A Review" Journal of Financial
       Economics, 3 (1976): pp. 3—51.
                                 — 23



Tobin, James,   "Estimation of Relationships For Limited Dependent
        Variables," Econometrica, 26 (1958): pp. 24-36.


United States, An Act To Provide for Pension Reform, 1974.


Value Line Investment Survey, New York: Arnold Bernhard, 1974—1976.
