                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE LOCATION OF OVERSEAS PRODUCTION
               AND PRODUCTION FOR EXPORT BY U.S.
                      MULTINATIONAL FIRMS


                       Irving B. Kravis

                       Robert E. Lipsey


                     Working Paper No. 1482




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #482
                                                                             June, 1980




                  The   Location of Oversea8 Production and
            Production for Export by U.S. fultinational       Firum


                                  ABSTRACT


     The location of overseas manufacturing production by U.S. firms
seems to have been strongly influenced by common factors that operate
in all industries: notably proximity to the  United States and to
other markets. Within industries, the choices made by parent finis
among locations appear to show a tendency of "opposites attract,"
with low—wage and low—capital—intensity parents choosing high—wage,
highcapital_intensjty countries and high—wage, high_capital_intensity
parents making the opposite choice.
     Production for export seems -to have been most strongly attracted
by large internal markets in host countries.   Economies of scale in
production presumably made large markets also economical as export
bases. Another factor was high trade propensities of
which we interpret as                                  host countries,
                      representing access to imported
world prices or better transport, finance, and other   materials at low
                                                      trade facilitie8.
     Labor cost seems to have been a weak influence on location
choices. U.S. firms tended to
                               export from high-wage countries but
the high productivity in such countries more than offset the high
wages. However, labor cost, to the extent we could
                                                     measure it, was
not in general a major influence on the location of export production.




Dr. Irving B. Kravjs                         Dr. Robert E. Lipsey
Department of Economics                      National Bureau of Economic Research
368   McNeil Building                        15—19 West 4th Street, 8th Floor
University of Pennsylvania                   New York, New York 10012
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19174             (212) 598—3533
(215.) 243—5692
                The location of Overseas Production and
           Production for Export by U.S. Multinational Firms
                          Irving B. Kravis*
                          Robert E. Lipsey**



Introduction

     Our purpose in this study has been to contribute to an understanding
of the way in which the behavior of multinational firing affects the
location of the world's manufacturing production.' We discuss here one
part of that story: the determinants of U.S. firms' decisions about the
location of their own activities.


     *National Bureau of Economic Research and University of Pennsylvania.

    **National Bureau of Economic Research and Queens College, City
University of New York.
     1
      This paper was prepared for presentation at a Ford Foundation
Conference on Empirical Trade Policy Analysis at the University of Western
Ontario, May 3—5, 1980. The work reported on here, which is part of the
NBER's program in International Studies, was performed mainly under a
grant to the National Bureau from the Ford Foundation and was aided also
by a contract with the U.S. Department of Labor and the Treasury Department.
We also draw on some preliminary results of a National Bureau study
supported by the National Science Foundation on Multinational Firms and
Host—Country Technology, and a study of multinational firms' adaptation
to factor prices that was part of Anne Krueger's project on Trade Policy
and Employment in Less Developed Countries, financed by the Agency for
International Development. We are grateful to these agencies for their
support and also to the City University of New York for grants of
computer time. Most of the data are those of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, and we are most appreciative of
the assistance of Arnold Gilbert of that agency who supervised the calcula-
tions.

     The   views
               represented here are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily represent those of the funding agencies. This is not an official
National Bureau report; in particular it has not been submitted to the
Board of Directors for approval.
                                   —2—




       To opposing hypotheses about the essential character of U.S.
multinational firms have    been offered to explain their decision making

with   respect to the location of production. One, the market scanning
hypothesis, holds that multinationals use their superior knowledge to
locate     manufacturing activities in countries that are most advantageous

from the standpoint of market opportunities and cost considerations.

The other hypothesis views multinationals as market makers; multinationals

are regarded as sufficiently sheltered from competition and consequently

so powerful and profitable that their strategies for dealing with the

tax   and other impacts upon them of host governments tend to subordinate
the   economic factors that ordinarily affect the location of industries,

particularly cost considerations.

       We attempt in this paper to see how far we can explain these location

decisions by the economic considerations implied by the scanning hypothesis.

The view of multinational firms we adopt for this    purpose is   that produc—

tion in a host country is the result of the interaction of several sets

of factors. Two of these are the standard trade—theory influences which

involve the interaction of country characteristics (such as factor abundance

and factor prices) and commodity characteristics (such as factor intensi-

ties). These are elements that are described by Dunning, for example,

as external to the firm.2 They explain the desirability, in terms of



       2
        Dunning (1977).
                                   —3—

cost, of producing a particular commodity in a particular country.

      The other set of factors consists of firm characteristics, which

Dunning (ibid) refers to as internal to the firm, and which determine

the ownership of production. They are what enable a multinational to

produce     in a host country in competition with host—country firms that
presumably have the advantage of being on their home ground. These
internal characteristics can themselves be broken down into several elements:
those belonging to the home countries of the multinationals, those belonging
to particular    industries, and finally those specific to individual firms

that differentiate them even from other firms     in   their own countries

and   industries. Home—country characteristics would be those that would be
typical, say, of firms from the United States as compared to those from
other countries, such as skill at mass—marketing. These would have to
be attributes that become internal to the firm and are then carried over
to production in other countries. Industry characteristics would be
those common to firms in an industry regardless of their national origin,
such as, perhaps, a high degree of product differentiation in the
machinery     industry.

       If   industry characteristics are dominant, we might expect to find
that the same industries are foreign investors from each country, and
that the propensities of companies to invest abroad would be determined
by their industries but not by their national origins. If country
characteristics were important, the industries investing heavily abroad
from the United States would be those in which U.S. companies had developed
special advantages (such as skill at mass—marketing or petroleum explora-
tion) while the Swedish industries investing abroad might be quite a
                                      —4—


different group.3 Since the advantages of firms are in comparison to

the characteristics of firms in other countries, the composition of

investment will differ by area. U.S. firms might have a strong advantage

in R&D—intensive activities relative to host—country firms in LDC's, but

much less of an advantage relative to host—country firms in Western Europe.

Thus the composition of investment will differ not only among parent

countries       but among host countries, and the advantages of host—country
firms      as   well as those of parent—country firms   should   explain the pattern
of investment.
       Within each industry in a     parent country firms may     vary over   a wide
range      in the characteristics that determine firm—specific comparative

advantage. Even in an R&D—intensive industry there will be companies

that lead in R&D investment or in innovation and others that are mainly

followers or copiers. Thus we        may find        a single industry
                                                that even in

within a single parent country, firms with different characteristics will
have    very different propensities to produce abroad or to produce in

particular countries. The company attribute that has most frequently

been identified as determining the propensity to produce outside the

home country is size, with a study by Horst (1972) as the main evidence.

However, even the relation to size is complex. While the likelihood that

a   firm will be a foreign investor or a foreign investor in several countries
does increase with size of firm, among investors, the propensity to produce
abroad——the proportion of production or employment that takes place

overseas——does       not seem to be related to the size of the firm. Thus the


       3
     For a discussion of country differences see Swedenborg (1979),
chapter 3. The contrary view, that all multinational firms, whatever
their national origin,    .have the same repertoire of advantages...
                                .


is taken by Samuelsson (1977), p. 185.
                                  —5—

influence of size seeu to be mainly a threshhold effect.4

       In this paper we take up two issues related to the location decisions

of U.S. multinational firms. One is whether, within industries, firm

attributes   are associated with the location of investments. The second

is   whether across all industries there are country attributes which
determine the location of production for exports. We have not investigaged
the industry attributes which may determine these decisions or the inter-
action among firm, industry, and   country characteristics.




     4
      See Swedenborg (1979) for the relation among Swedish investors.
The same seems to be the case for U.S. investing firms.
                                       —6--


Wio Invests Where? Parent Firm Characteristics and
the_Location of Fo reign     Product ion
      One way in which the location of production is determined is that

parent firms that have decided to manufacture abroad select a location or

locations for these operations. It has been suggested that this is a

separate decision from later ones about the magnitude and character of

the individual operations,5 and we wish to ask, therefore, whether there

is some    relation between the characteristics of a country and the     type

of firm that sets up manufacturing there.

      Table 1 shows, for a detailed country breakdown but a rough one for

industries,    that we may   have   a difficult time explaining these decisions
as   the result of an Interaction     between country and parent characteristics.
Although there are differences In the ranking of countries in the six
industries listed, what is much more striking is the consistency of the

country    ranking from one industry to another. Canada invariably ranks
first in   the number of U.S. parents operating there,      the U.K. and Mexico

alternate for second and third place, Germany and France, followed by

Australia have most of the fourth, fifth, and sixth places, Sweden,

Switzerland,   and the Philippines share most of the last few ranks.
      The rankings for a few countries, with a finer level of industry
detail, are given in Table 2. Again, Canada is almost always first,
followed by the U.K., Germany, and Sweden in that order.
      The point of these tables is not that there is no interaction of
the sort hypothesized, but that country characteristics by themselves
seem to dominate these decisions. Proximity to the United States would
seem to   be the most important consideration, to judge by the high rank


      5
       See,   for example, Richardson (1971).
                                       —7-.


Table 1
Number of U.S. Parent Firms in Each Manufacturing Industry Group
Active in Each Country or Group of Countries — 1966


                                             Primary &               .

                            Food    Chemical Fabricated           Transport Other
                           Products Products   Metals   Machinery Equipment Mfg.

All Countries               172       341          316         595   129    729

Developed Countries         116       295        276           547   117    616
   Canada                    77       201        180           331    83    418
   Europe                    73       219        148           380    56    376
      UK                     39       124           70         213    23    201
      Germany                28        73          48          107    17    105
      Belgium—Luxembourg     15        52          25           53     7     50
      France                 24        91          27           90    20    100
      Italy                  20        63          20      •    71    10     63
      Netherlands            18        53          28           49     7     57
      Spain                  19        40          10           26    10     34
      Sweden                  3        18           8           14     1     19
      Switzerland             4        32           7           20     4     30
   Japan                     15        53          17           60    10     47
   Australia                 23        77          27           72    15     83
   South Africa              12        43           16          30    11     38

Developing Countries        106       191          107         193    50    286
   Latin America             93       170          91          163    48    224
      Argentina              18        57           18          36    17     34
      Brazil                 16        63           21          58    15     49
      Colombia               16        44           14          18     3     35
      Mexico                 46       120           72         112    34    137
      Venezuela              26        53           11 -        17    10     46
   India                       3       33           15          29     5     21
   Philippines               23        27            6          12     1     36


     Source: U.S. Department of Commerce (1976).
                                    —8—

Table 2

Rankinga of Four Countries by Nunber of
U.S. Parent Firms in Each Industry — 1970



                                    Canada   U.K.   Germany   Sweden

Food processing                      1        2       3        4
Paper and allied products            1        2       3        4
Chenl ca is
  Drugs                              1        2.5     2.5      4
  Soaps, cosmetics, etc.             1        2       3.5       3.5
  Other chemicals                    1        2       3        4
Rubber and plastics and prod.        3        2       1        4
Metals                               1        3      2         4
Nonelectrical machinery
  Computers and office mach.         1.5      1.5    3         4
  Farm machinery                     2        2      2         4
  Other nonelectrical mach.          1.5      1.5    3         4
Electrical mach. & equipment
  Radio, TV, electronics             1        2       3        4
  Household appliances               1        2       3        4
  Other electrical mach.             1        2       3        4
Transport equipment                  1        2       3        4
Other manufacturing                  1        2       3        4


      Source: U.S. Department of Commerce unpublished data.
      a
       From high (1). to low (4).
                                  —9—

of two such different countries as Canada and Mexico. The use       of   English

as the major language seems also to be a factor, contributing probably to

the rankings of Canada, the U.K., and Australia. The size of markets

also appears to be a factor that would explain some of the rankings, and

will   be discussed more fully later.
       A possible interpretation of the figures is that there is a regular
country   order in the establishment of affiliates and that it is mostly.

identical among industries. The country order does not necessarily imply

a timing relationship, although there very likely is one. The country
order might simply be that if a company has an affiliate in only one
country the affiliate will be in Canada. If     it has   two, they will be in
Canada and in Mexico or the U.K., if it has more than three, they will

be in those three countries and Germany or France, or possibly Australia.

If there is a timing relationship it would be that U.S. companies

establish affiliates first in Canada and last in Sweden or the Philippines,

among the countries we have distinguished. Another possibility is

that the country order is associated with the size of the parent. That

is, the smallest parents have affiliates only in Canada and only the

largest have affiliates in the low—ranking countries.

       The last possibility is tested in Table 3 in which we rank the

countries of Table 2 by the average number of employees in parent operations

in the United States for parents in each industry of manufacturing af fill—

ates in that country. As we might expect, parents of Canadian affiliates

are the smallest, in general and   in   most industries. In every   industry
for which we have data, parents of Swedish affiliates are the largest

companies. The other two countries sometimes exchange ranks, and         their
                                    — 10 —




Tab]e 3

Rankingaof Four Countries by Average Size (Employment) of
U.S. Parents in Each Industry Manufacturing There — 1970



                                    Canada       U.K.   Germany   Sweden


Food processing                      2            3       4         1
Paper and allied products            3            4       2         1
themicals                            4       '    2       3         1
Rubber and plastics and prod.        1            3       2        NA
Metals                                4           2       3         1
Nonelectrical machinery               4           2       3         1
Electrical machinery                 4            3       2         1
Transport equipment                   3           2       1        —

Other manufacturing                   3           2       1        NA
   Average                            3.1         2.6     2.3      1
                            a
   Average (six industries)           3.5         2.7     3.0      1


     Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, tzrtpublished data.
    a
        From high (1) to low (4).
    b
        Industries for which Swedish data are available.
                                      — 11   —




average ranks are similar. Thus it appears that there is a size—of—
parent order to the establishment of affiliates in general, across

industries,     with affiliates in the less popular countries established
mainly by firms which already have affiliates in the more popular countries.6
        Aside from size of parent, there may be other characteristics that
distinguish parents locating their production in different countries. For
example, labor—intensive U.S. firms might go     abroad to countries where

labor    is cheap, or low—wage (presumably low—skill) U.S. companies might
tend to have affiliates in low—wage countries abroad. We make a first
test of such within—industry selection, using our broad country groupings,
in Table 4, which shows the awrage rank for each country or country group,
across industries, for the characteristics of U.S. parents and their affili-
ates.

        The   data suggest some consistency in parent rankings from one industry
to another, but in surprising directions. The lowest-wage U.S. companies
(or lowest—skill) tended to be the parents of affiliates in Canada and
Sweden, two very high-wage countries. The highest—wage U.S. parents were
more likely to be the ones with affiliates in "Other Europe," a comparatively
low—wage area, although it contains a wide variety of countries, and with
affiliates in Developing Countries. Thus, within each industry, parents
seem to have selected foreign locations with characteristics least like
their own. In other words, within each industry opposites seem to attract.
        Parents of affiliates in "Other Europe" and the Developing Countries
were not only high—wage companies in their industries but also the most


        6
      This is not the only possible explanation for the figures. We would
get the same relationship if small U.S. firms invested only in Canada and
large ones, say, only in Sweden, but that does not seem to be very likely.
Table 4
Average Ranking of Countries and Country Groups by Average Wage
and Assets Per Worker of U.S. Parents in Each Industry — 1970b
and U.S. Affiliates in Each Industry — 1966


                                                                                               Japan,
                                                                          EEC                Australia,
                                                                       Other Than            New   Zealand,
                                                                       Germany      Other        and          Developing
                                    Canada   U.K.   Germany   Sweden   and U.K.     Europe   South Africa     Countries

Average Payroll Per Worker
  Parents                  5.8               4.3      4.2      6.4        3.6        3.6           4.4           3.7
  Affiliates               1.2               5.0      3.9      2.0        3.2        6.2           6.4           7.5

Assets Per Worker
  Parents                            3.9     5.4      5.0      6.3        4.1        2.9           5.5           2.9
  Affiliates                         2.7     6.3      6.3      2.8        3.2        3.2           4.3           7.2



    Source:      U.S. Department of Commerce, unpublished data.
    a
        From   hi&   (1)   to low   (8)
    b
     Among     industries    for which all countries' data are available.
                                     —13—



capital intensive. The companies that located in Sweden1 a high—wage
country, tended to be the least capital intensive in their industries.
    Thus as far as factor prices and factor proportions are concerned,
within    industries U.S.—parent   companies   do not seem to have sought condi-
tions   similar to those they operated under      in the United States. The
U.S. parents drawn to each area seem to have been at the opposite end of
the scale from what we would expect of local firms in that area.
        If parents were investing in locations that had attributes unlike
the parents' own, it would not seem likely that affiliate characteristics
within industries would reflect those of their parents. We might expect
that the affiliates' attributes would instead reflect those of their own
locations. The second line of each set in Table 4 describes these
country or country—group differences in affiliates. For example, average
payroll per worker tended to be highest in Canada, and next in Sweden,
followed by the EEC countries, the U.K., Other Europe, Japan, Australia,
New Zealand, and South Africa, and finally the developing countries.
Capital intensity was highest among affiliates in Canada, followed by
those in Sweden and "Other EEC countries" and lowest in the developing
countries. This is at least roughly the order we would expect from the
ranking in terns of payroll per employee if that measure reflected the
cost of labor rather than average skill levels. Thus the capital intensities

of affiliates seem to reflect local wage costs rather than parent capital

intensities   within industries.
     A more systematic way of comparing parent and affiliate characteris-
tics, where both are available, is by correlating parent characteristics
with affiliate characteristics. For example, a parent characteristic for
                                    — 14    —




the U.K. food industry would be the average capital/labor ratio of U.S.
parents with food Industry affiliates in the U.K., relative to the average
capital/labor ratio of all U.S. parents with food industry affiliates.
The corresponding affiliate characteristic would be the average capital/
labor ratio of U.S.—owned food industry affiliates in the U.K. relative
to   the average for all U.S.—owned food industry        affiliates. If we correlate
affiliate     and parent capital intensities in this way we find almost no

relationship.                   That is, countries in which relatively capital—

intensive parents within each industry          have invested   do not have relatively

capital—intensive affiliates.      There   is thus no indication that parents
are transmitting technologies     that can be characterized by their own capital
intensities.

       If we correlate payroll per worker of parents with that in affiliates

we do find a significant negative relation. Countries in which affiliates
pay relatively high wages for their industries (as compared with other U.S.

affiliates) have drawn their investment from companies paying relatively
low wages in the United States (r —        —.34).   These high affiliate wages are
associated with high affiliate capital intensities within industries
(r .42), as we would expect.7 Furthermore, high parent payrolls per
worker in the United States appear to be associated with low affiliate
capital intensities, rather than high ones.




        For   stronger evidence on this point see Lipsey, Kravis, and Roldan
 (1978).
                                   — 15 —




       To sununarize our findings with respect to firm characteristics within

industries, there seem to be large differences in average size between U.S.

investors in Canada and those in the less common destinations for U.S.

capital, not because large U.S. firms   do not invest in Canada but because
small U.S. firms invest only in Canada or first in Canada, and there

is a fairly regular ordering of investment locations. Within each industry,

the   low—wage firms tend to have investments in high—wage countries, such
as Canada and Sweden, while high—wage U.S. companies invest more frequently
in    low—wage destinations, such as the developing countries. These high—wage

companies are also relatively capital Intensive and yet tend to be the

main investors in areas in which affiliates have low capital intensities

for their industries. These are not strong relationships but at least it

does seem evident that there is no positive correlation, within industries,
between the wage levels (and presumably the average skill levels) of
parents or their capital intensities, and those of the countries in which
they choose to locate their foreign production. If there is any relation-
ship it appears to be that parent firms look for country characteristics
that complement their own rather than resemble them.
       If these differences between parent and affiliate characteristics
represent differences in product lines between them they fit with an
earlier finding that production by U.S. firms in a host country does not
substitute for U.S. exports or parent exports to that country but does
substitute for exports by other countries to that host country (Lipsey and
Weiss, 1976a and   1976b).A possible inference Is that the U.S. firm may
be producing abroad what it was not likely to export from the United States
in any   case.
                                    —16 —



Country Characteristics and the Location
of Production for Export
     The issue we are concerned with here is what country characteristics,
part of the set "external" to the firm in our earlier discussion, determine
location decisions by U.S. parent firms. One part of our study was a
theoretical analysis of these choices (Weinblatt, 1980), based on a model
of a firm minimizing the cost of serving a foreign market or markets or the
cost of serving both home and foreign markets, taking demand in each market
as exogenous. That analysis pointed to,as the varIables to be con-
sidered, relative costs of factors (such as labor cost) and materials,
interacting with   factor proportions (such as capital intensity), transfer

costs (such as tariffs and    freight   rates), and economies of scale, both

by themselves and interacting with the other variables.

     Partly    1cause we do not have worldwide measures of transfer costs,
and partly to reduce the influence of subsidies and other factors for
which   we have no empirical measures, we have concentrated on the location

of production for export rather than total production.        A focus on export
sourcing,   rather than on manufacturing activity, has the advantage that

the role of local demand in each    individual    host country can   be   expected

to play a lesser and different role. Obviously a large local market

makes it more worthwhile to meet the entry costs and        once   an affiliate

is established a larger market may      afford   economics of scale that are

conducive    to exporting. Nevertheless, the influence of local demand
operates    on production for export only insofar as there are effects on

cost via    economies of scale, and that is how we    will interpret demand

variables. Because the factors affecting the choice between U.S. and
                                      — 17   —




foreign locations in general may be different in kind and degree from
those affecting choices between alternative foreign locations, we exclude
the United States as a source of exports. Thus             the   question which we wish
to    ask Is h far the       of different host countries in the worldwide
                          shares

exports of U.S. multinational firms (excluding the U.S. as a source) can
be explained by country (rather than industry or firm)              influences   on
relative costs of production.
        Ideally, we would like to have data on the major components of costs——

labor, capital, and raw material inputs——and also tax data——for each U.S.

affiliate     in each host country. We have had to make do with materials
that fall far short of this ideal. We must also assume that               the cost
and   productivity relationships we observe in      1966, the reference date
for   the   Department of Commerce data we used, are similar to those
wti1ct were anticipated when the investment decisions leading to the 1966

production capacity of the affiliates were made. This is unavoidable and

there   is but small comfort in the observation       that the decisions about
export sourcing may be    a little easier to alter once capacity is available

in different host countries than decisions about the location             of   produc-

tion facilities. But against       this has to be placed the practice of host
countries    in bargaining entry rights and      capital   concessions for export

commitments. Although such practices were not as extensive in the 1960's

as they have become since they may     still obscure the influence of the
independent    variables whose effect on export shares we will try          to measure.
                                           — 18   —




The Data

       The basic data on exports                           their majority
                                          by U.S. multinationals from

owned manufacturing affiliates in 49 host countries consisted of the
company returns to the 1966 census of direct investment abroad by the
Bureau      of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. Department of Commerce.8

The 49 host countries were those included in the census for which we

were   able to assemble external country data on wages, productivity, etc.
Since we did not have direct access to the census data because of the
confidentiality problem, BEA kindly performed the computations for us,
adding our external variables representing the cost and related character-
istics of the host countries. Data for 9 major (roughly 2—digit) manufac-
turing and 11 subindustries were available            in sufficient quantity to make

analyses feasible. It was impossible to include complete coverage of

manufacturing since the number of parents and            affiliates in some industries
was insufficient for separate regressions. Only parents reporting manufac-

turing affiliates             in at least three host countries were included. This
was done to avoid the possibility that small multinationals with affili-
ates in only one or two countries would, as a result of the very high
shares      of those host countries, dominate the results.9 The number of host

countries included in the regressions for individual industries varied

from 22 to 43.



       8
          preliminary work was done on data from the 1970 survey, but the
           Some
larger number of observations made the 1966 data more useful for regression
analysis for individual industries.
       9
        Only      manufacturing affiliates which met the following criteria were
included in the analysis: (1) sales at least $100,000; (2) total assets
at least $100,000; (3) at least 20 employees; (4) total net sales (total sales
ex sales taxes and returns) at least equal to export sales; (5) net sales
at least equal to imports from the United States; (6) value added greater
than   zero;      and   (7)   gross receipts at least equal to net sales.
                                    — 19 —



       The   dependent variable for each industry was the consolidated gross
export share (CES) of each host country in the worldwide (except U.S.)
exports of U.S. majority owned manufacturing affiliates. That is, the
exports of U.S. parents' affiliates in each industry In each host country
were summed and taken as a ratio of the world exports of all affiliates
of all U.S. parents in that industry. Other formulations of the export
share   variable are possible and some were tried in the experimental work.

In one version it was based on net exports. These were calculated by

deducting from each affiliate's exports an estimate of the contribution

to those exports of the affiliate's imports from the United States. The

purpose of this calculation was to approach more closely to a measure

of   production in the host country. The method was to assume that imports
from the United States contributed to the affiliate's exports in the
proportion they bore to the affiliate's total sales. Another variant
treated each parent as a separate entity for purposes of computing export
shares. Neither of the alternative formulations produced substantially
different     results in regressions from those produced by the consolidated

gross export share. The latter was in any case to be preferred marginally,

at least, over the others; a consolidated rather than individual parent

share   better matched the countrywide cost characteristics assembled to go
with    the census data. Also, with respect to the net share variant, the

shift from gross to net could only be     accomplished very crudely.
                                  — 20    —




Labor cost

     Labor cost is, of course, the most important element of cost; the

compensation of employees accounted for 64 per cent of costs other than

taxes for U.S. foreign manufacturing affiliates in 1966.10 In the

absence    of data on the quantities of output and exports specific types
                                                             of

of goods and the associated expenditure on labor, we estimated labor cost
per unit of output by dividing wages per worker, in dollars, by output
per worker (productivity).

                               Compensation __________________
             Unit labor cost = _____________  Wage per worker
                                 Output       Output per worker

     per worker. Preliminary regressions indicated that the shares
of exports originating in different host countries tended to be positively
correlated with average wages (average payroll per employee). Unless we
were willing to accept the Idea that a high price of labor was an attrac-
tion for an export site, the implication was that our wage per man was
mainly measuring labor quality, and that exports tend to originate in
countries with high quality labor, i.e., in countries with high investment
per capita in human capital. To measure the impact of differences in the
prices    for given qualities of labor on export sourcing, we adjusted

observed wages for the quality of labor. Several different ways of meas-

uring the price of labor are conceivable. Ideally we would know the

prices   in different countries for labor of different types: unskilled
labor, skilled labor, and probably some breakdown by type of skill. We
could then introduce information on the productivity of each type of labor,


     10
         U.S. Department of Conmierce (1976), P. 164.
                                     — 21   —




by  industry, in each country or use such information to calculate unit
 labor costs facing an industry in each country.

      In the absence of such information we tried two approximations.
Both involved dividing measures of labor cost for what         were thought to be

roughly equivalent types of labor by        the same set   of country measures of

output per unit of labor input, to get a measure of unit labor cost. The

labor input was    taken   as the number of workers multiplied by the average

quality of labor in the country, derived from data         on the education level
of   the labor force, described below.

        The labor price numerators were as follows. The first was the average

payroll    per worker in the particular industry, under the assumption that a
given    industry hired the same quality of workers in each country. The

second    was the average payroll per worker in all manufacturing affiliates
divided by the index of the average quality of labor in the country. The
assumption here was that the country differences in quality of labor
in manufacturing affiliates as a group were proportional to country differ-
ences in the quality of the labor force as a whole. In this second calcu-
lation, which is the one used in Table 5, the same quality of labor measure
appears in both the numerator and the denominator and therefore drops out
of the measure, which reduces to average payroll per worker divided by
average   output per worker, or labor cost per unit of output. The equations

using   the two different labor cost measures were too similar to warrant
showing both.
      The_quality of labor. There are several sources of error in using
years of education as a measure of the quality of labor. In the first
place, the human input into the educational process may vary in quality
from one country to another and from one period to another within the
4
                                      — 22 —



    same   country. (For example, in a country where only a few people receive
    higher education, the average quality of the students may be very high.)
    A second factor is that the amount learned during each year of schooling
    varies from country to country. Such differences, whether due to differ-
    ences in the efficiency of the educational system or to factors external
    to the educational system, mean that years of education do not provide a
    satisfactory yardstick for calibrating the quality of members of the labor
    force in different countries. Third, the relationship between educational
    attainment and productivity is unknown.
           Finally, and perhaps the most serious problem, our quality measure
    refers to the average of a country's labor force. The average qualities
    for all workers may differ more among countries than the average qualities
    for manufacturing workers or particularly for manufacturing workers employed
    by multinational firms. If that is the case, we may be overcorrecting wage
    differences.
           Despite these doubts, however, we decided to regard years of education
    as faute de mieux the key to labor force quality, and our problem was to
    find a means to convert different levels of education into differences in
    labor quality as reflected in differences in wage levels. Edward Denison
    (1967, p. 44) provided links between years of education and income (wage)
    levels in the form of an index of earnings differentials for otherwise
    similar individuals who have completed 9 different levels of schooling.11


           11
            The indexes are based on the weighted average 1959 earnings differ-
    entials of males at the different educational levels in each of 32 cells
    in a cross—classification by age, region, race, and farm vs. nonfarm occupa-
    tion. Denison's values for each of the 9 levels of education (expressed in
    years of schooling) were applied to data on the average years of schooling
                                      — 23



A   quality—adjusted average wage for each host country was then obtained
by dividing the unadjusted average wage by the Denison index for that
country.
       When export shares were correlated with this revised average wage,
the coefficient of the new variable was still positive but the positive
                                      12
association was   notably   weaker.        This   result   could reflect reality:

that   is, multinationals tend to locate production where wages are high
even when corrected for quality. One would expect in this case that high
wages would be associated with high productivity and thus betoken low
labor cost.
       Productivity. Productivity, the other term required to form the
approximation of labor cost, is defined here as real GDP divided by the
quality—adjusted labor force. The CDP figures are taken from the
extrapolation of the data of the UN International Comparison Project,13
and the labor force data represent the percentage of the population that

(Fu. 11 cont.)
of the economically active population in different countries to derive
an index of the quality of labor. (Data on average schooling for 20
countries may be found in OECD (1971).) For countries for which average
years of schooling were not available, interpolations were made with the
aid of an earlier index of human resource quality prepared by Harbison
and Myers (1964). An index based on an association between education and
income established by Krueger (1968) was also used in experimental regres-
sions, but the Denison index performed marginally better.
       12
       The r2 a were lower for 16 out of the 20 industrial classifications.
Also the coefficient of the uncorrected variable was twice its standard
error or more in 12 of the 20 while the same was true only in 5 cases for
the corrected variable.
       13
         Kravis, Beston, Summers (l978b).
                                       —24—


was economically active as reported in the ILO Yearbook of Labor Statistics.
The quality adjustment was achieved by multiplying the labor force figures
by the Denison Index.

       When export shares were correlated with labor costs, formed by the
ratio of quality—adjusted wages to productivity, the coefficient of labor
cost   was negative in all but 2 of        the 20 industrial classifications (grain
mill    and   bakery   products and   primary   and fabricated metals). The explana-

tory power of the variable was weak, however. None of the coefficients

was statistically significant at the 5 per cent level and only half were

larger than their standard errors.




       14
            measure of productivity may serve its purpose in aiding in the
            This
calibration of labor costs, but it would be inadequate as a measure of
productivity per se. For such a purpose what is needed is a measure of
output per unit of output with the inputs standardized so that they not
only remain constant in quality from country to country but also in propor-
tions. That is, if the prices of all the inputs in different countries
could be adjusted to refer to inputs of a standardized quality, we would
not want the productivity measure to be affected by differences in the rela-
tive aiount of capital or of natural resources. A pure productivity measure
would therefore be a residual measure of productivity differences that
cannot be accounted for by differences in the quality and quantity of
resource input. Presumably the remaining differences would have their
origin in general factors such as the general efficiency of the population
and its'work habits. Some experiments with this kind of productivity measure
were attempted but they were not fruitful.
                                                  — 25   —




Other Explanatory Variables

       Cost of capital. International differences in the cost of physical

capital are likely to be smaller than differences in the cost of a given

quality      of labor. In the        first place, differences   in the financial cost
of capital to a multinational firm with affiliates in various host coun-
tries viii be reduced if not eliminated by the opportunity of the parent
to   obtain marginal funds in the cheapest market. Secondly, with respect

to   the prices of physical capital, there is evidence that for the two—
thirds -of property,         plant, and equipment investment by U.S. manufacturing

affiliates that consists of equipment, or producers' durables, prices tend

to be very similar in different countries.15 The prices of construction,

which   accounts for the balance of gross domestic capital formation, do
vary substantially among countries, tending to rise with —                   -—
per capita GDP.'6 The results reported upon below do not include a
variable for capital costs chiefly because the only way to form a variable

for   such cost was from an estimating equation relating the prices of
capital goods to the level of real or nominal GDP per capita. Since this
was the method used to help form the productivity variable, considerable
multicollinearity was unavoidable when both the prices_fcapital goods


        15
       For the data on prices, see Kravis, Ileston, and Summers (1978a),
p. 120. The proportion of investment which consists of equipment is from
an unpublished tabulation of the 1966 foreign investment survey by the
U.S.    Department of Commerce.
        16
             inC =     .2928   in   GDP
                                          E   —     .2556       R2 =   .62
                     (5.1)                        (2.1)         SEE    .2817
                                                                n l6
                                                                inC    .7626
where C =       construction price index (US100) arkd GDPEX is the per capita
GDP converted to dollars via exchange rates and expressed as a per cent of
the United States (t ratios               in parentheses).
                                    —26—


and labor costs were included. In view of the greater importance of
labor cost and the relatively small impact that differences in construction

costs would have on current production costs, the results are presented

in terms of labor costs alone. It may, however, be of interest to report

that in some experimental regressions with 1970 survey data the coefficient

for relative construction costs had the anticipated negative sign in 8 out

of 11 (approximately 2—digit) industries.'7                      -




       Cost of inaterialinputs. A proper comparison of the relative prices

of material inputs for each industry was far beyond the scope of our

resources. The proxy variables we used were based on      the   hypothesis that

the   prices of raw and semi—finished materials will be lover the easier is
access to world markets; thatis, these prices, it is assumed, will be
inversely   correlated with the degree of sopennesst of the host countries.

The simplest measure of openness used was the 1970 stun of exports and

imports divided by GD? (OP).8 However, OP fails to take account of the

tendency for the relative importance of external trade to be inversely

correlated with the size of the internal market (Kuznets, 1964). OP might

indicate    the same degree of openness, for example, for a small country

with very restrictive trade policies (and hence high materials prices)

and a large    country with no restrictions   (and hence low materials prices).




       17
       In 3 cases the coefficient was more than twice     Its
                                                          standard error
and in 1 it was 1.6 tImes. Coefficients for relative wages were negative
in 9 of the Industries including 7 of those with negative construction
cost coefficients.

       18
       Data for GD?, exports, and imports from International Financial
Statistics, except for Hong Kong and Liberia which are from U.N. Statistical
Yearbook, 1973.
                                        — 27   —




To capture the effect of trade policies on materials prices, OP was

regressed against population and population density and the residuals (ROP)

taken as indicators of the ease of access in each host country to world

markets for material inputs. In simple correlations between export shares

and ROP the coefficient of ROP was usually significant at the 5 per cent

level.

       Other variables. Total GDP, converted to U.S. dollars via exchange

rates, was included as a measure of the size of the host country market.

The significance of this variable in the present context is mainly as an

indicator of economies of scale. To the extent that economies of scale

play   no role, the size of the host country market should have no influence
on the sourcing of exports. Furthermore, since the economies of scale are
not unlimited, their impact on export shares should be observable for a
certain range of rising GDP after which the further pull of a large GDP
upon location for export      should   diminish. These expectations are
consistently fulfilled in regressions in which GDP and       the   square of GDP
are    taken as independent   variables.
-      Experiments   with several versions of tax variables, none of them
very satisfactory on a priori grounds, did not prove successful and         they

are not reported upon here.'9




        19
                        used were (a) "effective income tax rates,'! the
          The tax versions
ratio of taxes at all governmental levels to net income before taxes,
(b) "realized corporate tax rates," the definition of pretax earnings and
profits as reported for U.S. tax purposes, and (c) the ratio of taxes to
reported income for individual firms. The first of these tax series was
obtained from the Survey of Current Business, May 1974, Part I (p. 36);
the second from Hufbauer and Foster (1976), pp. 27—29, and the third set
of    figures from the census forms.
                                     -     —28—



Results of Multlvari at eRegressions
       In   Table 5 regressions are presented in which the consolidated export

share   is the dependent variable and the independent variables are those
that were winnowed out in the previous discussion: labor cost,2° GDP,
GDP2, and the Residual Openness variable (ROP). The complete set of

anticipated signs (— + —         +) is found in         14 of the 20 equations with

ranging     .30 to .55 in 9     of these industrial classifications. The coef-

ficients     of GDP and ROP have the expected signs In all the equations and
are usually (14 out of 20) significant at the 5 per cent level. The
success of ROP raises the question of whether     is serving, as intended,
                                                              it

only   as a price indicator for material inputs. Perhaps it reflects the
host country's general propensity to trade; if so, the convenience of low
cost trading facilities (transport, finance, etc.) may be the elements
that are really influencing the export behavior of multinationals. The
coefficient of the squared term for GDP is negative with but one exception,
though it is less often statistically significant (7 out of 20 at the 5
per cent level).

       The labor cost variable is the major disappointment, being the

weakest in contributing to the explanation of export shares. While its

coefficient is generally (15 out of 20) negative, it fails to reach the

5 per cent significance level in any               of   the classifications and is



       20
        Our measure of labor cost is
                          Average    wage, all affiliates/Denison Index
                 Real GDP per capita/National labor force x Denison Index
which equals the total wage bill (based on the affiliates' average wage)
per unit of real GDP. The alternative variant of labor cost based on the
average wage of affiliates in the given industry in the host country (without
further correction for quality of labor) yielded similar though marginally
inferior results. In the version used in Table 6 the Denison Index cancels
out, but in the alternative version it remains in the denominator of the
productivity index.
                                              — 29 —




                                              T.ELE 5

                 Explanation of Export Shares in Teres of Labor Cost,
                                 Total Real GOP, and Openness

                                                    lode oens3 entVariables
                                                 Total           Square of     Residual
                                    Labor
                                     Cost       Real GOP         Total Real
                                                                      GOP
                                                                               Openness          j)
                                       (1)         (2)                  (3)           (4)          (5)

Food                                —19.39        7.37               —.280           .033        .213
                                     (.73)       (2.3)                (2.11)        (2.02)       (3:43)
   Grain, Mill, Eakezy              168.41        6.08               —.227           .141         .366
                                     (1.61)       (.77)               (.80)        (3.66)        (4.32)
   Beverages                         34.92       16.5                -.508           .117        .398
                                     (.40)       (2.29)               (1.88)        (2.97)       (4.46)
   Other Food                       —26.20        6.85               —.269          .018         .084
                                     (.89)       (1.88)               (1.85)        (.99)        (1.83)
Chemical                            —18.98       10.6                —.329           .040        .399
                                    (.81)        (3.45)               (2.66)        (3.07)       (7.98)

   Drugs                            —32.12       10.0                —.309           .019        .167
                                     (.91)       (2.36)               (1.79)        (.99)        (2.91)
   Soap, Cosmetics                  —37.76       10.4                —.311           .024        .148
                                    (.96)        (2.16)               (1.61)        (1.17)       (2.52)
   Other chemical                    —.22        8.95                —.279           .089         .523
                                    (.01)        (2.59)               (2.03)        C4.65)       (10.06)
                             -                                         .053
t±ar, Plastic                       —27.73       4.53
                                                  (.69)
                                                                                     .047        .381
                                     (.76)                            (.16)         (2.17)       (5.15)
Y.etali                              61.54                            .359           .050         .160
                                    (1.30)       (2.08)              (1.51)         (1.77)        (2.41)

5o,-lectrical Machinery             —53.30      14.2                 —.363           .039        .417
                                    (1.12)       (3.18)              (2.07)         (1.85)        (6.19)
   Cocputers, Office Mach.          —73.62      17.2                 —.414           .032         .398
                                    (.98)        (2.87)              (1.83)         (1.10)        (4.47)
                                                                               -

   Other Eon—electrical             —53.56      13.8                 —.387           .053         .326
                                    (.98)        (2.69)              (1.92)         (2.16)        (4.38)
                                                                                             -
Electrical Machinery                —24.42      12.6                 —.344           .041         .438
                                    (.91)        (3.64)              (2.48)         (2.61)        (8.3)

   Radio, TV                        —67.30       10,7                —.278           .052         .381
                                    (1.06)        (2.45)             (1.64)         (2.18)        (5.15)
   Otner Electrical '1ec.           —11.26       16.5                 .473           .055         .426
                                    (.33)         (3.69)              (2.68)        (2.67)        (6.75)

Transportation Equipment             51.07       13:0                —.342           .137         .417
                                     (.60)        (1.13)             (1.21)         (3.36)        (4.75)
                                                         -
   Motor Vehicles                    40.43       13.1                —.334           .128
                                     (.48)        (1.76)             (1.19)         (3.16)       (4.55)

Stone, Clay, Class                  —50.47       9.17                —.310           .072         .130
                                                 (1.34)              (1.17)         (2.10)        (1.90)
Instru.ents                         —15.17       15.5                -.406           .088         .526
                                    (.25)        (3.09)              (2.15)         (3.19)        (S.84)

  Constant term not reported. Dependent variable: consoiLdated eXpo share. For d.'finltion
of thc a-.d of independent variables, see text. (t ratios in parentheses).
                                          -30-
larger      than its standard error only in two     of   the cases in which it has
a negative sign. This may          be   due to the deficiencies of the measure——
particularly our possible failure to adjust correctly for quality
differepces, and     the   use   of   a labor cost measure that is the average for
all affiliates in a given host country. It mnav             be   that firms are con—
cernedwith costs of specific types of labor and that these vary among
countries in ways very different from the average labor cost. For
example, skilled labor might be cheap in Sweden and expensive in Latin
America, while average labor costs are high in Sweden and low in Latin
America. We are also unable to include some of the most labor—intensive
industries, such as clothing and textiles, because there was not enough
U.S. investment to permit us to run equations.
       The individual industries may be classified by size of the R2 and
by    degree of conformance to expected signs:21                           -
     WrongnforOne          Variab 1e22              Complete Conformers
                                 Industries with 12 <

                                                Other food                         .08
                                                Stone, clay, glass                 .13
       Metals (primary and                      Soaps, cosmetics                   .15
                                          16
        fabricated)                             Drugs                              .17
                                                Food-                              .21
                                 Industries with 12 >
       Grainmill and bakery                     Other nonelec. machinery           .33
                                          37
        products
       Rubber and plastics and
        products                         .38    Redfo, TV                          .38
       Beverages                         .40    Computers, office machinery        .40
       1otor   vehicles                  .40    Chemicals                          .40
                                                Nonelec. machinery                 .42
                                                Other elec. machinery              .43
                                                Electrical machinery               .44
                                                Other chemicals                    .52
                                                Instruments                        .53



       21
         Major industries underlined.
       22
         Coefficient of labor cost had wrong sign except for Rubber and            plastics
and   products, for which the coefficient of GDP2 had the wrong sign.
                                   — 31 —


    The   nonconformities were positive coefficients for labor cost except
for rubber and plastics and products which had a positive sign for GDP2.
Perhaps this industry more than others needs a very large market. When
this variable is deleted the resulting equation conforms with respect to
the remaining variables (i2 — .41).
     It is not easy to explain the patterns which lead to the distribution
of the industries among the 4 classes. Primary and fabricated metals may
be pulled to locations rich in mineral resources or with cheap energy,
factors which are not included among the explanatory variables. A similar
point regarding resource orientation may apply to stone, clay and glass.
For the rest, perhaps the most striking difference is the predominance of
industries catering to consumer markets in the low       group.   Industries
selling capital goods or other inputs for other industries tend to fall
more uniformly in the high      category 'and also to conform completely to

the model. Indeed, with the exception of transportation equipment and

motor vehicles, for both of which sales of automobiles to consumers loom

very large, all the capital goods industries are found in the conforming

category with high R2.     Again, it is the regularity with which negative

labor cost coefficients appear that is notable    since no individual one is
statistically   significant.

     It was thought that the pattern might reflect different labor and

capita]. intensities   of the industries. Labor—intensive industries might,

for example, be more attracted to low   labor   cost countries. However, an

effort to link the results to variations in capital/labor intensities of

the industries did not succeed.23



    23
       When the ratio of payroll to value added was taken as the measure
of relative factor intensity no consistent associations were found with
the three sets of industries. (Data from Bureau of the Census, Census of
Nanufactures, 1967, Vol. 1). When net capital stock per dollar of payroll
                                           —32--



        A problem that hangs over these regressions is the fact discussed

earlier that, regardless of industry,         there seems to be   a country   pattern
of    investment that puts Canada first, followed by the U.K. and       Mexico,
and then Germany and      France.    It is clear that there are influences at

work outside the range of the variables included in our export sourcing

regressions. These influences, which might conceivably affect export

sourcing    less than they affect production for host—country consumption,
might include both proximity to the United States and language. One way
to introduce such influences is to include dunmiy variables for a few
countries or for sets of countries. The disadvantage of this procedure
is    that such dummy   variables are correlated with some of the economic
variables   and    thus tend   to blur their effects. For example, Canada was

the   highest—wage foreign      country.
       We did experiment with country dummies for Canada, the U.K. and

EEC (Six) countries in some earlier versions of these equations, and

some of the results were startling. In equations including such dummies

(Fn. 23   cont.)
for 9 major industries was used to measure factor intensity, the industries
producing capital goods (all in our third category, except transportation
equipment) had low capital intensities. However, the chemical industry,
also   in our third category, had the highest capital/labor ratio of all 9.
Payrolls from idem: 1967 net capital stock from U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Capital Stock Estimates for Input—Output Industries: Methods
and Data, Bulletin 2034, 1979). The effort to link the influence of labor
cost on export source decisions to the factor intensities of different
industries may have failed because the factor intensity measures reflect
the mix of subindustries in each major industry in the United States and
these may have been very different from the mix among        U.S. affiliates
abroad.  For example, in the U.S. motor vehicles accounted for only 40 per
cent of the payroll and 60 per cent of the net capital stock of the
broader industry, whereas motor vehicle payrolls and capital stock probably
accounted for much higher percentages in U.S. transportation equipment
abroad. In the comparisons reported upon in the text we took the net
capital stock per dollar of payroll in the transportation industry of $.87,
though it might have been more appropriate to use the $1.32 of the motor
vehicle component. In the other major industries it was not so obvious what
adjustments should be made.
                                      —33—



as   veil as wage rates, productivity, GDP, and ROP as independent variables,
   —2
the R ranged from .42 to .94 compared to a range of .06 to .52 without

the   country dummies. However, the high R2 achieved by using dummy variables
are hard to interpret, since they mix together the economic and "non—economic"
factors. The     "non—economic"   factors may be mislabeled. Proximity and
identity   of   language may both be major cost—reducing influences. Further-

more, inclusion of the dummy variables often destroys the significance of

the other variables. For example, the coefficients for ROP are almost

eliminated by the introduction of dummies for all three areas. One may

take the view that the ROP variable is simply a proxy for a few countries

or alternatively that the dummy      variables   serve as proxies for the ROP as

well as other cliaracteristics. However, it seems preferable to favor

specific variables that account for the strong effects of the dummy

variables in these equations. That is the strategy reflected in Table 5.

       Another way of searching for missing country influences is to

examine the residuals from the equations of Table 5. These give some

very different impressions from the earlier discussion. The clearest

outlier, with a large positive residual, is the U.K.: the equations

 consistently underestimated U.S. firms' exports from there. The only

 other large average positive residual was for Canada and we also tended

 to   underestimate exports from Denmark, Austria, Chile, Colombia, and
 Peru. We consistently overestimated U.S.        firms' exports from Italy, Spain,
 Australia, India, Malaysia, Brazil, and Venezuela.        Thus several of the

 countries high on       the list of production locations, such as Australia,

 Mexico,   France, and    Germany, do not rank exceptionally high, once we take

 account   of the variables included in the equations, as locations for
 export    production.
                                      — 34   —




      The results    of this work on the location of production for export
provide   strong indications that U.S. majority—owned affiliates tended to

export   from countries with:
            1. large internal markets. However, after a certain point
                  had   been reached, the influence of market size seemed

                  to taper off, and to produce smaller further increases

                  in the host country's share of world exports. Since

                  there is no logical direct link between large markets in

                  a country and exports from that country we interpret

                  that   finding as having several implications. First,
                  proximity   to markets is a major factor in selecting

                  locations for production. Second, that in these industries

                  there were economies of scale in production that made

                  output cheaper to produce in large markets. Third,

                  within the range of market sizes we observed, economies

                  of scale began to decline with the result that the peak

                  rate of increase in the share of exports came at a market

                  size below the largest.

            2. high propensities to trade. Whether this was due to

                  better access to imported material inputs at low world

                  prices or to better transport,   finance,   and other facilities

                  for trade is not clear. Another possibility, at least for
                  small countries, is that the presence of U.S. affiliates

                  contributed to the high trade ratios.

      With respect to wages, there was only slight evidence for a negative

association between export shares and labor cost, at least as crudely as

the   latter is   measured here. Moreover, this evidence is not found in any
                                      — 35 —



 single industry equation, but rests only on the predominance of negative
 signs for the labor cost coefficient in the 20 countries. u.s. majority—
 owned affiliates tended to export from countries
                                                  vith high wages, but the
 high productivity of SUCh countries tended to offset the high wages
 fully   or   even a little more than fully. Clearly, labor cost
                                                                    was not a major
 influence in the Iocatioa of export production insofar as we have, been
 able    to measure   it correctly.
         This   investigation of the factors influencing the location of

production by multinationals      reveals underlying systematic elements in
locational decisions, and thus offers support for the hypothesis that the
multinationals tend, at least to some degree, to be market scanners. The
choices made by parent firms among different locations for their affiliates
follow an "opposites attract" tendency: Within given industries, lw—wage,
lw—capital—intensity       parents tend to place affiliates in high—wage,

high_capital_intensity      countries and vice   versa for high-wage, high—capital—

intensity parents.
         The extent to which cost. factors determine the location of export produc-
 tion varies, it seems, from industry to industry. Industries producing capital
equipment (and the parts of the chemical industry that sell to industrial
customers) seem to fit the market scanning hypothesis better than industries
producing goods that are purchased, with little further transformation,
by consumers. Perhaps industrial buyers are more expert and the competi-
tion for their business causes producers to weight cost factors more heavily
in locating their production for export, while consumers may be more influenced
by marketing strategies that entail less competitive price pressures for
producers.
4

                                        — 36   —




                               List   of References


     Denison, Edward F. (1967), Why   Growth Rates Differ,   Brookings Institution,
          Washington, D.C.

     Dunning, John H. (1977), "Trade, Location of Economic Activity, and the
          MNE: A Search for an Eclectic Approach," in The International
          Allocation of Economic Activity, Proceedings of a Nobel Symposium
          held at Stockholm, Edited by Berth Ohlin, Per—Ove
                                                                Besselborn, and
         Per Magnus Wijkman, Holmes and Meler, New York.
    llorst, Thomas (1972), "Firm and Industry Determinants of the Decision
          toInvest Abroad: An Empirical Study," Review of Economics and
         Statistics, August.

    Harbison, Frederick and C.A. Myers (1964), Education, Manpower, and
         Economic Growth, McGraw—Hill, New York.

    Hufbauer, Gary and D. Foster (1976), "U.S. Taxation of the Undistributed
         Income of Controlled Foreign Corporations," in U.S.
         the Treasury, Essays in International Taxation, Tax Department of
                                                             Policy Research
         Study No. 3, Washington, D.C.

    Kravis, Irving B., Alan Heston, and Robert Summers (1978a), United Nations
         International Comparison Project: Phase II: International
         sons of Real Product and Purchasing Power, Johns Hopkins
         Press, Baltimore and London.
                                                                  Universj

    _____ (1978b), "Real GDP Per Capita for More Than One Hundred Countries,"
         Economic Journal, June.
    Kuznets, Simon (1964), "Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of
         Nations: Level and Structure of Foreign Trade, IX. Comparisons
         for Recent Years," Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 13,
         No. 1, October.
    Krueger, Anne 0. (1968), "Factor Endowment and Per Capita Income Differences
         Among Countries," Economic Journal, September.

    Lipsey, Robert E., Irving B. Kravis, and Romualdo A. Roldan (1978), "Do
         Multinational Firms Adapt Factor Proportions to Relative Factor Prices?,"
         NBER Working Paper 293. To be published in Alternative Trade Strate
         and Employment:  Supply Response and Factor Market Links, Edited by
         Anne 0. Krueger, University of chicago Press..

    Lipsey, Robert E. and Merle Yahr Weiss (1976a), "Exports and
                                                                 Foreign
         Investment in the Pharmaceutical Industry,"
                                                      NBER Working Paper 87
         (Revised), January.
    _____ (l976b), "Exports and Foreign Investment in Manufacturing Industries,"
         NBER Working Paper 131 (Revised), May.
                                     —37-.


Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (1971), Occupational
    and Educat lona]. Structures of the Labor Force and Levels of Economic
    Development, Paris.
Richardson, J. David (1971), "On Going Abroad: The Firm's Initial Foreign
    Investment Decision," Quarterly Review of Economics and Business,
    Vol. 11, Winter.
Sainuelsson,   Hands—Fredrik (1977), UtThndska Direkta   Investeringar i Sverige,
       Industriens   Utredningsins titut, Stockholm.
Swedenborg, Birgitta (1979), The Multinational Operations of Swedish Firms:
       An Analysis of Determinants and Effects. The Industrial  Institute   for
       Economic and Social Research (Industriens Utredningsinstitut),
       Stockholm.

Taubman, Paul and Terence Wales (1972), "Mental A1iliy and. Higber Education
     Attainment in the Twentieth Century,"NBER Occasional Paper
                                                                     118, New
       York.
U.S.   Department of Commerce (1976), U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, 1966:
       Final Data, A Supplement to the Survey of Current Business, Washington,
       Government Printing Office.

Weinblatt, J.   "Exports and Foreign Production by Multinational Corporations,"
       Unpublished paper, NBER, 1980.
