NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIXED COSTS AND LABOR SUPPLY

John

F. Cogan

Working Paper No. 48l4

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1980

The bulk of this work was completed at the Rand Corporation and several
extensions were made while I was on leave to the Department of
Economics, Stanford University, and the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Thanks are due to Bill Gould, Reuben Gronau, Giora Hanoch,
Thomas MaCurdy, Kenneth Mauer, Randall Olsen, John Pencavel, William
Rodgers, Sherwin Rosen, James P. Smith, Michael Ward, Finis Welch, and

anonymous referees for their comments and suggestions. The research
assistance of Frank Berger and Robert Topel is also gratefully
acknowledged. Partial financial assistance was provided by a grant from
the Department of Health, Education and Welfare. I am deeply indebted
to Robert Michael, director of the National Bureau of Economic
two

Research—West, for additional financial support. I, of course, assume
responsibility for any errors in this paper. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Workirg Paper #484
June,

1980

Fixed Costs and Labor Supply

ABSTRACT

This

study is a theoretical and empirical analysis of the effects of

time and money costs of labor market participation on married women's supply

behavior. The existence of fixed costs implies that individuals are not
willing to work less than some minimum number of hours, termed reservation
hours. 'The theoretical analysis of the properties of the reservation hours.

function are derived. The empirical analysis develops and estimates labor
supply functions when fixed costs are present, but cannot be observed in

the data. The likelihood function developed to estimate the model is an
extension of the statistical model of Heckman (1974) that allows the minimum
number of hours supplied to be nonzero and differ randomly among individuals.

The empirical results indicate that fixed costs of work are of prime importance

in determining the labor supply behavior of married women. At the sample
means, the minimum number of hours a woman is willing to work is about 1300

per year. The estimated fixed costs an average woman incurs upon entry into
the labor market is $920 in 1966 dollars. This represents 28 percent of her
yearly earnings. Finally, labor supply parameters estimated with the fixed
cost model are compared to those estimated under the conventional assumption

of no fixed costs. Large differences in estimated paramters are found, suggesting
that the conventional model is seriously inisspecified.

John F. Cogan
National Bureau of Economic Research
204 Junlpero Serra Boulevard
Stanford, California 94305
(415) 326—7160

FIXED COSTS AND LABOR SUPPLY

I. INTRODUCTION

In the last seven years, labor economists have produced a considerable
volume of research on the determinants of married women's labor supply

behavior. During this period, several substantive methodological and
empirical advancements have been made. Perhaps these advancements are best
characterized by the work of Gronau (1973, 1975) on the "selectivity bias"
in wage equations, Heckman (1974) on the estimation of wage, labor force
participation, and labor supply functions, Hanoch (1976) on the theoretical
foundations for empirical integration of alternative measures of labor
supply, and Heckman (1974), Smith (1974), Heckman and Willis (1977), and MaCurdy

(1980), on life—cycle models of labor supply behavior. Although these studies
have greatly enhanced our knowledge of the role that economic and demographic
factors play in shaping married women's labor market behavior, much remains

to be done. There are several key issues that have been entirely neglected
or treated only on a superficial level. One such issue is the impact of
time and money costs of labor market entry on labor supply behavior. In
empirical work, little if any systematic attempt to incorporate such costs
into econometric models of labor supply behavior has as yet been undertaken.

Most often, the existence of these costs is assumed away. This lack of
empirical work stems primarily from two difficulties. First, data on
actual amounts of time and/or money costs incurred upon entry into the

labor market are at best scant and incomplete. Furthermore, even if entry
costs could be obtained for participants in the labor force, such data are

inherently not observable for nonparticipants. Second, the existence of

2

fixed entry costs imparts a discontinuity in the individual's labor supply

function. This discontinuity reflects the fact that with costs of labor
market participation, individuals will not choose to work below some minimum

number of hours. This minimum, or reservation hours, is not observable in
the data and presumably differs among individuals.

In this paper, a simple model to illustrate labor supply effects of
time and money costs of labor market entry is presented and a statistical
procedure for estimating labor supply functions when these costs are not

directly observable in the data is developed. Although the analysis is
confined to married women's labor supply, the approach taken is quite
general and may be applied, for example, to the estimation of demand functions for goods sold under fixed—fee plus marginal price arrangements.

Section II is devoted to a theoretical analysis of the effects of costs

of labor market entry on labor supply behavior. In Section III the statistical model and estimation procedures are discussed. The model relies on
two behavioral functions: an hours of work function and a reservation hours
function. The hours of work function is a garden variety labor supply function. The reservation hours function indicates the minimum number of hours
an individual is willing to supply to the market. With costs of labor
market entry, these two functions characterize the supply side of the market.

A market demand or wage function is added to complete the model. A maximum
likelihood estimator is proposed to estimate the parameters of these equa-

tions. This estimator extends the statistical model of Heckman (1974) by allowing for entry hours to be nonzero and to differ randomly among individuals,

Section IV presents the empirical results. These results indicate that entry
costs are of prime importance in determining the labor supply behavior of

married women. The estimated size of the discontinuity in the supply function

3

is large——around 1,000 hours per year at the sample means. Again at the
sample means, the estimated annual cost of labor force participation is
approximately $920 in 1966 dollars, which amounts to about 28% of the

average yearly earnings of working women in the sample. Also, labor supply
parameter estimates of the entry cost model are compared with those obtained

under the assumption of zero cost of participation. These comparisons reveal
large differences between estimated parameters and suggest that the
conventionally formulated empirical labor supply function is misspecified.

4

II. SOME THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Most of the important implications of cost to labor market entry are
easily summarized by the familiar income—leisure and corresponding labor
supply diagram:

H(W,Y-MfW(H-i)

z

0
0

WR

z
'-4

r

HOURS OF WORK (h)

LE IS URE

(a)

(b)

Figure 1

In Figure 1(a) Y and H are the individual's endowment of nonwage income and

time, respectively. The variables M and T denote the level of money and time
lost upon entry into the labor market. The reservation wage, the minimum wage
offer just necessary to induce the individual to work, is depicted as WR. As
Figure 1 illustrates, an implication of fixed working cost is that individuals
will not be willing to work below some minimum number of hours, termed reser-

vation hours. The reservation hours is given in Figure 1(a) by H—r—L1 and is

5

described by the discontinuity of the labor supply function at the reservation

wage in Figure 1(b). The size of the discontinuity depends on the individual's
preference function as well as the levels of Y, '1, and

A second immediate consequence of fixed cost of labor market entry is that
their existence severs the identity between the reservation wage and the shadow

price (value) nonworkers assign to their time. The value a nonworker assigns
to his or her time is given in Figure 1(a) by the slope of the indifference
curve at E*. Previous attempts to estimate nonworkers' values of time have

relied on its equality with the reservation wage. Two approaches have been

used. One is to use labor force participation data (Gronau, 1973, 1974). The
other is to use the height of an estimated labor supply function at zero hours

of work (Heckman, 1974). As Figure 1(a) suggests, the former approach, which
correctly estimates reservation wages, will tend to overestimate values non—

workers assign to their time. The latter approach, which estimates the slope
of the indifference curve net of the time and money cost (pt E in Figure 1(a)),

will underestimate the value of time at zero hours of work if only money costs
of entry exist, and overestimate this value if only time costs exist.
The effects of variations in fixed costs on hours of work among workers

are obvious and can be stated without derivation. Increases in money cost of
entry act as reductions in money wealth and, if leisure is a normal good, will

increase hours of work among workers. Increases in the time cost of working,
on the other hand, will reduce hours of work among workers.2
The effects of money and time costs of entry on the minimum number of

hours the individual is willing to work are less obvious, but easily estab-

lished by using the individual's expenditure function. The expenditure
'The properties of the reservation wage function are derived later in
this section.
2Strictly speaking, these results follow only if leisure is a normal good
in the case of money costs and the composite commodity (income) is a normal
good in the case of time costs.

6

function is written as

Y = G(w, U) + N — W(H —

(1)

equals the equilibrium quantity of leisure demand and
where (Y/W) E
C1

G2 is the reciprocal of the marginal utility of income. Furthermore,

(BY/RU)

(2G/W2)

G11 is the Hicks—Slutsky substitution effect of a risejn the

wage rate on the quantity of leisure demanded, and (2C/WU) C12 > 0
if leisure is a normal good,

The reservation hours of work function may be derived by differentiating
equation (1) with respect to the wage and evaluating the derivative at the
reservation wage (WR).

hR = _Gl(WR, U°) + H —

(2)

where U° is the level of utility achieved if the individual does not work.
To obtain the effect of a change in the money cost of work on reservation hours, differentiate equation (2) with respect to N holding utility

constant at U°. This differentiation yields

dhR
dM

(3)

The term

dWR

11dM
is the change in the reservation wage for a given change in

the money cost of labor market entry. As should be intuitively obvious, an
increase in the cost of entry will raise the reservation wage; that is,
>

0.

1

The remaining term, — C11, is the substitution effect of a wage

'Formally, this result may be derived by differentiating the expenditure function simultaneously with respect to W and M, and solving for

dWR

0
at (WR, U ).

7

change on the quantity of labor supplied. It is also necessarily greater

than zero. Reservation hours, therefore, rise with Increases in the
money costs of work.1
The effect of an increase in time cost of market entry on reserva-

tion hours is, on the other hand, theroetically ambiguous in sign. To
see this, differentiate equation (2) with respect to t

holding

utility

constant at U° to obtain

dhR

dWR

(4)

The product of the first two terms is the change in the quantity of leisure

demanded at the reservation wage. As with money costs, an increase in time
costs increases the reservation wage. The higher reservation wage reduces
the quantity of leisure demanded at the reservation wage. However, the total
quantity of time available for work or leisure declines by an amount equal to

the increase in time cost of market entry. The change in reservation hours
depends upon the relative strengths of these two opposing effects.2
interesting implication of equation (3) is that if one had data
on money costs and could estimate reservation hours of work, one could use
this information to estimate the parameters of the compensated labor supply
function.
2Further expansion of equation (4) yields an interesting though,
perhaps, less intuitive expression. Using the expenditure function, the
w
effect of time cost on the reservation wage can be solved for as . SubR
stituting this result into equation (4) yields

R_h cWR
dT
Wh
dh

(5\

The product of the first two terms is the elasticity of the compensated
labor supply function evaluated at the reservation wage—hours combination.
Thus, the effect of time costs on reservation hours may be said to depend
on whether the compensated labor supply function evaluated at the reservation wage is greater or less than unity.

8

Finally, to obtain the effect of nonwage income on reservation hours
differentiate equation (3) with respect to Y, allowing utility to vary.
Differentiation yields

dhR =

dWR

1

[i

1

dU0l

+ G12

Assuming leisure is a normal good, an increase in nonwage income will
raise the reservation wage; hence

dWR

is positive. Obviously since an

income in nonwage income raises the utility achieved by not working,
0

is also positive. However, under the assumption that leisure is a
are opposite in sign. Thus, in general, the effect

normal good G11 and

of nonwage income on reservation hours is ambiguous.

This effect, however, can be signed in at least one interesting
case; when the uncompensated labor supply function is backward bending

in the neighborhood of the reservation wage. If it is, an increase in
nonwage income will raise reservation hours. To derive this result, differentiate the expenditure function with respect to Y holding utility constant
to obtain an expression for the change in the reservation wage for a given

change in nonwage income. Differentiation yields

dW

R

dY

O

1 IdU
hRLdY

G2-l

'As stated earlier, this expression is positive if leisure is a
normal good. Note that the product of the first two terms inside the
bracket is actually a ratio of marginal utilities evaluated at two points
along an indifference curve in income—leisure space. If leisure is a normal
good then the ratio is greater than unity. This proposition is easily proven
by evaluating the utility compensated effect of a wage change on the marginal
utility of income.

9

Substituting equation (6) into (5) and rearranging terms yields

=

- [Gii

+ hRG12 + G2GiJ -

=

+

h fl

- c2J

The sum of the first two terms inside the brackets is the slope of the
uncompensated labor supply function evaluated at the reservation wage.
All other terms have been defined earlier and are positive in sign.

Assuming an upward rising labor supply function, the analysis suggests
a rather convenient characterization of the hours of work and labor force

participation decisions. Define an augmented labor supply function as
the actual labor supply function extrapolated back to the wage axis. This
augmented labor supply function can be written as

(8)

h* =H(W,Y-N+W(H-T))

The reservation hours function is

(9)

hR

F(M,T,Y)

Using equations (8 ) and (9 ) and assuming an upward rising labor supply

function, the labor force participation decision may be cast in terms of a

comparison between h* and hR. If h exceeds hR the individual will choose
to work and her observed hours of work (h) will equal h .

If

hR exceeds h*

the individual will choose not to work and observed hours of work will
equal zero.1

1This formulation of the participation decision is obviously equivalent
to using the more conventional market Wage—reservation wage characterization.
The above formulation is used because it leads naturally to a specification
of the econometric model that facilitates comparisons with early work.

10

III. ESTIMATION

To estimate labor supply functions when there are costs of labor force

participation, one of two empirical strategies may be followd If information
on the time and money costs of labor market entry incurred by participants
is available, then these costs can be used to estimate the structural
parameters of not only the labor supply function but also of costs of work

functions. On the other hand if information on the time and money costs
of work is not available, then one can only obtain estimates of a quasi—

reduced form labor supply function. The quasi—reduced form estimates will
reflect not only the parameters of the individual's utility function but

also the effects of variations in the cost of work. In this section, I
discuss estimation when time and money costs cannot be directly observed
on the data.'

In order to estimate the parameters of the model, it is necessary to
specify the relevant equations and the underlying stochastic structure.
Following the analysis of Section II, two functions characterize the labor
supply decision: an augmented hours of work function and a reservation hours
function.

The augmented hours equation is assumed to take the followingform
for the ith individual:

(10)

h =

yO+ylN(W.)+y2YH+y3C+y4E.+y5A+oEylN(w)+y'z,+c

'Estimation of the complete set of structural parameters when the
costs of work are available is discussed in Cogan (1977).

11

where N(W1) is the natural logarithm of the wife's hourly wage, E is her
years of education, C is the number of preschool children (age 0—5) in the

is the husband's income, and A. is the wife's age. The theoret-

home,

ical and empirical relevance of each of these variables, in the absence of
costs of work, is well known.

The reservation hours equation assumes the form

(11) hR =
i

0+

+ 2C. + 3E. + 4A. + c 'Z1 +

1

1

1

.1

Although one may have intuitive feelings about the effects of each of
these variables on reservation hours, the theory developed in the preceding
section offers little insight into their expected effects.

The dependent variable is annual hours of work in 1966. This choice
requires some discussion. Ideally, we would like to use a measure of labor
supply whose dimension is the same as the period of time over which the

fixed costs are incurred. That is, if daily fixed costs, such as transportation costs to and from work, are important, then the appropriate measure

of labor supply would be hours of work per day. Unfortunately, existing
micro data files do not contain information on daily hours of work.
Together ezluations (10) and (11) imply a reservation wage equation of
the form

(12)

WR. = 60 +
1

61H.1

+ 62C. + 63E. + 64A. + u2

1

where
=

_____

and

=

1

-— (8

—

for i =

1,

4

12

The specification of the wage offer equation is

(13)

N(W)a0+a1E1+ci2X.+a3U.+c4N+ct5WE+c6A+c2 1Ea'Z0 +c2
1

i

where E is the level of education completed by the wife, X is her prior

labor market experienceU is a dummy variable which assumes a value of one
if the woman resides in an urban area, and N and WE are two regions of the
country dummies, north and west, respectively.
The vector of disturbances (c0,c1,c2) is assumed to be normally distributed with mean vector zero and constant covariance matrix Q.
Clearly, if the endogenous variables, h*, hR. and W, could be observed
for all individuals, then the parameters ot equations (1O)—(13) could be

estimated with two— or three—stage least squares. Unfortunately, these
variables are not observed for all individuals. Reservation hours
cannot be observed for

individual in the data, and h* and wage offers

cannot be observed for nonworkers. Without these data, an alternative
statistical approach, such as maximum likelihood is required to estimate
the parameters.

To form the likelihood function it is necessary to relate the values
of the hypothetical dependent variables to their empirical counterparts,
and describe the process by which these observable counterparts are

generated in terms of the underlying stochastic elements. Assuming an
upward rising supply function, a woman will be observed to be working if

(14)

h1 >hR

1Work by Heckman and Willis (1977) casts serious doubt on whether it
is appropriate to regard prior labor market experience as exogenous to the
current wage offer. Also, more recent work by Reckman (1980) suggests that
prior experience may also belong in the structural labor supply function.

13

Substituting the market wage offer equation into the hours of work function,
the participation decision may be written as

>

y1a'Z0 + (y' —

(15)

or more compactly, as

(16)

— (c

+ y1c2)

-

I > u

where

u ''

N(0, o +

+ y2a2 —

— 211012 + 211002)

The likelihood of observing a nonparticipant is simply

(17)

For

Prob[I <

=

uj

J

_=e_1#'2(T)2 dT

observations on workers we know that reservation hours are less than

the solution to the augmented hours, that is,

(18)

h* Z1 >

Hence, the appropriate density measure for observations hours and wages
among the workers is

h*_

9)

f(h J

y1a'Z0

—

y'Z1,

W —

a'Z0,

c1)dc1

where f(s) is the trivariate normal density function. Using equations (17)
and (19), the likelihood of the data consisting (say) of T observations, S
of them on nonworking women, is

14
S

(20) L= J
i=1

I T
1—P

j
i=S+1_oo
JJ

U

h.—

' f(h—1cx'Z0 —y'Z1 W—c'Z0c1)dc1
1

1

1

1

The computational burden of optimizing the likelihood function may be
reduced by replacing the trivarlate normal density function with the product
of the bivariate conditional normal and unit normal marginal densities.

This permits factoring the right—most term in equation 20 into a simple

univariate probit and bivariate normal density)
To estimate the parameters of the model, a multi—step procedure was

used. First, consistent estimates of the parameters of the wage equation
were obtained with Beckman's (1976) censored sample regression procedure.

The likelihood function, conditional upon these estimated values,2 was

then optimized. This two—step procedure yields consistent estimates of
the parameters, but incorrect asymptotic standard errors. To obtain
asymptotically efficient standard errors, these parameter estimates were
used as initial values in a one—step Newton—Raphson iteration on the
likelihood function in equation (20).

owe this point to Tom MaCurdy and an anonymous referee
2The likelihood function conditional upon estimated values of
the wage equation parameters collapses to one which is identical to that
proposed by Nelson (1974) and Olsen (1975) for models with unobserved
stochastic censoring thresholds.

15

IV.

EMPIRICAL RESULTS

The data used for the empirical analysiswere taken from the 1967
National Longitudinal (Parnes) Survey of Mature Women age 30—34 in 1966.

The sample selected contained 898 wives who worked at some time during 1966

and 939 who did not. Details of the data selection process and means and
variances of the variables used in this study are provided in the Appendix.

Estimates of the market wage function are reported in Table 1. For
comparative purposes, ordinary least—squares estimates of the wage offer

equation are also presented. The coefficients on education, experience,'
and urban are all statistically significant. The coefficient on education
should be interpreted as the effect of completing an additional year of

schooling rather than spending that year out of the labor force. Likewise,
the experience coefficient represents the effect of spending at least six
months in the labor force during a given year relative to spending that time

out of the labor force. The small size of the age coefficient indicates
little, if any, effect of either wage depreciation resulting from spending
time out of the labor force or variations in the quality of schooling over

time. Using a two—standard—deviation confidence ban (a 95% confidence
interval), our results indicate that the age effect lies between plus and
minus 1%.

Comparing these ordinary least—squares estimates with the "selectivity
bias—free" estimates provides some evidence of the effect of the selectivity

bias on individual parameter estimates. The major bias appears to be in the
estimate of the intercept term, which accounts for the entire difference

'Experience is defined as the number of years since completion of
school to 1966 in which the woman worked at least six months of the year.

16

Table 1

Married Women's Wage Offer Equations

Variable

Instrumental Variables
Coefficient
Standard Error

Ordinary Least Squares
Coefficient
Standard Error

Intercept

—.9556

.3273

—.8388

.1980

Education

.0826

.0116

.0806

.0077

Experience

.0298

.0694

.0230

.0030

Age

.0008

.0089

.0022

.0210

North

.0192

.0637

.0233

.0430

West

.0786

.0726

.0801

.0550

Urban

.1075

.0591

.1163

.0380

R2

.1786

(F)

(27.48)

Predicted mean wages*

Workers

1.97

1.92

Nonworkers

1.36

1.68

Full sample

1.65

1.80

*Given the assumed form of the wage offer equation, wages are log normally
distributed and the mean wage offer is calculated by

âZ +—a2
—
w= e 0 22

17

conditional and unconditional average wages at the sample means. The difference in the estimate of the effect of prior labor market experience,
though small in absolute magnitude, is large relative to the size of the

coefficient (23%). Likewise for the urban dummy (40%). It is encouraging
to find that the selectivity bias has little effect on the education

coefficient. Since the coefficients on age, north, and west have such
relatively large standard errors, little can be concluded about the impact
of the sample selection bias on these estimated parameters.

Table 2 presents estimates of the parameters of the hours of work and

reservation hours functions. The asymptotic standard errors of the estimated parameters are given in parentheses.
The estimates presented in Table 2 conform, at least qualitatively, to
those obtained in previous empirical studies of this demographic group (see,
for instance, Heckman, 1974; Cogan, 1975; Schultz, 1975) and thus indicate
that incorporation of time and money costs of entry do not alter the quali-

tative nature of the estimated labor supply parameters. An increase in the

wife's wage increasannua1 hours of work among working women, though its
effect is much smaller than those found in earlier studies of Heckman (1974) and
Schultz

(1975). The wife's education, her husband's income, and the

number of preschool children in the home all exert a negative influence on

her annual hours. Finally, there appears to be no life—cycle or cohort
variations in hours worked among working women in the age range of the
sample.

In the reservation hours equation, both preschool children and the

wife's age significantly raise the minimum number of hours a woman is
willing to supply to the labor market. Increases in the husband's earnings
also tend to increase the minimum number of hours but its effect is small

18

Table 2

Entry Cost Model Parameter Estimates

Variable
Constant

Log wife's wage

Hours of
Work Function
Coefficient
(asymptotic
standard error)

Reservation
hours Function
Coefficient
(asymptotic
standard error)

2158.69
(510.43)

746.2
(361.82)

1210.91
(185.49)

Wife's education

—91.54

—23.77

(18.36)

(21.35)

Number of children
0—6 years old

—120.41
(52.89)

Husband's earnings
($1,000)

—22.425

Wife's age

109.74
(64.08)

(9.07)

11.09
(10.35)

.468
(8.46)

17.36
(9.46)

Mean Hours

Workers

1417.73

1257.38

Nonworkers

1145.34

1318.26

714.70

867.98

p

.88

19

and not statistically significant. Increases in the wife's level of education, on the other hand, reduce minimum hours, though its effect is also
not significant.

The estimated mean reservation hours is large, for both working and
nonworking women in the sample, indicating that time and money costs of
labor market entry are of prime importance in affecting a married woman's

labor supply decisions. For example, a 10% increase in the wage offer
facing the average nonworking woman in the sample would not induce her to

enter the labor market. However, a 15% increase would and she would supply
1,327 hours a year at this new wage. If there were an additional increase
of 15% in her wage offer, her hours of work would increase by only an
additional 180 per year.

The estimated parameters may be used to solve for the compensating

variation measure of the costs of participation. In order to obtain this
measure, it is necessary to derive the form of the compensated labor supply

function from the assumed form of the uncompensated function. The uncompen—
sated labor supply function (equation (10)) may be written succinctly as

(21)

hi =

y'Z.

+ y1N(W.) +

where Z is the vector of other included right—hand—side variables. Using
the Slutsky decomposition, we may write the slope of a compensated labor
supply function associated with (21) as

=

(22)

[Th]C

— h12

20

The general form of the compensated function may be obtained from

equation (22) easily. Equation (22) is a first—order linear differential
equation whose general solution on an interval I is given by

(23)

h(w) =

e

W
J

— dt

y2T y1

e

_y2(w_w*)

+ ce

w*

where w is the intercept of the labor supply function extrapolated down to
zero hours of work and c is an arbitrary constant. The particular solution at
the reservation wage—hours p0-mt can be obtained with numerical methods.

Given the form of the compensated labor

supply function, I have

computed estimates of the annual fixed costs of work for the average

working and nonworking women separately. These estimates are presented
in Table 3 along with estimates of how these costs change with the number
of preschool age children and years of education for the average woman

in the data. Unfortunately, I have been unable to compute the standard
errors of these estimates. Caution, therefore, should be exercised
before attaching too much weight to their importance.

Table 3
Annual Costs of Work

Workers
Nonworkers

$

907.74

$1,080.97

Change in Costs of Worka
One additional
child age 0—6

$

337.15

One additional
year education

$

112.29

aThe effects are evaluated at the
sample means.

21

The estimates of the annual fixed costs are large, though not unreason-

ably so. For working women, this annual participation cost expressed as a
percentage of the average annual earnings of working women is 28.3%. As
expected, the estimated cost facing nonworkers exceeds that facing workers,

with the differential being $113.23. The estimated effect of an additional
preschool—age child, evaluated at the sample means, is of the expected sign

and quite large. At the sample means the difference in the number of preschool children accounts for 80 percent of the difference in the fixed costs
of working between working and nonworking women, .

Education has a positive

effect on the annual costs of participation. An additional year of education
increases the annual costs of work by over $100. Michael (1973) and others
have argued that education raises nonmarket production. If so, then one
might expect that more educated women would have better allocative skills,

and hence lower costs of entry. However, there are other factors which would
tend to produce a positive relationship between education and the costs of

participation. More highly educated women live in higher income households
which tend to locate further from central business districts than low—income
households (see Kain, 1962 and Muth, 1969).

Thus transportation costs would

be higher for more educated women. Also, more highly educated women attach
a higher value to their nonmarket time, and hence place a higher value on a
given amount of time lost in entering the market.

The assumed form of the labor supply function, in particular, hours
as a linear function of log wages is one commonly used to estimate labor
supply functions of married women.

It would be of interest

to know whether allowing for a discontinuity in the market supply function
results in parameter estimates that differ from those of this conventional

formulation. To aid in characterizing the restrictions implied by the

22

conventional model, return for the moment to the empirical model (equations
(10) —

(12)).

Under the assumption of no costs of participation, reserva-

tion hours (hR) are identically zero for all observations. Thus, equation
(11) is eliminated from the model and the restricted model becomes

K. =

(24)

10

+ y1N(W) + 2H + 13C3 + y4E. + y5A. +
i

2i

1

1

31 4i 51

6i

N(W.) = a + a E. + a X. + a U + a A. + a WE. + a N. + c
1
0
ii
2.
1

(25)

Equation (24) may be expressed in a slightly different form to yield
the wage at which the woman would be willing to supply a given amount of

labor. This form of the labor supply function, termed the shadow wage
function, Is given by

(26)

'2
2
0j
13
14
N(W )=—+—h.1 -—Y
-—C.——E.—----A.-——
i
i
i
H.
y

Equations

(25)

s

Heckman's

of

and (26) characterize the conventional model.

model was first proposed by

This

a

i

Heckman (1974a), Without detracting from

contribution, note that it imposes two restrictions relative to

model that allows for costs of entry. First, it

imposes

the restriction

continuity in the supply function for all hours. Second, it imposes a

proportionality relationship between the parameters of the labor supply

and reservation—wage equations. The reservation—wage equation is defined

as the shadow—wage equation (25) at zero hours of work. Each parameter
is proportional to the corresponding parameter in the hours of work equation
with the factor of proportionality being the slope of the labor supply function.1
1

It

should be pointed out that this restriction is relaxed by Heckman
in the generalized version of the model which he proposes in his l974b paper.

23

If entry costs are important in the data, one would expect the esti—
mates of the conventionalmodel to systematically exceed in absolute value

those of the entry cost model. To see this, consider the graph in Figure 3.
In this graph, hT represents the "true" labor supply function when there are

costs of participation. The existence of fixed costs is reflected by the
discontinuity at the reservation wage. A constraint of zero costs of entry
in the model implies a constraint of continuity in the labor supply function, i.e., that the height of the labor supply function at its origin (the
shadow price of time as full—time leisure) equals the reservation wage.

Imposing this constraint on data which has at least some nonworkers will
result in an estimated labor supply function that looks like hE and the

effect of the wage on hours of work will be overstated. This result will,
in general, hold for all estimated parameters.

hT
hE
00

WR

h

0

Figure 3

Hours of Work

24

To determine whether the two models lead to important differences in
parameter estimates, Heckman's (1974) maximum likelihood procedure was
applied to the data to estimate the parameters of the conventional model.
This estimate along with those of the entry cost model are provided in
1
Table 4. Differences in estimated parameters are both systematic and large.

Table 4

Hours of Work FUCOfla

Variable

Entry Cost
Model

Constant

2158.69 1

(510.43)

Log wife's wage

Wife's education

Husband ' s earnings

Wife's age

3872. 9037
(510.11)

(185.49)

3357.0092
(212.43)

—91. 545

—199.4556

(18.36)

(28.69)

—22.425

—92.8

12 10.906

(9.07)

Children 0—6
years old

Conventional
Model

(14.48)

—120.41
(52.89)

—628.7724

.468
(8.46)

—40.0193
(12.95)

(65.18)

aStandard errors are given in parentheses.

'In Figure 3, the intercept of the estimated labor supply function
(the estimated reservation wage), is drawn
reservation wage (WR). In reality, it is not clear whether the conventional
model will lead to an over or under estimate of the reservation wage if
both time and money costs are present.

so that it equals the true

25

The estimated wage coefficient is almost three times as large in the
converitionalinodel, the education coefficient twice as large, the husband's

earnings coefficient four times as large, the children coefficient five
times as large, and the age coefficient one hundred times as large.
To further assess the comparability of the two models, some 'additional

statistics were computed. Both the conventional model and the entry cost
model jointly estimate the probability of working and hours of work among

the workers. The sample labor force participation rate is .491. The
estimated mean probability of working with our proposed procedure is .494, while
that of the conventional model is .52, Using a 50 percent rule, the proportion of successful predictions of labor force status with the fixed cost
model is .718; with the conventional model it is slightly higher, .725.

Thus, the two approaches appear to predict the work—not work decision
equally well.

To compare the relative accuracy of the two models in predicting hours
of work, the sum of squared deviations of actual hours of work from predicted hours of work for the subsample of labor force participants was

computed. The sum of squared deviations for the conventionalmodel is four
times as large as that for the entry cost model.
To make a final assessment on the comparability of the
two models, consider the graph in Figure 4 of the labor supply functions

estimated with the two models. Let W be the wage at which the labor supply
functions estimated from the two models intersect one another. If nonzero
reservation hours are important in the data, the conventional model would be

expected to underpredict hours of work among the workers with wages below

W relative to the entry cost model. The reverse should be true for workers
with wages above W. For wages below W, the mean residual (actual minus predicted)

26

Wage ro'Cs

W=
2.43

2.00
1.39
1.3.4

288

1964

2080

Annual hours of work

Figure

4. Average married women's estimated labor
supply functions

for the entry cost is +70.6; for the conventional model, it is +1293.3.

For wages above , the entry cost yields a mean residual of —729.8, and
for the conventional model it is —1379.6.

These comparisons indicate that the conventional model is

misspecified relative to the entry cost model. It is tempting to conclude
that the misspecification arises because fixed costs of labor market

entry are ignored. However, this is not necessarily correct. It might
be that fixed costs of entry are unimportant in generating observations
on hours of work and that labor supply functions are nonlinear; being

27

relatively flat at low wages and relatively steep at high wages.
If so, allowing for a discontinuity might provide a good approximation

to the relatively flat portion of the supply function. Hence, it might
give the appearance of the importance of fixed costs of entry when, in

fact, these costs are unimportant. The point is that without observable
data on fixed costs, evidence of their effects can only be obtained
indirectly and, as a consequence, results of tests for their existence
may depend crucially on the assumed functional form of the labor supply

equation. However, regardless of whether or not fixed costs are important
in generating the data, the conventionally used labor supply function for

married women is misspecified. It is likely that the rather large own—
wage elasticities estimated for these women reported in earlier studies
is a direct result of this misspecification.

28

V. CONCLUSIONS
The major conclusion drawn from the analysis presented in
this paper is that costs of labor force participation, measured both
in terms of their estimated dollar amount and their estimated effects on
labor supply behavior, appear to be important, at least in the demographic

group analyzed here. For the average woman in the data the costs of

work amount to approximately 28 percent of annual earnings. These
costs impart a discontinuity in the average woman's labor function of

almost 1300 hours per year, which is larger than half—time work. Also,
differences in the number of preschool—age children in the home appear
to be a major factor contributing to these costs and account for virtually
all the difference between the costs of work facing working and nonworking

women. From the comparisons of estimators, there is evidence that the
conventionally used empirical model of labor supply which ignores fixed
costs leads to substantial overestimates of the true labor supply parameters.

These conclusions must be qualified somewhat. Estimation of the costs
of work requires extrapolation of the compensated labor supply function

from the level of the discontinuity to the origin. In this region there
are relatively few observations. It is also not clear how sensitive the
costs estimates are to the function form chosen. Serious consideration
should be given to these issues before attaching too much weight to the

estimates of the annual costs of work. Also, the model assumes that women
can freely choose and vary their hours of work. Yet, casual empiricism
suggests that there may be minimum hours of work constraints imposed by

employers for many types of jobs. The large constant term in the
reservation hours function may primarily reflect these constraints rather
than the effects of fixed costs of work in the supply side.

29

APPENDIX

The data used for the empirical analysis was taken from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Nature Women. The NLS data file consists of five
annual surveys of a multi—stage probability sample of women aged 30—44 in

1966. In this study only the information contained in the first interview
(1967) was used. The basic sample drawn from the 1967 survey consisted of
approximately 2700 observations on white households in which both the

husband and wife were present. Given the problems of separating reported
income into the return to labor and capital for individuals who are self—
employed or owned a farm, households in which either spouse reported being

self—employed were dropped from this basic sample. After these exclusions
about 2300 observations remained. Further exclusions (360 observations)
were made because of missing or incomplete information on the core variables

of this study, such as income, age, education, etc. Finally, an additional
110 observations on households in which the husband performed no market in
1966 were dropped from the sample.

The remaining sample used for the empirical analysis consisted of 1829

households. Of these, 898 contained wives who worked at some time during
1966 and 931 who did not. Table A.1 provides the means and variances of
all the variables used in our empirical analysis.

Number of observations

Number of children
0—6 years old

Wife's age

Wife's wage rate

Wife's hours of work

.326

38.40

2.00

1368.3

11.496

Wife's education

.1971

West
9.46

.5089

North

Experience

.4788

Mean

Urban

Variable

898

.404

18.59

3.92

.604x106

6.00

41.29

.1582

.2499

.2496

Variance

.787

37.74

—

11.23

4.33

931

.2050

.5188

.4919

.806

19.28

6.54

22.8

.163

.25

.25

Households

with Nonworking Wives
Mean
Variance

Households

with Working Wives

Sample Statistics

Table A.1

31

Definitions of Variables

Urban — dummy variable which assumes a value of one if the household
resided in a city of over 250,000 in 1967.

North — dummy variable which assumes a value of one if the household
resides in the Northeast or North central states as defined by the Census.

West — dummy variable which assumes a value of one if the household
resides in the western states as defined by the Census.

Experience — number of years up to 1966 since marriage that the woman
worked at least six months.

Wife's education — number of years of education completed by the wife.
Wife's wage rate —

calculated

by dividing earnings in 1966 by annual

hours of work in 1966.

Wife's hours of work — weeks worked in 1966 multiplied by usual number
of hours worked per week.

32
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Cogan, J., "Labor Supply and the Value of the Housewife's Time." Santa
Monica, Ca.: The Rand Corporation, R—1461, April 1975.
_________• "Labor Supply with Time and Money Costs of Participation."
The Rand Corporation, R—2044/HEW, October, 1977.
Gronau, R., "Wage Comparisons——A Selectivity Bias," Journal of Political
Economy (November/December 1974).

"The Intrafamily Allocation of Time: The Value of the Housewife's Time," American Economic Review, 63:4, 634—51 (September 1973).
Hanoch, G., "Hours and Weeks in the Theory of Labor Supply." Santa Monica,
Ca.: The Rand Corporation, R—1787—HEW, July 1976.
Beckman, J.J., "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply," Econometrica,
42:4, 679—94 (July 1974a).

"Effects of Child—Care Programs on Women's Work Effort."
__________•
Journal of Political Economy (March/April, l974b).
___________•

"The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,

Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Sample
Estimator for Such Models." Annals of Economic and Social Measurement,
1976.
•

"Heterogeneity and State Dependence." International Economic

Review, 1980.

Heckman, J.J. and Willis, R., "A Beta—Logistic Model for the Analysis of
Sequential Labor Force Participation by Married Women," Journal of
Political Economy, 1977.
Kain, J., "The Journal—to—Work as a Determinant of Residential Location,"
Papers of the Regional Science Association, University of Pennsylvania,
1962.

MaCurdy, T. "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life—Cycle Setting."
Forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy, 1980.
Michael, R., "Education in Nonmarket Production." Journal of Political
Economy, 18, No. 2, 306—27 (March/April, 1973).

Muth, R. Cities and Housing. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969.
Nelson, Forrest D., "Censored Regression Models with Unobserved Stochastic
Censoring Thresholds," Working Paper No. 63, Computer Research Center
for Economics and Management Science, Cambridge, Mass., December 1974.
Olsen, Randall J., "The Analysis of Two Variable Models When One of the
Variables is Dichotomous," Yale University, September 1975.
Schultz, T.P., "Estimating Labor Supply Functions for Married Women."
Santa Monica, Ca.: The Rand Corporation, R—1265—NIH/EDA (forthcoming).

33

Shea, J.R. Spitz, and Zeller, F., Dual Careers: A Longitudinal Study of
Labor Market Experience of Women. Columbus, Ohio: Center for Human
Resource Research, Ohio State University, May 1970.
Smith, James P., "The Life Cycle Allocation of Time in a Family Context,"
unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1972.

