                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INTERTEMPORAL SUBSTITUTION
                    AND THE BUSINESS CYCLE



                        Robert J. Barro


                     Working Paper No. 1490




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1980




This paper was prepared for presentation at the Carnegie—Rochester
Conference, Rochester, April, 1980. The research underlying this
paper is supported by the National Science Foundation. I have
benefited from suggestions by Bob King, Ben McCalluin, Charles
Plosser and Bill Schwert. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper #490
                                                                     June, 1980




             Interternporal Substitution and the Business Cycle



                                 ABSTRACT



     This paper summarizes the theoretical role of intertemporal substitution

variables in the "new classical macroeconomics." An important implication

is that positive monetary shocks tend to raise expected real returns that are

calculated from the usual partial information set, but tend to lower realized

real returns. After reviewing previous empirical findings in the area, the

study reports new results on the behavior of returns on the New York Stock Ex-

change and on 'freasury Bills. The analysis isolates realized real rate of return

effects that are significantly positive for a temporary government purchases

variable and significantly regative for monetary movements. However, the results

do not support the theoretical distinction between money shocks and anticipated

changes in money. Since the study focuses on realized real returns, which can

be measured in a straightforward manner, there is no evidence on the hypothesis

that expected real returns, which are calculated on the basis of incomplete in-

formation, rise with monetary disturbances. Because this proposition is sensitive

to the specification of information sets, It may be infeasible to test it

directly.




                                                    Robert J. Barro
                                                    218 A Harkness Hall
                                                    University of Rochester
                                                    Rochester, New York 14627

                                                     (716) 275—2669
     Intemporal substitution variables play a major role in the

new "equilibrium" models of the business cycle. A central feature

of these models is the response of supply to perceived temporary

opportunities for unusual rewards to working or producing; that is,

to relatively high anticipated real rates of return. In some cases,

as in explanations for the non-neutrality of money, the intertemporal

substitution mechanism is combined with confusions between general

inflation and shifts in relative prices. In these circumstances the

expectations of high returns are not borne out by the behavior of

subsequently realized returns. In other settings, such as temporary

increases of government purchases during wartime, economic expansion

is stimulated by accurately perceived rises in real rates of return.

     The first part of this paper summarizes the theoretical role of

intertemporal substitution variables in the "new classical macroecomonics."

Some of this discussion draws on material from my survey paper (Barro,

l980b). The later parts of this section stress empirical hypotheses

concerning the contemporaneous and lagged effects of monetary and

government purchases variables on realized real rates of return.

     The next section describes briefly some previous empirical findings

that relate to the business cycle role of intertemporal substitution

variables. This discussion is followed by some new empirical evidence

on realized real rates of return. The analysis deals with returns on

New York Stock Exchange stocks and on Treasury Bills. The principal

results concern reduced form effects of monetary and government

purchases variables on these realized returns.
                                —2-




I. Theoretical Analysis

    A. Setup of the Model

     Consider the type of model where goods and services are traded

in a large number of localized markets or "islands," indexed by a

parameter z. A simple version of the imperfect information/inter-

temporal substitution story, due to Phelps (1970) and Lucas and

Rapping (1969) and related to ideas advanced by M. Friedman (1968),

allows individuals to receive current information on local prices

P(z), but at most lagged information about the economy-wide average

price level P or other nominal aggregates like the money stock. The

underlying idea is that local prices reflect a mixture of the un-

perceived nominal aggregates and a variety of local factors that are

specific to markets, individuals, occupations, etc.   Fluctuations in

these local elements, which involve changes in the composition of

technology and tastes, re-evaluation of individual talents or

opportunities, and the like, are viewed as having far more significance

than general business conditions for individual fortunes (Lucas, 1977,

pp. 19-20). In particular, the exploitation of these local opportunities

may require rapid and large responses by individuals, whether in terms

of accepting or offering a job, making a sale, undertaking an invest-

ment project, and so on. Under imperfect information conditions,

individuals attempt to purge the general price component from their

 observed price signals in order to make the appropriate allocative

 decisions.
                                 -3-



    Specifically, suppliers in a local market compare their observed

current price or wage opportunities with expectations of prices or

wages at alternative times and places. In a simplified setting where

individuals visit only one market each period and where intermarket

mobility over time is sufficient to make all markets look equally

attractive one period ahead, the margin of substitution will involve

a comparison of P(z) with EP+i, which is the expectation formed

today in market z of next period's general price level. In this

setting the expected price for "next period" represents the perceived

long-run average reward for the pertinent type of labor service or

other good. Changes in current actual prices (wages) relative to

anticipated future prices (wages) are viewed as inducing substantial

intertemporal substitution on the supply side. In particular, the

temporary nature of the perceived wage or price offer implies a

substitution toward current activities and away from planned effort

at an array of future dates. Similar intertemporal substitution

would not arise for the case of a perceived permanent change in a

relative price variable such as the current real wage rate.

     The relation of observed to anticipated prices appears as the

central relative price variable in the models of Lucas (1972, 1973),

Sargent (1973), Sargent and Wallace (1975), Barro (1976), et al.

The precise form of the relative price variable differs across models.

For example, Lucas (1973, p. 327) writes his supply variable in

logarithmic terms as P(z) -
                              EP;   that is, EP appears without

explanation instead of EPti. However, most of his results would

be unaffected by this difference in form.
                                         -4-




      Sargent (1973, P. 434) an& Sargent and Wallace (1975, p. 242) use the

variable Pt -
                Et lPt, where E lPt is the average expectation formed last period
of this period's price level. A direct comparison of          with EiPt is difficult

to reconcile with the interteinporal substitution or search stories of labor

supply. Notably, in contrast to the interteinporal substitution model, the

Sargent/Wallace setup seems to predict a supply response to a contemporaneously

understood monetary change that was not predicted at date t-1. However, in

many cases the contemporaneous expectations, EP or EP1, would be formed

by updating the prior value, Et1Pt, for the information contained in current

data. If current information is limited to that contained in a local price

observation, P(z), then a formulation based on a variable like P(z) —

                                                                 For example, if
may be indistinguishable from one involving P(z) -        EPt.
                                                                          +
the Bayesian updating rule appears in linear form as EPt =        OP(z)       (l_e)Et1P,
where the 0 coefficient would depend on the relative values of price variances

across markets and over time (see Lucas (1973, p. 328) and Barro (1976, p. 9)),

then P(z) -           =                _E 1P)__that is, the two forms of relative
                EPt       (l_0)(P(z)
price variables would be linearly related. The two specifications would be

distinguished only by structural breaks that shifted the value of the 0 parameter

or by the existence of additional variables, such as war conditions or foreign

shocks,   that provided extra contemporaneous information about the general price
level.
         The impact of a variable like Pt - Et        has been rationalized along

long-term nominal contracting grounds by Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977).           The

argument is that previous expectations of current prices determine some portion
                                  —5—




  of current contractual nominal wages, which would then be compared

  with current prices to determine the supply of commodities by firms.

 This interpretation is disputed in Barro (1977) on the grounds that

  efficient contracts would not permit variables like employment to

 be influenced by perceived, purely nominal disturbances.

      A direct comparison of next period's expected nominal price

 with currently observed prices is appropriate only if stores of

 value earn a zero nominal rate of return; that is, if fiat money is

 the only available asset. More generally, as noted in Lucas and

 Rapping (1969), McCal].uzn (1978), Barro (l980a), and King (1978),

 the anticipated future prices would effectively be discounted by

 the available nominal interest rate over the applicable horizon.

 Instead of specifying a supply response to Pt(z) relative to

 EzPti which is a measure of the anticipated one-period real

rate of return on money from the perspective of market z, the

pertinent variable would be the expected real rate of return based

on the holding of assets that earn a nominal interest rate
                                                             Rt.
     Equilibrium business cycle models typically incorporate a

positive speculative response of supply to perceived excesses of

observed prices over anticipated (future) normal values; that is,

to unusual real rate of return opportunities. An
                                                   analogous type

of spcculation implies a negative effect of the same type df

relative price variable on the demand side (Barro, 1976, p. 5;
                                -6-




B. Friedman, 1978, P. 76). In a specification that employs an

anticipated real rate of return measure as the relative price

variable, the aggregate demand equation when considered as an

average over the markets would exhibit the conventional negative

substitution effect of expected real interest rates on consumption

and investment.

    Suppose that aggregate supply and demand are influenced by the

same relative price variable; for example, by an anticipated real

rate of return with comparable information on prices, etc., on both

sides of each local market. If the other right-hand side variables

for supply and demand are exogenous real variables, then an equilibrium

solution would involve a dichotomy between monetary variables and the

real sector. The equation of supply to demand would determine output

and the anticipated real rate of return in each local market as

functions of the exogenous real variables. Therefore, in this type

of model it is essential for obtaining a link between nominal

disturbances and real variables that the monetary shocks impact directly

on excess coiimodity demand.1 One possibility would be a real balance-

type effect on commodity demand or supply. In Lucas's (1972, p. 106)

overlapping-generations model in which money is the only store of

value, a positive real balance effect on aggregate demand corresponds

to the older generation's incentive to spend all of its savings from

the previous period.2 For the context of households that have access

to interest-bearing assets and that effectively plan over an infinite

horizon (perhaps because they have an operative bequest motive), it
                                        —7-.




is argued in Barro (l980a, pp.                 )   that       the principal direct monetary

effect on excess commodity demand would involve the discrepancy between the

money stock and   its   contemporaneously perceived value. Essentially, this

setup ignores the wealth effect corresponding to changes in the excess

burden due to anticipated inflation. The formulation implies, in

particular, that equal increases in total money and in the desired

money stock have no direct effect on excess commodity demand. The

distinction between this type of specification of the monetary wealth

effect and the real balance type specification arises primarily in

analyses of anticipated inflation, which involve changes in real

balances but no changes in money relative to perceived money. If last

period's money stock is viewed as observable, the latter variable

becomes the unperceived part of current money growth, denoted by

mt -Em.
     zt
     A simple log-linear model of local commodity markets that reflects

the above discussion is (Barro, l980a, p.                          ):



           S                  -                               5
     (1)   y(z) =   1t(1)             5(m_Em)        +



          d                                                    d
     (2) yt(z) =                  +                       +
                    _d1t(z)           d(m_EZm)

 where y(z) is the log of local output, r(z)                            P(z) -          +
                                                                                 EP+i       Rt
 is the anticipated one-period3 real rate of return from the perspective

 of market z (neglecting effects associated with the variance of future

prices), P(z) is the log of the local price, P is the log of the average
                                  —8—




of prices across markets, R is a one-period nominal interest rate on an

asset that is assumed to be traded economy-wide, s'd > 0 are relative price

elasticities, s'd > 0 are "wealth" elasticities, and the 6(z)'s are local
disturbance terms that add to zero in summations across the markets. In the

present setup there is only one form of interest-bearing asset--notably, the

model does not encompass imperfect substitutability between bonds and equity

claims. Further, some of the results depend on a setup that allows individuals

to observe an economy-wide nominal interest rate, rather than a pre-set global

real rate of return. Constants, economy-wide real shocks, or systematic

effects on natural outputs could readily be added to equations (1) and (2).

      The assumptions that goods not travel across markets during a

 period and that local prices are completely flexible generate the equi-

  librium condition for each commodity market, y(z) =     y(z).      Equations

  (1) and (2) then imply conditions for local output and expected real

  rate of return, which can be written as



        -                                                 d      +
                                                                           s
             y(z) = (1/ct)
                        (cL$d_ctdS) (m_Em) +          /ct)e(z)


       (4)   r(z) = (1/ct) [(m_E,m) +



  where ct      + ctd        +
                                 d'      E
                                             €(
                                             d    -   s
                                                      c(z).

   B. Some Properties of the Model

        Equations (3) and (4) are not final solutions for y(z) and
                                                                      Further,
   r(z) because they contain the endogenous expectation
                                 -9-


the model would have to be closed to determine     and the array of

P(z)'s by specifying some sort of portfolio balance condition. How-

ever, for present purposes, the main results can be obtained by

studying the intermediate equations (3) and (4)4



Association Between Money Shocks and Output

     The direction of association of output with money shocks in

equation (3) depends on the relative magnitudes of some elasticities.

The speculative supply coefficient a, which is stressed in these

types of models, entails a positive relation, but the demand

coefficient d has an opposite implication. A sufficient condition

for obtaining the "normal" net positive relation is that money shocks

impact directly nstly on the demand side; that is, >      8.   The direct

monetary effect on supply--which can be viewed as reflecting a wealth effect

on demand for leisure--is, in fact, typically assumed to be negligible in

macroanalysis.


Behavior of Rates of Return

     As stressed by Sargent (1973, pp. 442-44), there is a direct tie between

departures of output from its natural value (which is itself treated as con-

stant on average across markets in the present setting) and departures of

the anticipated real rate of return from the natural rate. Since money

shocks impact positively on excess commodity demand, the relative price

variable r(z) moves positively with m -        in equation (4) in order to
                                          Em
maintain clearing of the local commodity market.
                                -10-




     It should be stressed that the pertinent variable above is the antici-

pated real rate of return, rather than the realized value.     In models with an

economy-wide nominal interest rate where monetary aggregates are not observed

contemporaneously, the realized and anticipated returns tend to move in opposite

directions in response to a money shock. For example, consider a setting where

nominal aggregates are observed with a one-period lag, where money growth rates

are serially uncorrelated, and where no elements of persistence in output are

introduced (see below). Under these conditions, a change in this period's

money stock would be reflected one-to-one in next period's price level. Because
                                                          5
of incomplete current information about nominal aggregates, equilibrium expected

future prices end up rising by less than the actual (full current information)

mean value of future prices; that is, by less than one-to-one with the current

monetary disturbance. The full equilibrium then involves current prices rising

relative to the "sluggish" expected future prices, but by less than one—to-One

with the current money stock. Portfolio balance typically requires the implied

increase in current real money balances to be accompanied by a decrease in the
                                              6
current economy-wide nominal interest rate.       The rise in the anticipated real

rate of return is consistent with these results because the decline in the

nominal interest rate is smaller in magnitude than the rise in current prices

relative to expected future prices (that is, than the magnitude of decline in

locally expected inflation rates). Note, however, that the mean (full current

information) realized real rate of return must have fallen, since nominal inter-

est rates have declined and the rise in the mean of actual future prices is

greater than that of current prices.
                                    —11—




       The inverse effect of money shocks on current nominal interest rates is

not a central element in the above story. Positive serial correlation in the

money growth process can reverse this effect, essentially by introducing the

feature that the perceived parts of current money shocks signal future money

creation and general inflation, which lead to increases in the current economy-

wide nominal interest rate. This change leaves unaltered the conclusions

regarding anticipated real rates of return. Unperceived monetary injections

continue to raise anticipated real rates of return as indicated in equation (4).

(The rise in the nominal interest rate cancels the effects of anticipated gen-

eral inflation in the formula for expected real rates of return.)

       The effects on realized real rates of return in models with an economy-wide

market that sets a nominal interest rate are generally dependent on the nature

of the serial dependence in the money growth process. Positive serial correla-

tion--which characterizes the post-World War II U.S. experience--implies that a

current money shock has an even larger effect on the actual (full current infor-

mation) mean value of future prices relative to the effect on currently anti-

cipated (partial current information) future prices.    The mechanism involves

the inverse effect on next periodts money demand of the inflationary expecta-

tions that arise after the current money shock has been fully perceived.     Be-


 cause of this effect, the presence of positive serial correlation in the money

 growth process reinforces the inverse effect of money shocks on realized real

 rates of return.

        The preceding story applies to the effects of unperceived monetary move-

 ments on contemporaneously expected real rates of return and on subsequently

 realized returns. If nominal aggregates are observed with a one-period lag,

 the   present type of model would not account for effects of money shocks on
 output or expected real returns that last beyond the initial "period." Per-
 sisting   effects of monetary and other disturbances have been explained in a
                                       1"


number of models, such as Lucas (1975) and Sargent (1979, Ch. XVI), from

consideration of stock adjustment effects. A key element in these

models is the existence of "exce;s capacity" in periods following

the positive shock to aggregate demand. For example, the initial monetary-

induced response of investment, production and employment is reflected

later in increased stocks of capital, inventories, employees, etc. Because

of stock adjustment costs in a generalized sense, these high levels of stocks

boost commodity supply7 beyond the time at which nominal disturbances are fully

understood. However, the spur to aggregate demand--which was provided initially

by the direct impact of the nominal shock--must now be generated by a reduction

in expected real rates of return (that is, by a decline in prices relative to
                                   8        .   .
expected discounted future prices).     Since incomplete information is not a

part of this excess capacity effect, the reduction in expected real returns

would now coincide with a decline in the (full current information) mean

value of subsequently realized returns.

     To summarize, unperceived monetary disturbances would induce a contem-

poraneous increase in expected real returns, to be followed (when information

on nominal aggregates becomes available and when the excess capacity effect

becomes important) by a drop in expected returns. Realized real rates of

return would be reduced throughout the period subsequent to a monetary shock.




C. Effects of Government Purchases

     Interteoral substitution effects associated with movements in govern-

ment purchases have been stressed in papers by Hall (1979) and Barro (1979).

These effects arise in the context of temporary purchases, such as wartime

expenditures, which have a strongly positive impact on aggregate demand.9
                                       —13—




Long-run changes in the share of gross national product absorbed by govern-

ment purchases have a corresponding inverse effect on households' permanent

disposable income, which tends to eliminate the net impact of these purchases

on aggregate demand.'°

     The positive effect of temporary         government purchases on aggregate demand
induces   a rise   in   current conunodity prices relative to expected, discounted

future prices; that is, an increase in expected real rates of return. This

price movement restores commodity market clearing through a combination of

reduced private demand and increased aggregate supply. The positive supply

response reflects the interteinporal substitution of factor services and

final products toward periods with relatively high (discounted) values of

wages and prices, which signal unusual rewards for intensive work effort and

production. This behavior implies that periods with high values of government

purchases relative to "normal," such as wartime, will also be periods with

relatively high values of output. The substitution effects set off by tem-

porary government purchases have been stressed by Hall (1979, section 2),

who points out also that this mechanism differs in some important respects

from the response of supply to monetary misperceptions that occurs in some

business cycle theories that stress interteniporal substitution effects, as

discussed above. The effect of temporary government purchases on the time

arrangement of work and production does not rely on elements of misperception

with respect to the general price level or other variables. In particular,

the hypothesized positive effect of temporary government purchases on anti-

cipated real rates of return carries over in this case to a positive ffect

on the (full current information) mean of subsequently realized returns.
                                      -14-




       Lagged effects of temporary government purchases on output and real

rates of return are ambiguous. If the private plant and personnel that

produce to government order were entirely non-specific for this purpose,

then the persistence effects of shifts in government purchases would parallel

those of monetary shocks. In particular, the excess capacity prevailing in

future periods would tend to maintain high levels of output. Future real rates

of return would be depressed in this case. However, the opposite conclusions

emerge when factors are specific to government-ordered work. Therefore, the

primary theoretical hypothesis is for a positive effect on real rates of

return    (and output)   of the contemporaneous value of temporary government

purchases.
        For empirical purposes I utilize a series for the "normal" ratio of
government purchases to GNP that was      constructed   in Barro (1979, part II). A
time   series analysis of rtal government purchases was used to relate the expected

value of future purchases to currently observed variables. Shifts in the

ratio of federal plus state and local non-defense purchases to GNP appeared

to be permanent, in the sense that the most recent observation of this

variable provides the best prediction for future values.11 Similar behavior

characterizes movements in the defense purchases ratio when these changes do

not accompany wars. The only temporary movements that were isolated were the

shifts in defense purchases that were associated with wars. This behavior

is exhibited for the period since 1941 by the series labeled (gW - gW) j•

table   1, where gw is the ratio of real defense purchases to real GNP and

   is the constructed expected long-run average value of this ratio. Because

the (gw - gw )   variable corresponds to a gap between the current and   "normal"
                                       —15—




values of the purchases ratio, rather than to a spread between actual and

"anticipated'taunts, it should not be surprising that this variable exhibits
a substantial amount of positive serial correlation. In particular, the large
number of peacetime   years with small negative values of (gW - gW) are       offset
by a smaller number of wartime years with larger excesses of gW over gW•
(However, war years cannot be deemed special, since they constitute 42 per
cent of the years since 1941 and 33 per cent of those since 1946.12) The present

analysis does not encompass any effects of war that are not proxied by the tem-

porary purchases variable. For example, the investigation does not deal with

separate effects of patriotism, conscription, or changing probabilities of victory,

which could influence future property rights.




II. Previous Enirical Findings on theBusiness Cycle Role of Intertemporal

       Substitution Variables

       Sargent (1976) estimates a model from quarterly U.S. data over the 1951

to 1973 period. The analysis includes a price-surprise term, Pt -
                                                                           _l1     as

a key explanatory variable. (Recall that Pt represents the log of the price

level, which is measured in this   case       by the GNP deflator.) A major   finding
is   the minor explanatory role for the unenloyment rate of this price surprise
variable, which has an estimated coefficient that is negative, but with a
t-value of only 2.0. When the ndel is reestimated by Fair (1979, pp. 703—08)
with a second-order autoregressive error term and        with a constraint that the

expectation EiP be formed in an         internally   consistent mnner, the estimated

coefficient   becomes insignificant.
                                     -16—




       It seems likely that the Sargent and Fair estimates are confounded by

simultaneity problems; clearly, in an OLS regression with the unemployment

rate as a dependent variable, the sign of the estimated coefficient on the

price-surprise term would depend on whether demand or supply shocks were

dominant   over the sample. Fair (1979, P. 704) uses only the nominal money
stock and   population as exogenous variables for carrying out two—stage least

squares; deleting Sargent's (1976, p. 234) government purchases, employment

and   surplus variables because they were absent from the structural model.

(The treatment of the surplus as exogenous is surprising in any case.) Since

the contemporaneous realizations of the two exogenous variables and of the

long-term flQm]Jlal interest rate Cwhich is treated by Fair as predetermined)

are   the main basis for distinguishing supply effects of the                   current price
                                                                     13
level from   those   of the expected price level, -l"t'                   it   is   unclear that

the   estimates can be interpreted as supply parameters. For example, one
would question the independence of the interest rate from supply disturbances.
These doubts are reinforced by the dramatic reversal in sign for the                        price-

surprise coefficient that arises when Fair (p. 706) adds the years 1974-77

to the sample. The natural interpretation is that adverse supply shocks

were   important since 1974, with these shocks producing a positive correlation
between    the   unemployment rate   and price movements (and nominal                interest rate
changes).
                                     -             is also not an appropriate representa-
      The price-surprise term,           E1—111,
 tion of the intertermporal substitution variable in business cycle models,

 as discussed above.'4 The relevant comparison is between current prices
                                   —17—




(or wages) and expected future values, so the EiP would be replaced by a

variable like EtPt+l. The introduction of (partial) contemporaneous information

into the expectational calculation substantially complicates any empirical

analysis. In some cases (see below) it is possible to avoid the problem of

exp1icity constructing expectations by studying the behavior or realized real

rates of return. Finally, a nominal interest rate would appear also in the

interterrnporal substitution variable; that is, EP+1 would enter in discounted

form for a comparison with Pt.

      The empirical analyses of annual U.S. data since World War II that are

summarized in Barro (l980c) deal primarily with reduced form effects of money

shocks on the unemployment   rate, output   and   the   price level. The investigation

is extended to quarterly data in Barro and Rush (1980). The major finding is

the statistically significant and quantitatively important expansionary influ-
ence on real economic activity of a constructed money shock variable. The

positive   response of output to a monetary disturbance is estimated to peak

with a 3-4 quarter lag, then gradually diminish to become insignificant          after
about   7 quarters.   The negative response of the unemployment     rate   is similar,

although possibly revealing a slightly longer lag relative to that of output.

The empirical evidence did not indicate any periods of contractionary response

following the roughly two-year interval of above normal real activity following

a money shock. Given the relatively minor role played by price surprises in

the results of Sargent (1976) and Fair (1979) discussed above, it appears that

these monetary influences on output and the unemployment rate involve channels

that have yet to be isolated.
                                      —18—




       The results in Barro (1979) document positive output effects of govern-

ment purchases for annual U.S. data since 1946. There is some indication

that the largest expansionary influence applies to temporary movements in

purchases; but, as noted above, the only temporary variations that have been

isolated are parts of the defense expenditures associated with wars. Long-run

changes in defense spending are estimated to have a significantly positive,

but smaller, effect on output. The output effect of non-defense federal plus

state and local purchases is imprecisely determined. The relatively small

amount of sampling variation in this explanatory variable and the necessity of

using an instrument for estimation purposes imply a large standard error for

the estimated coefficient.'5 Lagged effects of governemnt purchases on output

are unimportant in the annual data. As. in the case of the reduced form

monetary studies, the results on government purchases lack a description of

the relative price variables that stimulate an increase In supply.

       Bortz (1979) uses quarterly post-World War II U.S. data to explore the

reduced form effects of money shocks on the realized real rate of return from

3—month    Treasury Bills. The study uses     the nney shock series constructed

by    Barro and   Rush (1980)   and measures real returns on Treasury Bills by netting
out   changes in the consumer price index. The prinipal finding (Bortz, 1979,
table 3)   is   a significantly negative effect of the contemporaneous and three
quarterly lagged      values of money shocks on the realized real return. The

t-values for the      estimated coefficients from   lags zero   to three are   in a
range from 2.4 to 2.7. Some statistical tests indicate a preference for a
form that utilizes      money shock variables over an alternative that employs
                                     -19-




actual growth rates of the money supply. Overall, these results support the

theoretical implications of business cycle models that stress intertemporal

substitution variables.

        Hall (1979, P. 16) uses quarterly, post-World War II U.S. data to estimate

a "labor supply" function with an intertemporal substitution measure as a

right-side variable. He finds a significantly positive effect Ct-value =             2.4)
of this price variable on total employment when military purchases and military

employment are used as instruments. The implied elasticity of labor supply

with respect to the current real wage rate is about one-half. Hall's basic

inference (p. 17) is that increases in military purchases and employment induce

an increase in aggregate employment via a rise in the intertemporal substitu-

tion variable. This finding accords with Hall's theoretical arguments and

with the analysis of government purchases that was presented above. However,

there is some di.fference between Hall's intertemporal substitution variable

and the previously discussed real rate of return variables. Hall's yariable

Cpp.   15,   16) is the real rate of return——measured as   a   one-year commercial

paper   rate net of the annual inflation rate as indicated by changes in the
GNP deflator--plus the log of the current real wage rate. This price variable
can be viewed as governing the substitution between today's leisure and         future

consumption of commodities. If     current leisure is an   especially    close sub-
stitute for future leisure, it may be preferable to rewrite the substitution

variable in terms of current nominal wage rates relative to discounted expected

future nominal wage rates; that is, as an expected real rate of return with

the rate of nominal wage rate change substituting for the rate of price change.
                                 -20-




However, if cyclical movements in real wage rates are relatively unimportant,

the distinction between this form of the intertemporal substitution variable

and Hall's construct will be minor.



III. New Reduced Form Evidence on Realized Rates of Return

     This section presents some evidence from annual, post-World War II U.S.

data on the effects of monetary and government purchases variables on realized

real rates of return. The focus on realized returns avoids a serious empirical

problem concerning the formation of price expectations. As the theoretical

section makes clear, for the interval where movements in monetary aggregates

are not directly observed, the sign of the effect of monetary disturbances on

anticipated real returns depends on whether conditioning is done on partial or

complete current information. Perceived real returns based on partial informa-

tion rise with money shocks, while those that could have been calculated based

on full information decline. Not surprisingly, the empirical results are highly

sensitive to the choice of which current information to use in forming expecta-

tions. Some of these problems are avoided by completely neglecting current

observations in these calculations, but issues are then raised concerning the

timing of receipt of lagged information. Further, this procedure incorrectly

ignores some contemporaneous information, such as war prospects, that should

be included in determining expectations of future prices.

     The theory does have several clear implications concerning the behavior of

realized returns, as is clear from the earlier discussion. These propositions

can be tested in a reasonably straightforward manner.   A drawback of this pro-

cedure is that it fails to test directly a key hypothesis that is associated
                                 —21—




with equilibrium business cycle theory--namely, the positive effect of monetary

disturbances on contemporaneously (and incorrectly) percieved real returns.

The concluding section contains some additional discussion of this gap in the

analysis.

     Nominal rates of return are measured empirically in two ways: first,

as the annualized return to maturity on 3-month Treasury Bills sold on secondary

markets; and second, as the total return on a value-weighted portfolio of all

New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) stocks. The latter series is reported by the

Center for Research in Security Prices of the University of Chicago. In inter-

preting the results it should be recalled that the theory applies to a setting

of an economy-wide nominal bond market. The implications posed by the existence

of equity shares has not been examined in the theoretical framework.

     For the Treasury Bill series the return for year t, (RT)t, is the annual

average of the 3-month bill returns. For the NYSE, the return (RMV)t applies

to the period from Janaury 1 to December 31 of year t. Realized real returns

have been constructed by subtracting either the annual rate of change of the

seasonally-unadjusted wholesale price index (WPI) measured from January of

year t to January of year t+l, or the change of the seasonally-adjusted GNP

deflator (PGNP) measured from the first quarter of year t to the first quarter

of year t+l.16 There is a minor discrepancy in the timing between the inflation

rates and the nominal returns, but the results were insensitive to some altera-

tions in this dating.17

     I have examined also the behavior of constructed "after-tax" real returns

variables. The tax rate applied to the nominal returns is the one implicit

in the relation between the nominal yield to maturity on Moody's Aaa rated
                                   —22—




corporate bonds and that on Standard ,      Poor's high grade municipal bonds. The

tax rate is determined in table 1 from the formula, i = 1 - (R                 /R   ),
                                                                   municipal     Aaa

where the R variables represent nominal yields. This calculation assumes that

corporate and municipal bonds are equivalent except for the (federal) income tax

exemption on municipals. I have used the same tax rate variable to adjust

Treasury Bill and equityreturns, although this procedure neglects various

differences in the tax treatment of these two types     of returns.    Because of this

and other problems, the constructed after-tax returns series should be regarded

as subject to considerable measurement error. However, the tax rate variable

that was used may capture the major secular changes in the true average marginal

tax rates on the two forms of asset returns.

        For the case of monetary shocks, I focus on the current and lagged effects

 of the annual money shock variable DMR (table 1), which was derived from the

 analysis in Barro (1980c,         ).     Essentially,the   values for annual average Ml

 growth appear relative to the growth that is associated typically with current

 real   federal spending relative to "normal,"     the lagged unemployment rate, and

 two annual lag values of money growth. The series for g, the ratio of real
 defense purchases to real GNP, expressed relative to its "normal" value, g,

 was   discussed above and   is contained   also in table 1.
        The   Treasury Bill variables   correspond roughly to the average annual real

 spot returns. Therefore, these returns should exhibit the theoretical relation-

  ships, which predict a negative effect of contemporaneous and lagged money

  shocks, and a positive effect of the contemporaneous value of government purchases

  relative to normal.
                                    —23-




     The NYSE returns reflect both average spot discount rates and the effects

of innovations on asset values, For example--with the expected time path of

real share earnings held fixed--an inverse effect of a money shock on real

discount rates would imply an upward adjustment to contemporaneous real asset

prices. Realized returns up to the date that includes the shock would be moved

upward, while   subsequent   returns would be pushed downward. The "contemporaneous"

effects revealed by the present time-aggregated annual data would be ambiguous,

si.nce they involve the offset of these two forces, The analysis of contempor-

aneous effects is complicated further if the shocks alter projections of real

share earnings. These difficulties do not pertain to the analysis of lagged

effects, Which would presumably be incorporated into asset prices before the

start of year t, Therefore, lagged monetary shocks would be expected to exert

a negative effect on realized real NYSE returnsi8

     The current value of the temporary government purchases variable would

be expected to have a positive effect on realized NYSE returns if the principal

movements in the (gW_gW) variable, which are almost exclusively war-related,

were anticipated by the start of year t.    I examine also the effect of the

lagged value, (gW - gW)      which is presumably fully understood during year

     The basic empirical results appear in table 2. All regressions apply to

annual data for the 1949-77 period, The starting date was dictated by the

strong effect of World War II controls on the reported price data from 1943 to

1947, Some of the data after 1977 were unavailable at the time of this study.

I consider first the behavior of the stock returns, RMV. The findings are

similar for these returns whether inflation rates are measured by the WPI or
                                      -24-




by the GNP deflator. For convenIence, I discuss only the results that use
the WPI.

       The estimated effects of the temporary government purchases variable on

realized real returns, RMV-D(WPI), are positive throughout. For specifications

that include also the money shock variable DMR, the t-.values of the estimated

government purchases coefficients are in the neighborhood of 2. For example,

with DMRtI as the only additional explanatory variable, the estimated coeffi—

dent on the (gW gW) variable is 5.1, s.e. =        2.6   (line 1 of the table) for

the pre-tax real rate of return regression; and 3.8, s.e. =      2.1,   for the case

of after-tax returns (line 5). The results are basically similar except for

a small deterioration of the fit if the lagged value of the gW -        g)   variable

replaces the current value, With the DMRt 1 variable as the other explanatory

variable, the estimated coefficient of the temporary government purchases

variable is then 4.7, s.e. =   2.6,    for the pre-tax returns case; and 3.9, s.e. =

2.1,   for the after-tax returns. When the contemporaneous and lagged values of

the (gW     gW) variable are entered simultaneously, the estimated coefficients

are both positive20 but, because of the high degree of intercorrelation between

these variables, the estimated coefficients are individually insignificantly

different from zero.

       There is some indication that permanent movements in government purchases

do not have the real rate of return influences that are produced by temporary

shifts. The variables g1 and g1 (gP is the ratio of real non-defense
                                             —25—




government     purchases to     real    GNP) are insignificant in an equation that
includes also the variables DMRt .and(                             For   the pre-tax returns
case, the     estimated coefficient on g1 is -0.1, s.c. =            1.7,    while that on

        is   -2.7, s.e. =    2.7.     For the after-tax returns, the corresponding esti-
mates   are —0.1, s.c. =       1.4,    and —2.4, s.e. =   2.2,21

        The one-year lagged monetary ,noveinènts have significantly negative effects

on the real stock returns. For example, the estimated effect of the DMRt1

variable on the pre-tax real returns is —8.2, s.e. =               2.6   (line 1); while that

for the after-tax case is -6.6, s.e.                2.2 Cline 5). The effect of the con-

temporaneous variable DMRt is insignificant (lines 2 and 6), as is also the

case for a second lag value DMRt...2.22

        The negative effect of one-year lagged monetary movements appears aiso

when actual money growth substitutes for the shock portion, DMR. The esti—

mated coefficient of                  is -5.3, s.c. = 1.5 for the pre-tax returns (line 3);

and -4.4, s.c. =      1.2,    for the after—tax values (line 7). (The estimated coefL.

flcients.of DMt (lines 4 and 8) and DM2 turn out to be insignificant.) The

fit of the equations that contain actual values of money growth are actually

superior to those based on the DMR values, which differs sharply from comparisons

of estimated equations for output and the unemployment rate (Barro, 1980c,                      ).


        Regressions were run also with sets of DMR and DM variables included
 simultaneously, which permits tests for the significance of a set of DMR or

 DM variables, conditional on the inclusion of the other set. For example, for

 the case of pre-tax returns where a contemporaneous and one-year lag value of

 each variable is considered, the test for significance of the DMR values, given
                                 -26-



the inclusion of the DM's, corresponds to the statistic F3 =       0.9.   The

corresponding test for the significance of the DM values, given the inclusion

of the DMR's, yields the statistic F.. =    2.1.   Since both statistics are beloc

the 5 per cent critical value of 3.4, the hypothesis of zero effect for either

the set of DMR variables or the set of DM values, given the inclusion of the

other set, would be accepted at the S per cent level. Nevertheless, the results

can be viewed as suggesting (at a significance level below 95 per cent) some nega-

tive impact on subsequent real stock returns of the perceived growth rate of money

(which would be closly related to anticipated future monetary growth rates),

given the values of monetary shocks. In this respect the results are reminiscent

of those of Faina and Schwert (1977, pp. 135, ff.), who have stressed the puzzling

negative relation between anticipated inflation (as measured by the nominal

interest rate on Treasury Bills with one-month maturity) and subsequently realized

NYSE returns. Related results have been presented by Jaffe and Mandelker (1976)

and Nelson (1976). These types of findings are elaborated and some explanations

are offered in Fania (1980, pp. 21, ff.).

     The results for realized real returns on 3-month Treasury Bills show much

less explanatory power for the government purchases and monetary variables.

A negative effect of the contemporaneous monetary shock does appear, which

parallels the results from quarterly data that were reported by Bortz Q.979)

and discussed above. For example, for the pre-tax returns net of WPI inflation,

the estimated coefficient on DMRt is —1.4, s.e. =     0.6    (line 10 of table 2);

while that for the after-tax returns is -1.5, s.e. =        0.7 (line 14). The result
that the contemporaneous money shock effect is negative on the Treasury Bill

returns and insignificant for the NYSE returns does accord with the theoretical

discussion. The Treasury Bill regressions do not indicate a preference for the

DM form of the equations, although the hypothesis of zero coefficients for either
                                   -27-




the set of DMR variables or the set of DM values would be accepted, given the

inclusion of the other set. In either form of the equations, the contemporaneous

(artnual) value has the only significant monetary effect. One and two-year lagged

values of the DMR or DM variables are insiiificant (lines 10 and 14).

     For the cases where the DMR variable is included, the temporary govern-

mont purchases variable has   a positive estimated effect on the Treasury Bill
returns, with t-values close to 2. The estimated coefficient for the case of

pre-tax returns (line 10) is 1.3, s.e. =      0.7;   while that for the after-tax case

is 1.4 s.e.    0.7 (line 14). However, the government purchases variable becomes

insignificant when the WPI is replaced by the GNP deflator to measure the

inflation rate (lines 26 and 30). CThe t-values for the contemporaneous

monetary variables remain close to 2 in this case.)

     I will consider now some details of the estimates for the equations based

on the WPI that use the explanatory variables DMRt,               and (gW_gW)•

Although this equation form is more understandable on theoretical grounds than

that expressed in terms of DM values, it should be recalled that the statistical

results do not reinforce this choice of form. The actual values of the pre-tax

realized real returns from the NYSE and from 3-month Treasury Bills are shown

in table 3 along with estimated values and residuals from the regressions

shown in lines 2 and 10 of table 2.

     The estimated coefficient on DMRt        in the RMV equation (table 2, line 2)
                                          l

of -8.3 implies that a one percentage point money shock reduces the mean of

next year's real NYSE returns by more than 8 percentage points! Since the

estimated standard error from the money growth rate equation that generates

the DMR values is .014, the results imply that monetary fluctuations have
                                   -28-




produced large movements in ex ante real returns, on the NYSE.   However, this

relationship should be viewed in perspective to the sample standard deviation

of the realized real returns on stocks, which was .195 from 1949 to 1977.23

Since the estimated coefficient on DMRt    in the Treasury Bills equation (iine l0)

is negligible, the effect of DMRt . on the NYSE returns represents also a differ-

ential effect on the expected real returns from stocks and short-term government

securities.

     The estimated coefficient for the (gW_gl) variable of 5.8 in line 2

implies a very large positive effect of war on real NYSE returns.    For example,

the Korean War values for (fgW) of .026 imply that the realized real

returns would be higher by .24 than those associated with the typical peacetime

value for (gW_gW) of -.015. It is clear that this magnitude of effect could

not be extrapolated in a linear form to the World War II experience, where

the values of gW - gW) are above 0.3.24 These results should not be viewed as

indicating that war is good for the stock market. Rather, the basic finding is

that the high values of temporary government purchases associated with wartime

imply an increase in the required real rate of return on equity--that is, a rise

in the discount rate applied to anticipated earnings. In this context it
                                                                    w   w
is notable that the results remain similar if the lagged value for (g -g )--

which is presumably known by the start of year t--replaces the contemporaneous
value. However, the present results do not rule out a separate effect of new

information about war conditions on equity prices, which could work through

an effect on anticipated earnings flows.
                                     -29-




    There is, of course, no inconsistency between efficient capital markets

and a predictable pattern either of overall real returns or of the return

f.iZEerential between stocks and Treasury Bills. The present results can be

interpreted as showing a strong positive effect of war and (money-induced)

recession on the return premium for stocks. It has, however, been argued

(for example, in Nelson, 1976, p. 482; and Fama and Schwert, 1976, p. 136)

that assets like common stocks should not exhibit lower expected returns than

less risky assets like Treasury Bills.25 For the estimated values shown in

Table 3, this situation occurs for 7 of the 29 years of the sample (1956, 1960,

1969—70, 1972-74). All of these years except for 1960, but no other years in

the sample, exhibit negative estimated real returns on stocks. These results

apply to equations that include the contemporaneous values DMRt and (gW gW)•

However, basically similar results obtain if only the lagged variables DMRt1

and (2W_gW)        are used as regressors. In this   case negative expected real
               1

returns   on stocks apply for 1951, 1956, 1960, 1969, and 1972-74.

     It is likely that the ftmctiQnal form could satisfactorily be restricted

to confine the expected real NYSE returns to exceed either those on Treasury

Bills or zero. For example, estimates of the functional form,

    [RMV- DCWPI)Jt = exp[a0
                                                                   + error   term,
                              +a1DMR +a2DMR +a3(g"— g')]
which restricts the estimated values to be positive, yields a log likelihood
that is only 1.1 below that of the linear form       (table   2, line 2). Although

the linear and non-linear forms of the return equationS have        not   presently

been set up to allow for a test of nested hypotheses, these results suggest

 that the appearance of negative estimated Cor expected) real NYSE returns
                                                                                      Is

not an important problem.
                                  —30—




 IV. Conclusions


      In some respects the new empirical findings support the theoretical

model--notably, in isolating realized real rate of return effects that are

significantly positive for the temporary government purchases variable and

significantly negative forthe monetary variables. The statistical preference

for actual monetary movements over the constructed money shock variable and

the relatively weak effects on real Treasury Bill yields are less satisfactory

features.

     A different issue concerns the extent to which the present empirical analysis

distinguishes hypotheses of equilibrium business cycle theory from those of more

conventional macroanalysis. The usual IS/LM model predicts a positive effect of

government purchases on rates of return, which should presumably be interpreted

as an effect on real, rather than nominal, returns. In this respect the predictions

parallel those of the equilibrium models. The IS/LM story involves crowding-out

of private demands with no mention of positive supply effects, but the direction

of interest rate response would still be positive. An important difference in the

"equilibrium" approach is the stress on temporary government purchases, which does

receive some support from the empirical results,

     With respect to monetary movements, the IS/LM framework suggests a negative

response of interest rates, although the distinction between real and nominal

rates is less clear in this respect. The equilibrium analysis predicts a negative

effect on realized real retums and an ambiguous impact on nominal returns (which

involves an effect on generally anticipated inflation). The stress on monetary

shocks, rather than perceived movements in money, in the equilibrium viewpoint

was not borne out in the present results, as mentioned above.
                                     -31.-




     The correspondence in some respects for the rate of return implications of

the equilibrium approach and other macro theories does not, of course, rule out

the present statistical results as valid tests of both types of theories. Al—

though real rate of return effects that are positive for government purchases and

negative for money growth may not be surprising, I cannot find much past empirical

evidence that bears on these propositions.

     One hypothesis that sharply distinguishes the equilibrium model with incom-

plete information on monetary aggregates from more standard macroanalyses is the

prediction of a positive effect of money shocks on contemporaneously (and errone-

ously) perceived real rates of return. As discussed above, this hypothesis cannot

be tested directly from observations on realized returns, precisely because the

incomplete information structure predicts that monetary disturbances move ex post

returns in a direction opposite to that of ex ante (partial information) returns.

Satisfactory testing of this hypothesis seems to require an explicit calculation

of price expectations conditional on partial current information.   I am uncertain

whether this analysis is feasible.
                                      -32—

                                  References



Bailey, M.J., National Income and the Price Level, 2nd ed., McGraw Hill,

     New York, 1971.

Barro, R.J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy," Journal

     of Monetary Economics, 2, January 1976, 1-32.

___________ "Long-Term      Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary   Policy,"

     Journal   of Monetary Economics, 3, July 1977, 305—16.
__________ "Output        Effects of Government Purchases," unpublished, University

     of Rochester, October 1979.

___________    "A Capital Market in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model,"

     Econometrica, 48, 1980a.

___________, "The Equilibrium Approach to Business Cycles," in Money, Expectations

     and Business Cycles, New York, Academic Press, forthcoming 1980b.

___________    "Unanticipated   Money Growth and Economic Activity in the United States,

     in Money, Expectations and Business Cycles, New York, Academic Press, forth-

     coming 1980c.

__________ and Z. Hercowitz, "Money Stock Revisions and Unanticipated Money

     Growth," Journal of Monetary Economics, 6, 1980.

__________ and M.    Rush, "Unanticipated Money and   Economic Activity," in

     S. Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago,

     University of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research,

     1980.

Blinder, A.A. and    S.   Fischer, "Inventories, Rational Expectations and the
     Business Cycle,"      unpublished, June 1978.

Bortz, G.A., "The Effects of Forecast Errors in Monetary Growth Rates on

     Real Interest Rates," unpublished, Princeton University, November 1979.

Fair, R.C., "An Analysis of the Accuracy of Four Macroeconometric Models,"

     Journal of Political Economy, 87, August 1979, 701-18.
                                             -33-




Fama, E.F. and G.W. Schwert, "Asset Returns and          InfLation,"   Journal of Financial

    Economics, 5, 1977, 115-46.


                 "Real Activity, Inflation and Money," unpublished, April 1980.


Fischer, S., "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimal Money

        Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 85, February 1977, 191-205.

Friedman, B., Discussion of paper by Lucas and Sargent, in Federal Reserve

        Bank of Boston, After      the   Phillips Curve: Persistence of High Inflation

        and High Unemployment, 1978.

Friedman, M., "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, 58,

        March    1968,   1-17.

Gray, J.A., "Wage Indexation: a Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of Monetary

        Economics, 2, April 1976, 221—36.

Hall,    R.E.,    "Labor Supply and Aggregate Fluctuations," presented at the

        Carnegie-Rochester Conference, April 1979, revised September 1979.

Jaffe, J.F. and C. Mandelker, "The Fisher Effect for Risky Assets: an

        Empirical Investigation," Journal of Finance, 31, May 1976, 447-58.

King, R.G., "Asset Markets and the Neutrality of Money: an Economy-wide

        Bond Market," unpublished, University of Rochester, October 1978.

Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott, "A Competitive Theory of Fluctuations and

        the   Feasibility and    Desirability   of Stabilization Policy," in S. Fischer,

        ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago, University of

        Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1980.

Lucas, R.E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic

        Theory, 4, April 1972, 103—24.
                                           -34-




              "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
     American Economic Review, 63, June 1973, 326-34.

___________ "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of Political
     Economy, 83, December 1975, 1113—44.

 Lucas, R.E., "Understanding Business Cycles," Journal of Monetary Economics,

      supplement, 1977, 7-30.

___________ and    L.    Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment, and     Inflation," Journal

      of   Political    Economy, 77, September/October 1969, 721-34.

 McCallum, B.T., "Dating, Discounting, and the P.bustness of the Lucas-Sargent

      Proposition," Journal of MonetaryEconomics, 4, January 1978, 121-30.

 Nelson, C.R., "Inflation and Rates of Return on Conunon Stocks," Journal of

      Finance. 31, May        1976,   471—82.

 Phelps, E.S., "The New Microeconomics in Employment and Inflation Theory,"

      in E. Phelps, ed., Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation

      Theory, New York, Norton, 1970.

 Sargent, T.J., "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the

      Natural Rate of Unemployment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

      2:1973, 429—72.

____________, "A        Classical Macroeconometric    Model for the United States,"
      Journal of Political Economy, 84, April 1976, 207-37.
____________, Macroeconomic Theory, New York, Academic Press, 1979.
 _____________ and      N.   Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Optimal   Monetary

      Instrument, and        the   Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political
      Economy, 83, April 1975, 241-54.
                                           -35-

                                    Footnotes


    11n Sargent (1973, p. 434) and Sargent and Wallace (1975, p. 242),        supply
depends on Pt_Et iP, while demand depends on an expected real interest rate.

Therefore, a direct monetary effect on excess comnodity demand is unnecessary.

Similarly, in Lucas (1973, pp. 327-28), nominal income is exogenous and supply

depends on P(z) _EP. Models where a separate form of relative price

variable influences investment demand, as in Lucas (1975, p. 1124), do not require

a direct real. balance-type effect on aggregate demand.        Although I regard this

general route as promising, a fully satisfactory setup with different forms of

relative price variables has not yet been constructed.


         2Th1s model   assumes also (p.    laS) that new money enters as governmental
 transfers   that are proportional to       individual money holdings. The implicit
 interest rate on      holding money in this circumstance leads to    neutral effects
of changes in the anticipated
                                   monetary growth rate.

     3The
          neglect of future anticipated real rates of return is satisfactory
because these values are constant in the present setup. This
                                                              type of model
stresses departures of currently perceived returns from normal values,
rather than changes in the normal rate of return.

     4The absence of actual or expected
                                        price levels from the right side of
equations (3) and (4) depends on some features of the specification in

equations (1) and (2). For example, this absence would not obtain if
                                                                     com-
modity supply and demand      depended    on the level of real cash balances, with
either   the actual or expected price level used as a       deflator for nominal

                                                      (continued)
                                       -36-




(4continued)

money. These changes would require an analysis of expectational equilibrium

and portfolio balance before discussing any solution properties. Ultimately,

the substantive differences would involve the real effects of anticipated

inflation, as indicated n the text.


     5vbdels where the current information set includes observations on a local

commodity price and a global nominal interest rate are considered in Barro

(1980a) and King Cl978).


     6This decrease may    not   occur if the induced rise in current output has a

strong effect on current real money demand.


     7Elements of adjustment costs on tKe demand side--for example, the planning

costs for investment that are stressed by Kydland and Prescott (1980,

would imply maintenance of high levels of aggregate demand in periods subsequent

to a shock (which would be followed by later periods of increased capacity). These

effects reinforce the persistence of high output, but offset the inverse effect

on real rates of return in some future periods. Similarly, an inverse effect

of monetary shocks on producers' finished goods inventories (as opposed to inven-

tories of goods-in-pro-cess and materials), which are stressed by Blinder and

Fischer (1978), would tend to sustain high levels of demand. Overall, the excess

capacity effect would be dominant in future periods if the principal initial

effect of monetary disturbances is on work and production, rather than on con-

sumption. In this circumstance the aggregate of future stocks——whether held

by businesses or consumers--will end up higher than they otherwise would be.
                                     —37-




     8 above, changing expectations of future money growth and associated general

 inflation would not alter the conclusions about expected real rates of return.


     9Direct substitution in utility or production functions of government pur-

chases for private consumption or investment expenditures, as stressed by

Bailey (1971, pp. 152-55), offsets the positive aggregate demand effect of

temporary government purchases.


     10This argument is independent of the method of public finance if house-

holds view deficits as equivalent to current taxation. The full direct off-

set of private for public demands arises when privately desired captial stocks

are invariant with the level of government purchases.



     11Neither this ratio nor the defense purchases ratio exhibited significant

drift. A drift does appear since 1929 in the ratio of transfers to GNP.

     12War years are classified as 1941-45, 1950—52, and 1965—72.


     13Another distinction arises from the non-linear restrictions on the

reduced form that are imposed in the calculation of -Y


     '4However, these ndels would predict a positive effect of contemporaneous
money shocks on the variable Pt -
                                    EtiPt.
     151n the theoretical model long-run movements in government purchases would

raise output, but not necessarily affect the real rate of return, if there were

a direct positive influence of govenmental activities on aggregate supply.
                                       -38-



        '6The    January-to-January consumer price index (CPI) yields results that

are very close to those obtained with the GNP deflator. The CPI's treatment of

housing costs seems to impart meaningless sensitivity of the index to variations

in nominal interest rates, which I had thought might particularly be a problem

in the present context. However, the CPI probably provides a better measure

than the WPI of true transactions prices. The WPI may be less sensitive than

the other indices to problems of measuring quality change, which are likely to

be most serious for services.


        17For example, a shift to December-to-December or February-to-February

values for the WPI had negligible effects on the results.


        '8This conclusion could be altered by two effects that I believe to be

minor. First, there is a lag in obtaining initial reports on the money stock

(which is now less than two weeks); and second there are subsequent revisions

to   the Ml data.      COnly "final" reports are used in the present analysis.1

A   detailed study of money stock revisions in Barro and    Hercowitz   (1980) indi-
cated only trivial implications for analyses of output and     the   unemployment rate.


           constructed (Barro, 1979), the g variable incorporates some        information

about    future war conditions. However, this   element does not have a substantial

effect   on the (gW_gW) series for the post-World War II period.

        20 For
            the pre-tax real rate of return equation with the        DMRt and DMRt1
 variables also included, the estimated coefficients are 4.1,        s.e. =   4.2,   for

 the current value of the temporary purchases variable; and 2.1, s.e. =          3.8,
 for the lagged value.
                                   -39-




    21The contemporaneous values of g' and gP are also insignificant, but the

endogeneity of these variables (which include real GNP in the denominators) may

cause some estimation problems, especially in the case of the g coefficient.


    22For the pre-tax returns equation with the DMRi and (g_gW) variables

included also, the estimated coefficient on t-2 is -2.4, s.e. =    2.5.   For

the after-tax returns case, the result is —2.2, s.e. = 2.1..


    23The mean real return was .082. With the GNP deflator used to measure

inflation, the mean real return was .077 with a standard deviation of .180.


     24However, the nominal return on stocks, RMV, from 1942 to 1945 is quite

high, averaging .24 per year (see table 1). The reported inflation rates are

probably meaningless for this period.


     25Treasury Bills do not provide a riskiess real rate of return; for example,

the sample mean return net of WPI inflation is .006 with a standard deviation

of .045. With the GNP deflator used to measure inflation, the sample mean

 return is .002 with a standard deviation of only .019. The relative riskiness

 of stocks and Treasury allis depends also on covariances wIth returns from

 other assets, such as human capital and real estate. Conceivably, the depend-

 ence of these covariances on money shocks, etc., could account for occasional

 negative risk premia on stocks.
                                                 -40-
                                                Table    1

                                  Values of Variables

 Date                           ww
          DM      DNR      (g —g )               RMV          RT    D(UPI)        D(PGNP)         t
 1941    .160    —.017          .0.54           —.095        .001    .171          ——
                                                                                                 .24
    2    .179    —.030          .214              .163       .003    .059          ——
                                                                                                 .17
    3    .265     .062          .349        .
                                                  .261       .004    .015          ——
                                                                                                 .25
    4    .162    —.050          .392             .198        .004    .015          ——
                                                                                            —
 1945    .150     .010          .34].            .337        .004    .020          ——
                                                                                                 .36
    6    .068     .003          .041            —.049        .004    .282          ——
                                                                                                 .35
    7    .034     .001      —.011                .037        .006    .124          .075          .23
    8    .004    -.005      —.009       .
                                                 .038        .010   —.016     .
                                                                                   .013,         .15
    9   —.010    —.012      —.021                .190        .011   —.050         —.013          .17
iö       .026     .022      —.002                .275
                                                         1
                                                             .012    .161          .084          .24
    1    .044     .013       .026                .200        .016   —.017          .014          .30
   2     .049     .011       .026                .132        .018   —.028          .017          .26
    3    .024
         .015
                 —.016       .013                .007        .019   .9             .014          .15
   4             —.002      -.001                .427    1   .010   —.007         .015      -    .18
1955     .031     .006      —.017                .235        .018    .016         .026          .17
   6     .012    —.012      —.017                .092        .027    .043         .040          .13
   7     .005    —.013      —.017               —.106        .033    .017         .018          .07
   8     .012    —.004      —.018                .374        .018    .005         .020          .06
   9     .037     .006      —.020                .128        .034   —.001         .021
1960    —.001    —.036      —.021                .015        .029    .005         .006          .15
   1    .021     —.004      —.019                .246        .024   —.002         .020          .20
   2    .022     —.015      —.020               —.078        .028   —.003         .016          .27
   3    .029     —.003      —.019                .199        .032    .005         .014          .24
   4    .039      .003     —.018                 .154        .036    .000         .019          .27
                                                                                            -
1965     .042     .003     —.013                 .134        .040    .035         .027          .27
   6    .044      .002          .000            —.089        .049    .015         .032          .26
   7    .039     -.002          .013             .248        .043   .010          .038          .28
   8    .068      .029          .016             .129        .053    .031          .046         .27
   9    .061      .015          .009            —.093        .067   .047          .055          .17
1970    .038     —.008     —.003                 .035        .065   .023          .050          .19
   1    .065      .021     —.011                 .157        .044   .039          .046          .23
   2    .068      .009     —.013                 .168        .041   .068          .041          .27
   3    .072      .009     -.017                —.173        .070   .163          .078          .30
   4    .053     —.007     -.016                —.284        .079   .159          .110          .29
1975    .042     —.017     -.015                 .340        .058   .043          .056          .22
   6    .050     —.013     —.017                 .245        .050   .047          .052          .23
   7    .069      .008     —.015                —.046        .053   .061          .061          .31
   8    .079      .011     —.015                 .086        .072   .099          .086          .32

Notes: DM1      1o(M/M1), where Mt is annual average of the Ml definition of
         money; DMR      DM -   t1,    where Ii?4 is an estimated value of money growth from
         Barro (1980c,           ); gW is real defense purchases relative to real GNP;
         gW is the estimated iaral value of this ratio from Barro (1979,         );
         RMV is the total nominal return on a value-weighted portfolio of all
         NYSE stocks; RT is the annual average of returns to maturity on 3-month

                                                                             (continued)
                                    -41-




Notes, continued


Treasury Bills sold on secondary markets; WPI is the seasonally-unadjusted
January value of the wholesale price index (1967 base);
                                                             D(WPI) E log (WPI1,
WPI); PGNP is the seasonally-adjusted first quarter GNP deflator (1972 base);

D(PGNP)t     log(PNGP1/PGNP); T     is   the tax rate variable, constructed as
    1 -   (R        /R        R          is standard
            municipal Aaa).                              Poor's yield on high-grade
              .


                               municipal
municipal bonds and RAaa is Moody's yield on Aaa rated corporate bonds. Interest
rate data appear, for example, in Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Report
of the President, January 1980, p. 278.
                                                   Table    2


                                   Fguations for Realized Real Returns

                                         Sample period:         1949—77
                                                                                   w       w      2            A
                                                                                  (g             R      D-W    a
Dependent Variable     CONST.                              DMt        DMt1              -)
                                 DMRt     DMR -1
                                           —8.2                                        5.1       .27    2.1    .17
RMV—D(WPI)      (1)     .12                                               .

                       (.04)               (2.6)                                       (2.6)

                                          —8.3                                         5.8       .27    2.1    .18
                (2)     .12      —1.4                                         .

                       (.04)     2,7)      (2.8)                                       (2.9)
                                                                      —5.3              3.0      .34    2.3    .16
                (3)     .29                                      •


                       (.06)                                          (1.5)            (2.2)

                                                       -0.4           —5.0              3.1      .34    2.3    .17
                (4)     .29
                       (.07)                           (2.0)          (2.0)            (2.3)


RMV (1— r) — D (WP
                 I)                        —6.6                                         3.8      .25    2.1    .14
                 (5)    .085
                       (.031)              (2.2)                                       (2.1)
                         .090    —1.5       —6,8                                        4.5      .27    2.1    .15
                (6)
                        (.032)   (2.2)     (2.3)                              .         (2.4).
                         .23                                          —4.4               2.2      .34   2.4    .14
                (7)
                                                                      (1.2)             (1.8)
                        (.05)
                                                        —0.6          —4.0               2.3      .35    2.3       .14
                (8)      .24
                        (.06)                              (1.6)      (1.6)             (1.9)

                                                                                        0.6      .03    1.9    .046
RT-D(WPI)       (9)     .011              -0.3
                       (.010)             (0.7)                                        (0.7)

                                 —1.4     —0.5                                          1.3      .17    1.9    .043
               (10)     .015
                       (.010)    (0.6)     (0.7)                                       (0.7)

                        .020                                           -0.3             0.5      .04    1.9    .045
               (11)
                       (.018)                                             (0,4)        (0.6)

                                                        —0.8              0.3           0.7      .13    1.9    .044
               (12)     .034
                       (.019)                              (0.5)          (0.5)        (0.6)
                                                    Table   2,   continued


                                                                                          w- w                       A
                                 CONST.                                              (g     g      R2    D-W        a
Dependent Variable                         DMR    DMRt1           ''1        DMt1
                                                                                                   AZ    1
          —                       .003            -0 • 5                                   0.7     V.)   1.0.)     .048
RT(1—r)       D(WPI)      (13)
                                 (.010)           (0.7)                                   10.7)
                          (14)    .008    -1.5    -0.6                                     1.4    .19    1.8       .044
                                 (.010)   (0.7)   (0.7)                                   (0.7)
                          (15)    .020                                       —0.5          0.6    • 07   1 •9      . 047
                                 (.018)                                      (0.4)        (0.6)
                          (16)    .036                            —1.0        0.1          0.9     18    1.9        045
                                 (.020)                           (0.5)      (0.5)        (0.6)

RMV-D(PGNP)               (17)    .10             —7.2                                     3.7    .25        2.2   .16
                                 (.03)             (2.5)                                  (2.4)
                          (18)    .11     —0.6    —7.7                                     4.6    .27        2.1   .16
                                                                                                                           Cd)
                                 (.04)    (2.5)    (2.6)                                  (2.7)

                          (19)    .26                                        —4.9          2.3    .34        2.4   .15
                                 (.06)                                       (1.4)        (2.0)

                          (20)    .26                              0.1       —4.9          2.3    .34    2.4       .16
                                 (.07)                            (1.8)      (1.8)        (2.1)

Rtv1V(1i)     - D(PGNP)
                          (21)    .075            —6.1                                     3.0    .26    2.1       .13
                                 (.028)           (2.0)                                   (1.9)
                          (22)    .077    —0.6    —6.1                                     3.3    .26    2.1       .13
                                 (.030)   (2.0)   (2.1)                                   (2.2)
                          (23)    .21                                        —4.0          1.5    .34    2.4       .12
                                 (.05)                                       (1.1)        (1.6)
                          (24)    .21                             —0.2       —3.9         1.5     .34    2.4       .12
                                 (.05)                            (1.5)      (1.5)    (1.7)
                                                 Table 2, continued


                                                                                 (gW     gW)       R2    D-W
                              CONST.    DMRt    DMRi        DMt       DMi
tJependent Variable

                                                                                    —0.2           .03   1.9   .019
                               .000              .0.3
RT-D(PGNP)           (25)
                                                (0.3)                                  (0.3)
                              (.004)
                                                                                       0.1         .16   1.8   .018
                     (26)      .002     —0.5     0.2
                                                (0.3)                                  (0.3)
                              (.004)    (•L
                                                                      0.1              -0.1        .02   1.9   .019
                     (27)     —.003
                                                                      (0.2)            (0.3)   -
                              (.007)
                                                                      0.3               O.0        .12   1.9   .018
                               .003                        -0.4
                     (28)
                                                           (0.2)      (0.2)            (0.3)
                              (.008)

           -
RT(l-.r)       D(PGNP)
                                                                                        0.1        .01   1.7   .02].
                     (29)     —.008              0.1
                                                (0.3)                                  (0.3)
                              (.004)
                                                                                        0.2        .17   1.7   .019
                              —.005     —0.7     0.0
                     (30)
                                                (0.3)                                  (0.3)
                              (.004)    (0.3)
                                                                      —0.1              0.0        .02   1.9   .021
                     (31)     —.003
                                                                      (0,2)            (0.3)
                               (.008)
                                                           —0.5        0,2              0.1        .17   1.9   .019
                     (32)       .005
                                                            (0.2)     (0.2)            (0.3)
                               (.008)

                                                                                                  Standard errors
Notes:     All data are annual. See tables 1 and 3 for definitions and tabulations of varib1es.
                                                                                            is the standard—erroi'-
           of coefficients are shown in parentheses. D-W is the Durbin-Watson Statistic, a
               of-estimate.
                                       -45-

                                      Table 3

           Actual an.dEstimatedVa1ues for.Realized Real Rates of. Return



                 Cl)                             C31      (4)          C51        (6)
Date          RMV-D(WPI)     RMV-D(WPI)       RESIDUAL   RT-D(WPII R:?PI RESIDUAL
1941            —.266                                     —.170
       2          .104                                    -.056
   3              .245                                    -.011
   4              .183                                    —.011
1945              .317                                    —.016
   6            —.332                                     -.278
   7            —.087                                     —.119
   8              .054                                     .026
       9
                           - ____________   _________              ___________ _________
                  .241         .065           .176          .061        .008      .053
1950              .113         .177          —.064        —.149       —.012     —.137
   1              .217         .067           .149          .032       .020       .012
   2              .160         .147           .014          .046       .027       .018
   3            —.002          .126          —.128          .010       .048     —.037
   4             .434          .249           .185          .016       .024     -.008
1955             .219          .031           .188          .002      —.014      .015
   6             .049         —.009           .058        -.016        .008     -.024
   7            —.124          .141          —.265          .016       .017     —.002
   8             .368          .132           .237          .013       .004      .009
   9             .129          .026           .103          .035      —.016      .052
1960             .010          .002           .008          .024        .036    -.012
   1             .248          .318         -.070          .026        .013      .013
   2            —.075          .059         —.134          .031        .013      .018
   3             .194         .138            .056         .026        .003      .024
   4             .154         .039           .116          .036       -.011      .046
1965             .099         .014           .085          .004       -.006      .011
   6            —.104         .094          —.198          .034        .010      .023
   7             .238         .176           .062          .033        .032      .001
   8             .098         .184          —.086          .022       -.004       .026
   9            —.140        —.089          —.052          .020       —.007       .027
1970             .013        —.013           .026          .042        .015       .027
   1             .117         .096           .022          .004       —.023       .027
   2             .100        —.141           .240        —.027        —.023     —.005
   3            —.337        -.060          —.277        —.093        —.022     -.071
   4            -.443        -.039          —.404        —.080         .000     —.080
1975             .297         .116           .181          .015        .023     —.008
   6            .198          .189            .011         .003        .020     —.018
   7           —.107          .132          —.239        —.009        —.008     -.001
   8           —.013        (—.048)         (.035)       —.028       (—.022)   (—.006)

Notes: Definitions for RMV, RT and D(WPI) appear in the notes to table 1. The
        figures shown in coltmins 2 and 3 are the estimated values and
                                                                       residuals,
        respectively, for the regression shown in line 2 of table 2. Those in
        coluimis 5 and 6 are from the regression shown in line 10 of table 2.
