                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     EXCHANGE-RATE UNIONS
               AND THE VOLATILITY OF THE DOLLAR


                      Richard C. Marston


                     Working Paper   No. 1492




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1980




The author is indebted to Richard Herring, Stephen Meyer, and semi-
nar participants at the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton
University, and the NBER's Summer Institute for their helpful corn—
merits and suggestions. Financial support for the Rodney White
Center for Financial Research and the NBER is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper 1/492
                                                               June, 1980




         EXCHANGE-RATE UI1IONS AND THE VOLATILITY OF THE DOLLkR


                                Abstract

      This study analyzes why formation of an exchange-rate union, such as
the newly-established European Monetary System, can be harmful to the
interests of some member countries. The framework provided for analyzing
behavior in the union is a three-country model which combines an asset market
determination of exchange rates with a price sector emphasizing wage indexa-
tion behavior and price competitiveness between countries. The three
countries consist of two members of the union as yen as a nonmember country
(the United States), allowing the study to investigate trade and financial
relationships within and outside the union.

     The study examines how each country's exchange rates and prices respond
to stochastic disturbances of several types, of which the most important is
a capital account disturbance directly affecting one member's financial market
(originating, for example, in shifts between U.S. securities and those of one
member country). The analysis shows that the effects of the union on each
member country depends upon (1) the source of those economic disturbances which
give rise to fluctuations in exchange rates, (2) the share of trade between
members of the union, (3) the degree of integration between the financial
markets of the member countries, and (14) the responsiveness of domestic wages
and prices to changes in exchange rates.

     The exchange-rate union fixes the cross exchange rate between member
currencies, thereby preventing disturbances from affecting this key exchange
rate. In doing so, however, the union may actually increase the variability
of prices in the econonr of one member country. The outcome depends
critically upon the degree of financial integration between the two member
countries in the absence of the union. The importance of another factor,
domestic price responsiveness, is brought out clearly by comparing the
alternative extremes of no price adjustment and full price adjustment to
exchange rate changes. Price behavior interacts in an interesting way with
financial integration to determine the potential gains or losses of each
country in joining the union.

                                                 Richard C. Marston
                                                 The Wharton School
                                                 University of Pennsylvania
                                                 Philadelphia, PA 191014

                                                 (215) 243—7626
     In the current period of floating exchange rates, some countries have

chosen to tie their exchange rates together in a joint float against the

U.S. dollar, forming exchange-rate unions within a system of floating exchange

rates. The most prominent of these unions is the European Monetary System --

a union fixing exchange rates between European currencies.1 The EMS, as
well as unions elsewhere, represent an important departure from exchange

rate flexibility with effects on union and nonunion countries that need to

be examined.

     The reasons   for forming a union vary   widely, but one common concern is

about how exchange rate fluctuations affect trading and other economic

relationships between potential members of the union. Countries in exchange-

rate unions often conduct much of their trade with other countries in the

union; in the absence of a union, fluctuations in exchange rates disrupt

trade between the member countries and lead to significant changes in their

general price levels. For example, recent exchange rate crises have involved

major fluctuations in the Deutsche Mark price of the dollar; to the extent

that other European currencies have not followed the DM's movements,

bilateral rates within Europe have been affected. Proponents of exchange-

rate unions claim that the fixing of bilateral rates will minimize the

disruptive effects of such disturbances.


     3-The terminolor here is potentially confusing. In this study, the
term exchange-rate union refers to an arrangement in which member countries
of the union maintain fixed exchange rates between member currencies, but
with each country retaining its own central bank with control over its
national monetary policy. This limited type of union, which Corden (1972,
p. 3) calls a vpseudo_exchange_rate union," is to be distinguished from a
"complete exchange rate union," or monetary union, with a single central
bank and a union-wide currency.
                                                                            2




     This paper provides a framework for analyzing the effects of an exchange-

rate union. The paper shows that the desirability of a union depends upon

several key factors:

     1. The trade pattern of the countries in the union. what is important

is not just the general openness of the economy, as in McKinnon (1963),

but the share of trade between potential member countries relative to trade

with the rest of the world.2

     2. The source of those economic disturbances which give rise to fluctu-

ations in exchange rates. Chief among these are financial disturbances which

affect one member country's financial market more than another, with the

volatility in the dollar exchange rate of that country leading to changes in

bilateral rates in the absence of a union.

     3.    The degree of interation between the financial markets of the member
countries. This paper shows how financial integration facilitates intra-

union adjustment, not through the long-term financing of deficits within a

union, as in Ingram (1973), but through market adjustments in the absence

of a union.

     --.   The degree of price responsiveness to changes in exchange rates, a

point emphasized earlier by Corden (1972). The model to be developed will

include a labor market with partial or full wage indexation and a goods

market with pricing behavior allowing foreign prices to have a direct impact

on domestic prices and   with   demand behavior reflecting either imperfect or

perfect. substtutLo between foreign and     domestic   goods.


     2Tower and Willett (l97) provide a comprehensive survey of the literature
on optimum currency areas which examines the conditions necessary for success-
ful exchange-rate or monetary unions; McKinnon (1963) and Mundell (1961) are
two early contributions to this literature. Among other studies of unions
are Allen (1976), Corden (1972), and Ingram (1973), the latter two specifically
dealing with a European monetary union. Thygesen (1979) describes the
European Monetary System.
                                                                             3




      Section I of the paper develops a financial ndel for two types of

exchange-rate regimes: fully flexible exchange rates and an exchange-rate

union floating against the dollar. As in the monetary approach to the

exchange rate, the transactions demand for money is a key ingredient in the

short-run determination of exchange rates. But the financial model also

includes interest-bearing assets which are imperfect substitutes for one

another, and allows for the capital-gains effects of exchange rate changes.

The financial model dllbeused to analyze the effects of a union in a world

in which wages and the prices of domestic goods are exogenous.

      In Section II of the paper, the adjustment of domestic prices to foreign

prices and exchange rates is traced directly to behavior in the labor market

and pricing behavior in the goods market. The wage and price equations,

together with the asset equations specified in Section I, are used to

analyze several types of economic disturbances, among them fluctuations in

world prices and financial disturbances. In Section III of the paper, the

expanded model is used to compare experience under flexible rates with that

in an exchange-rate    union. The   analysis shows that wage indexation plays a

key   role   in determining whether an exchange-rate union can achieve its

objectives.


                 I. Financial Behavior in an Exchange-Rate Union


       To investigate the relationship among exchange rates, interest rates

and prices in an exchange-rate union, a three-country model of financial

behavior under flexible exchange ratis introduced.3 The three countries


      3The underlying model of financial behavior is similar to those of
 Branson (1976), Girton and Henderson (1976), and Herring and Marston (1977).
                                                              countrieS 1 and 2,
include two potential members of the exchange-rate union,

as well as a third country called the United States. Each country has its

                                      is called the franc, country 2's the
own currency; country l's currency
                                   dollar. The exchange rates for these cur-
mark, and the u.s. currency the

rencies are as follows:


           1
          X :     franc price of the dollar,

          x2 :    mark price of the dollar, and

                  franc price of the mark.


Triangular arbitrage ensures that the cross exchange rate between the cur-

rencies of countries 1 and 2 are linked to the respective dollar exchange
                                                                           rate
            =   x1/x2.   In an exchange-rate union, this cross exchange
 rates,
                                                  described below.
 is fixed by foreign exchange intervention as
                                                              (Mi) and a home
      Each member country has two financial assets, money

 bond (H1). The United States issues a dollar_denominated bond (F); the

 two member countries are assumed to be too small to influence the interest

 rate paid on this dollar bond (r3). The public in each member country is

 assumed to hold four different assets:      domestic money, bonds denominated

                                             domestic government), and bonds
 in domestic currency (and issued by the

 denominated in each of the other currencies, a range of assets permitting
                                                                     (See Table 1
 diversification of portfolios across the three currencies.

 for the balance sheets of the public and the monetary authorities of

 countries 1 and 2). Domestic money is issued by the monetary authority of
                                         assets domestic bonds and three types
 that country, which in turn holds as

                                          bonds and the bonds and money of the
  of foreign exchange reserves: dollar

  other potential member of the union.
                                                                                        5




                                     Table 1

                            Sectoral Balance Sheets



           Country 1                                      Country 2
                       Monetary                                           Monetary
Public                 Authority                Public                    Authority

           1           lm                                              2n           n
                   H            Mm             M2        V2           H           M
          V

                                Am                                    x2pn        An
H1'                X]Tm

xl2H2l
                                                                      H/H12       M2m
                   x121
                   X12M2m


Notes: The superscript m denotes the monetary authority of country           1,   n the

monetary authority of country 2. The public of country 1 holds its wealth

(v1) in the form of domestic money (M1), domestic bonds (H11), country 2's

bonds (Ha, which enters the balance sheet at the exchange rate x12), and

foreign   bonds (F1, with exchange rate x'). The monetary authority of

country 1 holds as assets home bonds (H1m), dollar bonds (XlFm), as well as

the   bonds (Ha') and money (Ma') of country 2 with exchange rate             Its
liabilities consist of money held by the domestic public (Mm) and by the
monetary   authority of country 2 (Mm), plus a balancing item (Am) which

 offsets changes in exchange rates in the monetary authorities' balance

 sheets. The balance sheets of country 2 are explained analogously.
                                                                               6



     The transactions demand for money plays a central role in determining

prices and the exchange rate. The demand for money is assumed to depend

positively on the ratio of nominal output (Py) to nominal wealth (v), while

the demand for home and foreign bonds depends negatively on this ratio.

Holdings of each asset are expressed as a fraction of total wealth, so that

asset demands are homogeneous of degree one in Iy and V. (See Table 2.)

     The bonds of countries 1 and 2 pay interest rates of r:l and r2,

respectively; the total expected return for the 1th country investor includes

the expected change in the exchange rate z1 =    (x1)      -
                                                               x±7/x1, for X
x2, X12. The asset demands of the public are assumed to be gross substitutes;

that is, asset demands are positively related to the a'm interest rate and

negatively related to the returns on other assets. Each asset demand

includes a stochastic element (u, uh1, or ufl), the properties of which

will be specified below. The equilibrium conditions for the money and bond

markets are set out in Table 2.

     Because of the inherent complexity of the three country model, several

additional assumptions are adopted to simplify the analysis:

     1. Countries 1 and 2 are assumed to have Tnidentical financial behavior.

The initial portfolios of the two countries are identical in the sense that

the public of each country holds the same amount of its own domestic money

and bonds, dollar bonds, and the bonds of the other country; one country's

ii4tia porbfojio, is    thus   the mirror image of the other countrys portfolio.5


     For a similar formulation, see Henderson (1977).

     5The assumption of identical behavior does not require that country 1
hold equal amounts of its initial wealth in country 1 and country 2 bonds,
but only that its initial holdings of country 1 (2) bonds be equal to
 country   2 VS initial holdings of country 2 (1) bonds.
                                                              Table 2

                                           Two-Country Model       of Financial Behavior


                Country 1                                 Asset    Demands                   Country 2

Demand   for Money
                          2                                                                             2               12
   =                                                  +                                 = m2(P2Y2       r   ,   r1 -   z     ,   r3 + z22
                                                                                                                                        ,v +u
       m1(yl      r,1   r     +z12   ,
                                         r3 +z 1)v1       u                                    v2,
Demand   for Country 1 Bonds
                                                                                                    2 1                                  2   2
H11 =           r1, r2 + z'2, r3 +             z1)V'-i-u'11                             =   hl2(Py r,r  -z12 ,r3 +z)V+uh12
        h(
Demand   for   Country 2 Bonds
                                                                                                                                             2
x12H2l =       ___                 +               + zl)v1+uhl2l                  H22 =        ___ r2
                                                                                            h22(Y                r1 - z12 ,       r3   + z2 )V+u
           h2l(PY         r1, r2         z'2, r3
                 vi,                                                                              v2,
Demand for     Dollar Bonds
                                                                                                                           12               2 f2
                                                                                 X2F2 =     f2(PY           ,
                                                                                                        r2 r1 -        z        , r3   + Z
                                                                                                                                         2)V+u
X1F1        ___
         fl(PJ-y'    ,l     r2   +z12 ,r3 +z1)v'+
                                                                                               V2   ,
               vi,
                                                      Market Equilibrium Conditions
Money Market
                                 12 21n 2xn                                         2
   =      =       + X F im                  -
                              + X (H +M )-AmMin                                    M    =     =   H+               + (I+Mmn)/X12_An_M

Bond Market
                                  in


                                                                                  of the money supply expres-
Notes:  The asset demand functions are described in the text; for a description
                                          condition for cnuntry 1 states that   the supply of bonds by the
sions, see Table 1. The bond equilibrium                               and   the monetary authority of country 2
goyernment (-) less holdings by the domestic monetary authority (Hlm)      2  (HJ2)
(Hm) must equal the demands by the public of country 1 (H--) and country
                                                                            8



The asset demands of the two countries, moreover, are equally sensitive to

changes in own interest returns, cross returns, output or wealth. Finally,

the initial levels of output are assumed to be equal in the two countries,

as are the initial levels of wealth. This assumption of identical behavior

rules out the effects of size or other asnnmetries within the union, an

interesting topic for later analysis.

     2. The elasticity of the demand for money with respect to transactions

is assumed to be unity. With the specification above, this assumption

implies that a rise in nominal output with wealth constant will increase the

demand for money proportionately, while a rise in wealth with output constant

will leave unchanged the demand for money.6 The demand for money is also

assumed to be more sensitive to an increase in the home interest rate than

to increases in the interest rates on bonds denominated in other currencies.

     3.   The disturbances to be analyzed below are all serially uncorrelated

with mean zero. Assuming that expectations are rational, then z1, the

expected change in the exchange rate, must equal zero for all exchange rates.

More complex types of disturbances would be interesting to study, but would

complicate the analysis significantly.


A. Behavior Under Flexible Exchange Rates

     To study the response of financial variables to stochastic disturbances,

the asset demands are linearized around   the   equilibrium values of the


exchange rates (x),   interest   rates (r), domestic prices and output (P, y)


     6This assumption simplifies the analysis of prices and exchange rates
since increases in prices lead to proportionate increases in the demand
for money, while increases in exchange rates affect the demand for money
only to the extent to which prices or interest returns change.
                                                                                          9


as well as the disturbances (u =
                                         u0= u =      0).      For convenience, the

initial values of all prices and exchange rates are set equal to unity.

     The   four equilibrium conditions in Table 2 determine four financial
variables (r1,     r2, H1,   x2) as functions of prices, output, the disturbances,
as well as other variables. In the analysis below, the relationship between

exchange rates and     prices   wilibe of major interest. For this reason, the

four equations are solved for the two exchange rates (x1) as follows:



           H      [x1 -
                                            -             j 12
                                                             (p 22  22
                                                                y -P0y0) -
                                                                                 hi hil
                                                                               (u -u0


    L J [x2 xj         -                    -
                                                Py)   +   j22    22 22
                                                               (P y -P0y0) -
                                                                                 h2 h21
                                                                               (u -u0
                                                                                              (i)




where        J 0,               ai 0, and uhl =   h1l      +   uh12.7 Increases in the
level   of transactions in either country 1 or 2 lead to changes in the excess

demand for H1 and H2; the coefficients J1' and J reflect the direct impact

of higher transactions on the demand for money and bonds, as well as the

indirect impact working through changes in interest rates. Increases in

exchange rates similarly induce changes in the excess demand for each bond

with the coefficients            and H reflecting the impact of changes in

exchange rates on these asset demands.

        To understand the adjustment of interest rates and exchange rates in

the two countries, consider the effects of an increase in the price of

country    2's goods (P2).      The higher price level leads to an increase in

country    2's   interest rate. An excess demand for H2 and excess supply of

thereby develops, dth changes proportional to the coefficients J22 and J12,

respectively. To restore equilibrium to the H2 market, the mark must


     7The explicit expressions for these coefficients are given in the
appendix.
                                                                                            lo


appreciate. The mark price of the dollar,                   must fall with the magnitude

of the appreciation dependent upon how sensitive is the demand for H2

to changes in           as reflected in the coefficient,                Similarly, the mark

must appreciate relative to the franc; that is, the franc price of the mark,

      must rise.

      The   impact on        of a rise in P2 is not as straightforward.               and

together nru.st adjust so as to increase the demand for country l's bonds.

But it is possible for the demand for H1 to increase even when the franc

appreciates relative to the dollar (x1            falls).       To examine this possibility,

the   excess demand for H1 due to changes in exchange rates is rewritten as a
f'unction of the two franc exchange rates8 (where both coefficients are
positive :

                    +        (H1   - x)   +         (2      -

Since   the   franc price of the mark (H12)        necessarily       rises, the excess demand
     1
for H can rise even when X falls if this demand is particularly sensitive
                                   -I




to     so that the coefficient (-H1x2) is large relative to (H1 + H' ).
                                                             xl    x2
                   1.   .
Otherwise, X will depreciate along with X
                                         12

        The two coefficients, (I-]± +         H2) and -2' reflect the degree of
financial integration among the three countries. The second coefficient is

large relative to the first when the public of country 1 (2) primarily holds

the bonds of country 2 (1) rather than dollar bonds. In this case of a high

degiee. of financal integration between the member countries, a small change


               -                                                                for small
                  is approximately equal to (x1-x) -
                   x2)                                                 (x2-x)
discrete changes around    =         = 1. =X
        91t can be readily shown that (H- +                     > 0, while as previously noted,
H'<
                                                                                         11


in     has a substantial effect on the excess demand             for   country   l's bond.
In the opposite case where the public in each member country primarily holds

dollar bonds rather than the bonds of the other member country, the first

coefficient is larger. Then a small change in                 has a substantial effect

on the excess demand for country l's bond.1°

     When the equations in (1) are solved for the two dollar exchange rates,

the result is the two equation system:


              [i A121                          R2 Ii2lI
        1=1              I                    ÷1                                        (2)

[(x2xj 2l A22j                                 L-J
where A11 =
            (2               -
                                 2   J21)/A    0,
      A12 =
            (2               -
                                 2   J22)/A    0,
      A22 = A11, A21 = A12,          A=   (H       2 2
                                                    -




The coefficients A11 and               summarize the all-important impact of prices on

exchange rates. As the previous discussion indicated, a rise in the price

of country 2's goods must lead to a fall in the mark price of the dollar,

     so A22 must be negative. Since the financial sectors of countries 1 and 2

are assumed to be identical, the impact of a rise in P1 on X1 must also be

negative (A11 = A22).            In response to a rise in F2, however, the franc price

of the dollar, X1, can either rise or fall, so A12 can be positive or

negative. The same indeterminancy pertains to A21.

      The relationship between the price of a country's goods and its dollar

exchange   rate   is   illustrated for country 1        in Figure 1. The curve     labelled

     -0A1thongh this discussion has centered on the coefficients in the equa-
tion for H1, the coefficients in the H2 equation can be similarly compared.
                                                              12




                                   /
                             *
P1                          A
                                        2
                                 7          P



                        7




Figure 1. Impact of a Foreign Price Disturbance under
              Fixed (A*A*) or Flexible (AA) Exchange Rates.




P1
         A'                                     P



     A




                                                      A

              w




Figure 2. Impact of a Capita]. Account Disturbance with
           Fully Indexed Prices.
                                                                                              13


AA represents those combinations of P1 and                    which   keep the asset markets

in   equilibrium. A higher price level increases the transactions demand for
money and the domestic        interest rate. To restore equilibrium to the asset

market,   the exchange rate must fall (the domestic                  currency must   appreciate).

B.   Behavior in an Exchange-Rate Union

      In an exchange-rate union between countries 1 and 2, the monetary

authorities intervene in the exchange market to keep fixed the franc price

of the mark, X12 =       x1/x2.        The franc and mark prices of the dollar then float

together: (xl_X) =           (x2-x).       Suppose that the foreign exchange intervention

is carried out by the monetary authority of country 1 who buys (or sells)

country    2's   currency and sells (or buys)             country l's   currency to keep X12

fixed. (The results would be the same if                   country   2 carried out this inter-

vention.)11 The four asset equations described above would then determine

r1, r2, x1 =      x2,   and M2m, the last variable representing the holdings of

country 2's currency by country its monetary authority. The four equations

can be solved for the dollar exchange rates as functions of nominal output

in each country and the disturbances, uhl:

                                                             hl hi      h2 h2
                                                           (u -u0 ) + (u -u0 )
(X1-X) =      Bl(rl_Plyl)
                     00
                                   +
                                       B2(P2y2_Pyg)
                                                      -                                       ()
                                                               2(H1
                                                                 xl +H1)
                                                                      x2


whereB
          1      J+J21 CO,B2 =B.                12

                 2 (H+Hl2)


     0ther more complex types of foreign exchange intervention involving
the purchase or sale of securities might also be examined. Marston (1980)
analyzes the effects of different types of intervention in a two-country
model with stochastic disturbances.
       121
        B must be negative because 11
                               .         21       1
                                    J + J < 0 and Hi + H2                         )-   0 by the
assumptions outlined above.
                                                                                 l!1


This   equation shows that an increase in prices or output in either country

leads to a fall   in   both countries' dollar exchange rates.

       Comparison of the coefficients in equations (2) and (3) provides some

insight into the effects of a union. The coefficient of (P'y'-Py) in

equation (3), B', is the average of the coefficients of that same variable

in the equations (2) for flexible exchange rates)3 By joining the union,

countries 1 and 2 find their dollar exchange rates sharing equally the

effects of price disturbances in either countryTs market.

       In the union a rise in P2, for example, leads to an increase in

country 2's interest rate and in the demand for country 2's currency; as a

result, there is an incipient rise in X12 and fall in X2. To prevent

from rising, the monetary authorities of country 1 intervene in the exchange

market, selling country 2's currency and buying its own currency. The excess

demand for country 2's currency is thereby reduced and the excess demand

for country l's currency increased. The net result of the intervention is

that      and X2 fall by the same amount, thereby cushioning the impact of

country 2s price disturbance on country 2's exchange rate.

       As in the case   of flexible exchange rates,   the curve PA in Figure 1

can be used to describe the inverse relationship between the dollar exchange

rate, of either country, X1, and the price of that countryt s goods. But

it should be clear from the above discussion that the impact of any change

in prices on that country's dollar exchange rate is moderated by intervention

in the exchange market. Because exchange market intervention has the

effect of dispersing the impact of a change in prices on either dollar

exchange rate, Ak is steeper in the case of an exchange rate union (A"           B'O).

                                = B1 and (A12÷A22)/2 = B2.
       13That   is, (A+A21)/2
                                                                                15




C. The Effects of Capital Account Disturbances

     With the alternative financial models specified, we can analyze the

effects of economic disturbances on the financial markets of the two

countries. In both exchange rate regimes, these disturbances will lead to

changes in interest rates and exchange rates, which will in turn induce

adjustments in prices and output. Of particular concern are the effects of

the disturbances on the general price indices in each economy, since these

price indices presumably reflect the purchasing power of local incomes

(including wages, as will be seen below). For the two member countries, the

general price indices are defined as follows:


               =   (l)a11   (2)(l2)a12 (P3X1)al3

               =   (Pl/Xl2)a21   (2)a22 (P3X2)a23,                            (1)



where a =lfori=l,2.
          13


Country l's price index, for example, is a function of the prices in francs
of country 2's goods, U.S. goods, as well as its own goods. The analysis to

follow will determine for each regime the effects of disturbances on the

variances of these two price indices. In this section, adjustment in the

financial markets alone will be considered, while in the next two sections

the analysis will be extended to the labor and goods markets.

     The economic disturbances which will be of central interest in the

analysis are ones which directly affect one member country's currency

vis-a-vis the dollar. The specific disturbances discussed in this section

are random s,hif,t, between the securities of country 2 and   the   United States,1


     lLlOther types of disturbances are considered in later sections of the
paper.
                                                                                                   i6

with   E(uh2) =      E(u2)     =   0, Euh2) _ah2, Eu2)7 f2' and E(uh2uf2) =
              These capital account disturbances will induce changes in the mark
- °h20f2
price of the dollar. But, in addition, under flexible exchange rates such

disturbances will also change the cross exchange rate between the franc and

the    mark and the franc price of the dollar.
       By using equations (2)               and (3), we can         obtain    expressions for the changes
in    the exchange rates associated with a shift out of country 2's securities

into the dollar security (uh2 -                        '. 0).       Under   flexible exchange rates,

these changes are given by:

                .l       1         H1       h2        h2
              (x     -x0)= x2(u -u0))0,
                                   A
                                                                                                   (5)
                                        1


              (x
                   2 -    2 =          xl    h2
                                            (u
                                                  -   uh2 ) > 0,
                         x0)

              (x12 -
                         x2)       =    (H                 (uh2 -   u2)      0.




This shift out of mark securit3.es causes both dollar rates to rise, but the

mark price of the dollar rises more than the franc price, implying that the

cross exchange rate, the franc price of the mark, must fall. Notice that

the changes in               and X12 are dependent upon the two excess demand coefficients

 discussed earlier. When country l's financial market is highly integrated

 only with the dollar market (so that (H +                           '2)    is relatively large), x12

 must adjust more than X1. When the member countries are highly integrated

 only with one another &2 S relatively large in absolute value), X1 must
                  12
 adjust more than X  .
        In   a union, in contrast, the two dollar exchange rates rise in tandem

 since   the cross rate is fixed:
                                                                                                    17



              (x1     - x) =         H2   11i) (uh2            2) ,                                 (6)




It is readily apparent from expressions (5) and                       (6)   that   formation of the

union reduces the impact of the disturbance on the mark price of the dollar.15

That is because foreign exchange intervention associated with the union helps

to disperse the effects of the disturbance to country l's markets.l6 For the

same reason, the union increases the impact of the disturbance on the franc

price of the dollar. In fact, the change in either dollar exchange rate in

the union is just the average of the changes in the dollar rates in expres-

sion (5).

     To determine the effects of the capital account disturbance on the

general price levels in each country, the expressions for I and                            i2 in (Li.)


are first linearized around their equilibrium values (i =                               = i),   where

all prices and exchange rates are set initially at unity. Using the equa-

tions in (5),         (11   -
                                i)   and (12 -
                                                 Ig)    can be expressed as functions of

                      The variances of i1 and i2 can then be written as follows for
(uh2 -
         u2).
the case of flexible exchange rates:
                                                   2
         2
            =
                                +       + a32              h
         ii      I
                                                                        Flexible Exchange
                 I—
                                                       2                       Rates                (7)
                                 +
             =
         2
                 [_a21(i                   a Gh2
              noted above, O _I2 <Ia. Thus,                                                and
  > H1x2     > (H1
                x2         l)
                      xl >_k±xi•
                                                                  in expressions (5)             (6),



                       2

     l6If both countries experience capital account disturbances, intervention
has the more limited role of evening out any fluctuations in the cross rate.
(See Section iii.)
                                                                            18


The changes in the general price levels depend partly upon the consumption

weights, a... But also important are the excess demand factors determining

(for the case of a shift out of mark securities) how much the mark and franc

depreciate relative to the dollar and how much the franc appreciates relative

to the mark. (See (5) above.)

       Consider first the variance of country 2s price level, 0±2. If there

is a shift from the bonds of country 2 to U.S. bonds, the mark depreciates

relative to both the U.S. dollar and the franc. This mark depreciation raises

the general price level of country 2 by raising both the mark price of U.S.

goods (with weight a23) and the mark price of country lts goods (with weight


a21).
        The effects of capital account disturbances on country l's price level

are not as clear-cut. In response to a shift out of mark bonds, the franc

appreciates relative to the mark and depreciates relative to the dollar.

The franc price    of country 2's goods falls and the franc price of U.S. goods
rises,    so the general price level can rise or fall in response to this

disturbance. The net effect on the price level depends upon the condition:


                  0 as a12 ________
                        13l2)
The two sets of factors involved are the share of country 2's goods and U.S.

goods in country l's consumption (a12 and a13), and the response of the excess

demand for country l's bonds to changes in exchange rates. To examine the

influence of the exchange rates, assume that the consumption shares are equal

 (a12 =
          a13).
                 If the demand for country l's bonds is highly sensitive only
 to   the dollar exchange rate (in which case (H+1 ;2) is large relative to
                                                                                    19


          then     the franc will vary mainly against the mark rather than the

dollar. This would be the case if country l's financial market is more highly

integrated with the dollar market than with country 2's market. The general

price level of country 1 then will fall in response to this disturbance.

The general price level will rise in the opposite case where the member

countries' financial markets are highly integrated with one another but not

with the dollar market. The degree of financial integration between countries

1 and 2, therefore, is a crucial element here.

       There is an interesting intermediate case where the general price level

is stable in the face of this disturbance. If the excess demand for H1 is

equally sensitive to both exchange rates, then increases in the franc price

of U.S. goods will offset declines in the franc price of country 2's goods.

Country l's general price level will be effectively insulated from this

disturbance unless a12 is markedly different from a13.

       Now consider changes in the general price level in an exchange-rate

union where, (x        - x) = (x2 - x) and where   (x1-2   - 2) = 0.   The variances

of the price levels in the two countries are given by:



          all
                   =   a2   2A
                              -
                                        2


                                    —                 Exchange-Rate
                                    -   2                   Union                    (8)

          a        =              H1)
              12                            h2
                       232
Both countries experience changes in their general price level only to the

extent   to which their dollar exchange rates change. And the changes in
and X2 are weighted only by the share of U.S.         goods   in their trade, a13   and

       respectively.
a23,
                                                                             20


    To compare experience in the two exchange-rate regimes, consider first

the case of country 2. Since in a union the cross exchange rate between the

mark and the franc is fixed, that source of variation in country 2's general

price index (with weight a21) is eliminated. In addition, the response of its

dollar exchange rate to any disturbance is reduced because of the effect of

foreign exchange intervention in dispersing excess demand from one country's

market to another. Thus, the variance of      arising from changes in the

mark price of U.S. goods is also reduced. Country 2 clearly gains by joining

the union.

     Country 1, in contrast, may gain or lose. Introduction of the union

will raise the variance of country irs price level if the financial markets

of the member countries are highly integrated, whether or not these markets

are highly integrated with the dollar market. Consider first the case where

the integration with the dollar market is relatively low. In that case,

country l's price level will vary mainly because     varies in response to

this disturbance. But it was shown previously that introduction of the union

increases the movement of X1, so the variance of i1 must be greater in the

union. Secondly, consider the case where the three markets are equally well

integrated. Then, under fully flexible rates, X12 will move in the opposite

direction from X1, thus helping to insulate country l's price level from

the effects of the disturbance.17 By joining the union, country 1 loses

the benefit of this insulation.

     Only    in tbe   where the member countries' financial markets are


     17Note that cuuntry 1 is   insulated from changes in the general price
level but not from changes in   relative prices. Changes in relative prices
between countries 1 and 2 (or   between the U.S. and country i) may be an
independent source of concern   (for example, because they affect resource
allocation).
                                                                                  21


highly integrated with the dollar market alone can a union actually reduce

the variance of I. In that case, the capital account disturbance will have

its greatest impact on the cross exchange rate between the franc and the

mark. By joining the union, country 1 will be able to fix this cross rate

and thereby substitute variability in the domestic price of U.S. goods

for variability in the price of country 2's goods. The more important is

trade between the member countries as opposed to trade with the United

States, the more will the variance of i- be reduced through this effect.18

       The conclusion of this analysis is that an exchange-rate union benefits

one member country but not necessarily the other. The country which is

susceptible to capital account disturbances must gain as a result of the

union, partly because a union stabilizes the important cross exchange rate

between member currencies, but also because the union helps to disperse the

disturbance into the financial market of the other country. The other

country may gain if trade within the union is especially important, but only

if financial markets in the absence of a union         fail   to moderate movements

in the cross exchange rate. therW1se., a union will actually increase the

variance of       price Level.


     l8The general condition is that the variance of             will be reduced by
joining the union only if

                                            +
            a13(H1 - H12)/2      a12(1111       H2) + a13H12.
Note that the first term on the right side of the inequality is positive,
while the second is negative. For the variance of i1 to be reduced, the
share of trade with country 2 must be relatively important, but so also must
the relative impact of the disturbance on the cross exchange rate in the
absence of a union, as reflected in (H1 + &- )
                                            xl
                                            x2




                                                                                       I
                                                                                22


       The next sections of the paper will extend the analysis to the markets

for labor and goods. Section II will introduce equations to explain wages,

domestic prices, and output, and will investigate the response of this

extended model to several tes of disturbances. Section III will then

return to the comparison of exchange rate unions with flexible exchange rates.


            II. Prices and Wages Under Flexible Exchange Rates


       In this section, a simple model of the goods and labor markets will be

introduced. The specification chosen is meant to emphasize the importance of

three factors:

       1. wage indexation behavior by which the labor force protects itself

from the effects of price changes, including those originating in exchange

rate   changes;
       2. direct and indirect   linkages between prices in different countries;

and

       3. varying degrees of substitutibility between foreign and domestic
goods.

The model is meant to   be   general enough to encompass a variety   of different

forms of behavior in the labor and goods markets, but specific enough in

functional form to simplify the analysis.


A. Outline of the Model

       Prices exhibit markedly different behavior under the alternative

assumptions of fixed money wages and fixed real wages. The specification of

wage behavior in this paper is chosen so as to encompass these two extreme

forms of behavior, while allowing for the intermediate possibility of

limited adjustment of nominal wages to prices. If W1 is the money wage of
                                                                                   23



country 1 and I the price index, wage behavior is described by equation (9):


                                 =
                                     (1)1
The exponent, b1, is called the wage indexation parameter, where

                                              19
                             0           1.
                                  b1


This parameter may reflect wage-price linkages embodied in formal indexation

agreements, or may simply reflect the responses of market-determined wages

to price changes. The general price index which is used in determining money

wages, defined earlier in (14), includes foreign as well as domestic prices.

      The price of domestic goods is explained as a function of wages and

the price of foreia goods:


                    lll (P2xl2)12 (xl)C13 1114                                    (10)



Equation (10) may be interpreted as a simple markup equation which relates
                                                                                 114
p1 to wages and the cost of imported materials; in that case, C1(y1/)

is a markup term which varies with output relative to capacity output (s).

The coefficients c11, C12,             would satisfy the inequality c11 +   C12 + c13    1.
                                 c13
Alternatively, the foreign prices may capture the influence of foreign

competition on the domestic price markup.2° Finally, if the domestic industry

is perfectly competitive (with a Cobb-Douglas technology, for example), then

the markup will agai.n vary with output and the coefficients of wages and


     3-9For studies of wage indexation behavior, see Fischer (1977), Gray
(1976), Modigliani and Padoa-Sch±oppa (1978), and Sachs (1979); the latter
two studies deal with open conomies

      20For a similar formulation, see Modigliani and Padoa-Schioppa (1978).
                                                                               24




foreign prices will satisfy the equality c11 + c12 ÷ c13 = 1 (so that

equation (10) is homogeneous of degree one in wages and prices).    Jhichever

interpretation is given to equation (10), the specification is broad enough

to allow for a direct influence of foreign on domestic prices, or to allow

foreign prices to affect domestic prices only indirectly through wage

indexation (in which case, c11 = 1 in the homogeneous case).

        The demand for the output of the domestic industry is expressed as a

function of foreign prices relative to domestic prices as well as an

exogenous element, G1, representing government spending, foreign income, as

well as other variables:21

              1 =
                       xl2)/p2                    1                        (ii)



with g12, g13 ? 0. The coefficients g12 and g13 reflect the degree of

substitutibility between domestic and foreign goods; i± foreign and domestic

goods are perfect substitutes, these coefficients approach a limiting value

of infinity.

        The equations describing behavior in the goods and labor markets

together provide a second relationship between the exchange rate and domestic

price reflecting the impact of foreign prices on the domestic wage and the

price of domestic output. To derive this relationship, equations (9), (14),

 (10) and (11) are linearized around the equilibrium values 0±' prices

             P), wages (w), and the exchange rates (x, x, x2), all of which
 (ps,   P,
are set equal to unity, as well as domestic output (y). After solving

 this system o± equations for the domestic price as a function of the exchange


      2-Similar demand functions are found in Dornbusch (1976) and Sachs
 (1979). Note that equation (11) for simplicity ignores the impact of
 interest rates on aggregate demand.
                                                                                    25



rates and foreign prices, the result is the following equation:



      (-)      = E12P2-P)          + (-)     - (- + E13P3-P) + (x1x, (12)
where E12 =           +              + c1g12)/ - c11b1a11 +
               (c12       c11b1a12                          c1(g12+g13,

           =          +              +             -              +
               (c13       c11b1a13       c1g13)/       c11b1a11       c1(g12+g13.

The coefficients E12 and E13 are crucial parameters in the model since they

incorporate both the direct and indirect influences of foreign prices and

exchange rates on the domestic price.

      Country 1 is said to be fully indexed if these coefficients sum to

unity:         + E13 =     1;   that is, if a rise in the domestic currency prices

of both foreign goods leads to an equal increase in the price of the domestic

good. From the expressions for               and E13, it is evident that a fully

indexed domestic price can arise in two circumstances: In the familiar case

where foreign and domestic goods are perfect substitutes (g12, g13 =

the   sum of these coefficients approaches a limiting value of one; since

consumers treat the domestic and foreign goods as indistinguishable, the law

of one price must hold and changes in the domestic currency prices of the

foreign goods induce equal changes in the price of the domestic good.

Alternatively, if the wage indexation parameter, b1, is equal to one, so

that increases in foreign (or domestic prices) are fully reflected in wage

 costs, then the domestic price will be fully indexed regardless of the degree

 of substitutibility. between domestic and foreign goods.22 In the analysis


      221n addition, the price equation must be homogeneous of degree one
 (c11 ÷ c12 + c13 =       i),
                        so that increases in wage costs and the costs of
 foreign goods are fully passed on to the domestic price.
                                                                            26



to follow, only the latter case of full wage indexation will be referred to,

but the reader may wish to keep in mind the alternative interpretation in

terms of perfect substitutibility between goods.23


B. Interaction Between Prices and Exchange Rates

     In order to investigate the interaction between the wage-price sector

and the asset sector described earlier, consider a simplified version of the

above equations where there is only one foreign country with a price of

and a single exchange rate of X1. Equation (12) can then be rewritten as

follows :2


             (p1-p) =   E1-P) + (x1-x                                      (12')

In Figure 1, the curve WP, reflects the wage-price behavior implicit in (121).

WP has a slope equal to one when the domestic price is fully indexed, and a

slope of less than one otherwise. Similarly, with one foreign country the

asset market equation       country 1 (equation (2)) can be rewritten in

simplified form:25


             (x1-x)   = A1(PPy)     -
                                        (uh1ul)/f                           (2')



As before, AA reflects the inverse relationship between prices and the

exchange rate based on the transactions demand for money.


     23The emphasis on wage indexation reflects recent interest in how the
transmission of disturbances is affected by varying degrees of indexation
in different countries. See, for example, Branson and Rotemberg (1979) and
Sachs (1979).

      211.El is the counterpart of E1 for the case of a single foreign country.

             is the single country counterpart of A'1, while 1/H is the
 counterpart of H/A. Note that A1< 0 and H >0.
                                                                                    27


    Figi.re 1 shows that the domestic price and exchange rate are simul-
taneously determined      by portfolio behavior and wage and price behavior

(where output for the present is assumed to be exogenouly fixed at y1=y).

To examine this relationship in more detail, equations (2') and (12') are

solved to obtain reduced form expressions for            and P1   (expressed   as


deviations from their equilibrium values):


            (x1-x) =      AyE1(P-P)        -
                                               (u-u)/H                              (13)

                                      (l-E-A1y)


            (p1-p1)   =   E1(P-P)     =
                                          E1(u-u)/H                                 (i)
                                      (1-E1A1y)

The change in the general price index for country 1, I, is also written in
simple terms as follows:

             (i'-i)   =
                          a11(P1-P)
                                      +
                                          (l-a11)LP-P)
                                                         +
                                                              (x1-x)7               (15)



Using   this system of equations, we will analyze how prices and exchange

rates respond to two sets of disturbances: a change in the foreign price

and a portfolio shift between domestic and foreign bonds (capital account

disturbance).


     1. Foreign price disturbance

        To emphasize the importance of wage indexation in determining the

response of the system to foreign price changes, we will first consider the

case of fixed exchange rates where the asset curve (A*A* in Figure 1) is

vertical.       A-rise in foreign prices, (       -Ps)   0,     shifts the WP curve up


        26Equation (1)4.) is replaced by (12'), where (x1-x) =          0.
        27Foreign   interest rates are assumed to be constant when foreign prices
rise.
                                                                              28



by less than the change in foreign prices if wages are not fully indexed.

In contrast, with full indexation (the case illustrated), the foreign price

disturbance induces an equal increase in domestic prices. In both cases,

the monetary sector accommodates the increase in prices through an inflow of

foreign exchange reserves and an increase in the domestic interest rate.

With P1 and    increasing by the sane amount, the general price index,   I,
must clearly increase by that amount as well.

     With flexible exchange rates, the economy achieves some insulation from

foreign price disturbances. An increase in the foreign price level induces

an increase in domestic wages and prices, but the money supply can no longer

adjust to accommodate the increase in prices. As a result, the domestic

interest rate rises and the exchange rate falls; the domestic currency price

of foreign goods rises less than the foreign currency price. Therefore, the

price of domestic goods rises less than under fixed exchange rates.

     Consider the case of full indexation illustrated in Figure 1. A rise

in the foreign price level leads to a fall in the exchange rate and rise in

the domestic price as shon. How much P1    rises   and   falls depends upon

the slope of AA (the inverse of A1y) and therefore upon behavior in the

asset market.28 But as long as the economy is fully indexed, the price of


     28i the case where domestic and foreign bonds are perfect substitutes,
so that the demand for each bond is infinitely sensitive to changes in either
interest rate, the domestic economy can be fully insulated from foreign price
increases. Consider the coefficient of the domestic price, A, in the asset
market equation (2); when there is a single foreign country, A1 can be
expressed in terms of the underlying asset demand functions as follows:
                           11 1     1 11
                   A1= h1 -m1'
                          mF(h11() -
where h, h are the derivatives of the domestic bond function with respect
 to the domesdc interest rate and the level of transactions, respectively,
                                                                               29


domestic output (P1), the domestic currency price of foreign output (x'p),

and therefore the general price index, all rise by the swne amount:

(Pf-P)/(l-Aly); since A1        0, this change in domestic prices must be less

than the initial change in foreign prices. The variance of the general

price level in country 1 under full indexation is equal to         =
          2         2
(l-A1y0) ,    whereof   is the variance of the foreign price level.


     2. Capital account disturbance

     In Section I of this paper, a disturbance involving country 2's capital

account was discussed in a model where prices were exogenous. Now that a

wage-price sector has been added, a similar disturbance will be analyzed.

The disturbance takes the form of a shift out of country l's bond into the

foreign (dollar) bond (i-u) 4- 0 in equation (2'), which shifts the AA

curve in Figure 2 to the right. As in the analysis of the asset market alone,

this shift out of the domestic bond leads to a rise in X1 (depreciation of

the home currency). But now that depreciation raises the domestic price as

well, if wages respond to changes in the general price level or if foreign

prices directly influence domestic prices.

     If domestic prices are less than fully indexed (E        1), then   the

capital  account disturbance will lead to a change in the exchange rate
greater than the change in domestic prices (the slope of WP is less than
one).,   Let the terms of trade be defined as the ratio of the price of


(Footnote 28 continued)
and where the money demand derivatives are defined analogously. If domestic
and foreign bonds are perfect substitutes, so that h- =, then A1 = -vO.
The curve AA in Figure 1 becomes flat, and changes in foreign prices therefore
lead to offsetting changes in the exchange rate, while the domestic price
remains constant.
                                                                                          30



domestic goods to the domestic currency price of foreign goods: T =

As a result of the capital account disturbance, this ratio will fall, thereby

making domestic goods more attractive. By equation (ii), domestic demand

and   output    will rise in response to this change in the terms of trade.

        If domestic prices are fully indexed (the case shawri in Figure 2), the

results are quite different.            P1 and X1 both rise as before, but they increase

by the same amount:


               (plp) =      (xlx)   =                                                     (i6)



Therefore, there is no change in the terms of trade, and                 the   general price
                                i       129
level rises as much as P or X


                                        *   ****
        In   the analysis to follow in the next section, these same disturbances

will be analyzed within the context of an exchange-rate union. For this

purpose, the domestic price equation for country 2 is set out below:


                (P2-Pg) =   E2P1-P)         +   (x2-)   -
                                                            (x1-   +   E23P3-P)
                            +   (x2-x7.                                                  (17)


 The coefficients in equation (17) are entirely analogous to those defined

 earlier in equation (12). As in the case of P1,              full     indexation of country

            2                                                21    23
 2s price, P , occurs when the two coefficients (in this case, E + E )

 suni   to   unity.


         29The variance of the general price level is therefore:

                            °Il =   1/(l_A1y)72
                                                                         31



     III. Prices and Exchange Rates in an Exchange-Rate Union


    In Section I, the financial behavior of two potential member countries

of an exchange-rate union was examined in detail. That section showed how

the member countries were affected by a capital account disturbance

originating in the financial market of one member. Formation of the union

unambiguously benefitted the member country suffering the disturbance, but

increased the variance of the general price level in the other country if

the financial markets of the two countries were sufficiently well integrated

in the absence of a union.

     One weaJness of the earlier analysis lay in its assumption of exogenous

wages and prices for the output of each country. In this section, the

earlier analysis will be modified to allow for the type of wage and price

adjustment outlined in Section II. To emphasize how much difference price

adjustment can make, prices will be assumed to be fully indexed in the sense

discussed above.30 Thus, the analyses in Sections I and III may be

considered polar cases representing the extremes of no adjustment and full

indexation of domestic prices.

     Besides extending the earlier analysis of a capital account disturbance

in one market, this section will also consider the effects of two other types

of disturbances: changes in the price of U.S. goods and capital account

disturbances affecting the financial markets of both member countries.




     30Since, in these circuinstazices the terms of trade are constant, changes
in output as given by (11) will be ignored.
                                                                                32




A. Foreign Price Disturbances

     There are some disturb.nces for which an exchange-rate union      is   likely

to make little difference. One example is a change in U.S. prices, which has

its primary impact on both dollar exchange rates,         and X2, rather than on

the cross rate between the currencies of the members, X12.

     Under flexible exchange rates, fluctuations in the U.S. price, P3,

induce changes in the prices (P1, p2) and dollar exchange rates (x1, x2)

of both member countries. Higher U.S. prices, for example, increase wages

and prices in countries 1 and 2. Interest rates rise in both countries,

so X1and X fall cthe franc and mark appreciate relative to the dollar).
           2      /




How much each dollar exchange rate responds to the change in P3 depends

upon the parameters in the asset equations (2), All and Ai2, reflecting the

sensitivity of asset demands to prices, exchange rates, and interest rates.31

Fluctuations in the general price levels of each country similarly depend

upon the asset parameters. If          is   the variance of the U.S. price, then

the variances of    and   i2   under flexible exchange rates are given by:


             =   3/ - (A11+A12)yJ
                                                                               (18)
                                            2

         I2 =             - (A22+A21)ygJ

In an exchange-rate union, the variances of the general price levels are:


         I1 I2 =       p3/ -        (B1+B2)y'7                                 (19)




     3eca1l that in the case of a single foreign country, the change in
X depended upon the slope of the AA schedule reflecting the asset market
parameter, A1. (See Section II.)
                                                                                 33




Since we have assumed that financial behavior in the two member countries is

identical, all of these variances must be equal.32 In the absence of a

union, the dollax exchange rates and prices of countries 1 and 2 respond

alike to changes in U.S. prices. So formation of the union can make no

contribution to price stability.

      If, instead, there were asymmetries between the member countries dependent

on relative size or other factors, the union could play a limited role in

the case of an external disturbance of this type. But that role would be

limited to dispersing any excess demand pressure on the cross exchange rate

arising from differences in the responses of X1 and       to the disturbance.


B. Capital Account Disturbance Involving Country 2's Bonds

      In contrast with the foreign price disturbance, the capital account

disturbance analyzed in Section I has asymmetrical effects on the two member

countries in the absence of a union. As in the earlier discussion, this

disturbance   takes the form   of random shifts between the bonds of country 2

and U.S.   bonds.
       The effects of this disturbance on the price levels in countries 1 and 2

can   best be analyzed by first considering a special case. Suppose that the

financial markets of the two countries are highly integrated only with the

U.S. market. In that case, as shown in Section I, the capital account

disturbance in country 2's market will lead to much larger changes in

(as well as x2) than in X1. These changes have very different implications

for the two countries' price levels.


     32With identical financial behavior in the two countries, All + A12
B1 + B2; in addition, since asymmetries in size are ruled out, y =      y.
                                                                            3L1.




      Country 2 finds that the mark depreciates substantially relative to

both foreign currencies (for the case of a shift out of country 2's bonds);

   rises while X12 falls. As a result, the mark prices of foreign goods

from both the United States and country 1 rise in country 2. With wages and

prices free to vary in country 2, the price of country 2's good also rises.

So country 2's general price level rises.

      Country 1, in contrast, finds itself largely insulated from this dis-

turbance. When domestic prices are fixed, the general price level in

country 1 changes because of variations in X12. But when prices can vary,

the increase in the price of country 2's good offsets the fall in      so

that the franc price of country 2's goods changes much less than when prices

are fixed.33 Since in this case of high integration with the dollar market

the change in     is also small, country l's price level is largely insulated

from this disturbance. Introduction of the union must then increase the

variance of its price level.

       In the more general case where the financial markets of the member

 countries are integrated, country 1 is not as fortunate.   That country's

 price level can increase substantially in response to this disturbance in

 the absence of a union. Yet it is still true that introduction of the union

 increases the variance of country l's price level still further.


                                                     falls, so that the franc
      331t can be shown that P2 rises more than
 pice of country  2's good actually rises, but  by much less than the rise in
 P.
        In this case where the financial markets of the two member countries
 are well integrated only with the dollar market, the excess demand parameters
 in (20) below, x2  and J-2, which measure the cross effects on H- of changes
 in x2 and P2, are both relatively small in absolute value.
                                                                                                                    35



       Consider,             in turn,      behavior          under ftlly flexible rates and in the

union. In this general case it is easy to show that the variance of i1 is

always smaller than the variance of i2 under flexible rates. Compare the

numerators in the expressions for a1 and                                   a12:

                     2
                                     rIl
                 a11— x2'02121 %2,
                               2
                                                     I

                                           AC        I
                                                                                               Flexible
                                 I
                                 I—
                                                                                                       Exchange
                                                                                                    Rates           (20)

                             =                                 2
                 02                                          ah2,


where C =             - y(A            +A'2)J - y(A11-A12)7                       >   0. Recall that Hj (for
j   = 1,2)   measures the response of the excess demand for H1 to changes in

exchange rates, while J1 measures the direct and indirect response of this

excess demand to changes in the level of transactions. Since the own

effects predominate (i.e., -HC I2 0 and J1 -J12 0 as previously

indicated), the numerator of a1 must be smaller than that of a2.

       It is also true that after the union is formed, the two countries share

equally the effects of the disturbance. The variances of i1 and                                               can

be written as:35


             a
                 2
                 Il              12 =      2 1
                                           L
                                                 -            -

                                                              2AC
                                                                           +
                                                                               ljll]2 °h2
                                                                                      j
                                                                                       2
                                                                                       I
                                                                                                    Exchange-Rate
                                                                                                       Union         (21)


       35                .                  -            -                 .
         The variance of either price level )ln                                 the        -
                                                                                       union is:
                                       r        (H -H1)               12
                                 =
                                       L1B1                        B2)2J
                                                                           ah2

Expression (21) can be obtained by multiplying numerator and denominator by
                 then substituting A11 + A12 = B' ÷ B2 and simplifying.
(1-y(A-A12)),
                                                                             36



As shown in Section I, the foreign exchange intervention associated with the

union fixes the cross exchange rate between the franc and   the   mark, and as

a result both currencies vary together relative to the dollar. With P1 and

   exogenous as in Section I, the general price level of each of the member

countries responds to the disturbance only to the extent that each country

trades with the United States. With full indexation, in contrast, the rise

in the domestic currency prices of U.S. goods induces adjustments in P' and

P2; both prices rise as much as the dollar exchange rates. Therefore, the

franc and mark prices of goods from all three countries, and hence the general

price levels, all rise by the same amount. (For that reason, under full

indexation the variances of i1 and i2 do not depend upon the share of each

good in either general price index.)

     Now compare price behavior in the two systems. It is evident from (20)

and (21) that the variance of i1 is raised by formation of the union, while

 the variance of i2 is lowered. So with full indexation, countries 1 and 2

 fare quite differently by joining the union. The country experiencing the

 capital account disturbance gains markedly through the effect of the union

 in dispersing excess demand from its financial market to that of the other

 country.

      How much the other country loses by joining the union depends upon how

 well integrated are the financial markets of the two countries.      With

 financial ties largely confined to the dollar market, country 1 is largely

 insulated from this disturbance under flexible rates, so the loss in price

 stability in joining the union is greatest in this case.    The more integrated

 the financial markets of the members, the less difference a union makes.

      Notice that these results are quite different from those in Section I
                                                                           37



where, in the case of high integration with the dollar market alone, the
union was advantageous for country 1. When prices are        indexed,   higher

integration with the dollar market makes the union even more undesirable

for country 1. Thus, the degree of price indexation interacts in an important

way with financial integration to determine the effects of the union on the

individual countries.


C. Capital Account Disturbances in Both Countries

     When capital account disturbances originate in the financial market of

only one member country, an exchange-rate union disperses the effects of the

disturbances to the financial market of the other member country. If both

countries experience capital account disturbances, in contrast, there may not

seem to be any benefits from union for either country. Yet if the disturb-

ances in each market are not perfectly correlated, both member countries can

benefit from a union.

     Consider the case where the variances of the capital account disturbances

in the two countries are equal: ahl =          In this case, it can be shown
                                        °h2•
that both member countries benefit from the union by reducing the variances

of their general price levels as long as the disturbances are not perfectly

correlated.6 By joining the union, the two countries gain from a

diversification effect by which one disturbance is offset against another.

This gain from diversification is greater the less well integrated are the

financial markets of the two countries in the absence of a union. With a

symmetrical, rather than an asymmetrical pattern of disturbances, the


          member countries gain through the union as long as cov(uhlu12) .
  2     2
 ahl = ah2.
                                                                           38



exchange rate union becomes once again beneficial to both countries.


                            IV. Conclusion


     This paper has focused on a number of important factors which determine

the desirability of an exchange-rate union, including some factors which

militate against joining a union:

     1. How a union affects the individual members depends first of all

on the types of disturbances experienced by the countries of the union. The

title of the paper reflects the emphasis on one particular disturbance involv—

ing the financial markets of the United States and one member country. The

volatility of the dollar exchange rate of that member country disrupts

economic relationships between the two potential members of the union by

changing cross exchange rates between member currencies.

     2. Formation of the union fixes the cross exchange rate, but may

introduce greater variation in the dollar exchange rate of the other member

country. How changes in these exchange rates affect each country depends

upon the share of trade within the union and with the outside world.

     3. How   each country±res in the union also depends upon the degree of
integration between   the financial markets of the countries. Financial

integration is important because it determines how exchange rates adjust to

disturbances in the absence of a union.

     4 Finally, the effect of the union depends upon the degree of wage

and price indexation in the member countries. Price indexation interacts in

a complex way with financial integration to determine the potential gains

or losses of each country in joining the union.
                                                                           39



Under a variety of circumstances, these factors combine to make a union

economically undesirable to one of the member countries, suggesting one of

the reasons why many exchange-rate unions have thus far been unsuccessful.

     Much remains to be done in analyzing the effects of a union. But this

paper has identified a.numberof                     a decision to join a

union should be based and has provided a framework for analyzing these

factors. This framework, consisting of an asset market approach to exchange

rates as well as wage and price equations to explain the interaction between

prices and exchange rates, can be applied to analyze a variety of other types

of behavior in an exchange-rate union.
          Appendix: Explicit Solution of the Financial Model


    When the equilibrium conditions for the money and bond markets of

countries 1 and 2 as given in Table 2 are linearized around their equilibrium

values, the result is expression (1) in the text. The coefficients in this

expression are given below with their expected signs:1


          =   (h(•)-         )(F÷I) + h13(.)(Mg+3+Fg)                 +
                                                                               V0


          =
              -(h(.)-)       V0
                                           -   hi    (.)(Mg+j) -   x3JP0Y0(Fg+)          0,




     J    =
              Vihii+XVgh)Vgm
                                                -                         -         o,


     J1   =                                     -                         -
                                                                              Xh0,
     and J =    iij iiij -
                    V0m.V0m.                   70.
               V0mV0m



H1 H,           =
                    H,   J
Because financial behavior in the two countries is assumed to be identical,

                                  =   J,       and   J J=



     The•dervatives of the money demand functions in Table 2 are denoted by
m, m, m, in for the four arguments o± those functions, respectively; a
similar notation is used for the bond demand functions.

     22 is assumed to be negative. This coefficient would be positive only
if country     demand for country l's bonds were unusually sensitive to
increases in its wealth. A sufficient condition for a negative coefficient
is that the wealth elasticity of country 2's demand for l's bonds be less
than the ratio of total wealth to wealth held in foreign assets; that is,
                                       2.           2...
                12    -  1222 2       V0           V0
              (h (.)       P0y0/V0) 12
                                                    +       2 (xF    2/2)
Note that the latter ratio has to be greater than unity.
                               References


Allen, Polly Reynolds, Organization and Administration of a Monetary Union,
     Studies in International Finance No. 38, Princeton, June 1976.

Branson, William H., "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange Rate
     Determination,t' Seminar Paper No. 66, Stockholm, Institute for Inter-
     national Economic Studies, December 1976.

Branson, William H. and Rotemberg, Julio J., "International Adjustment with
     Wage Rigidity," NBER Working Paper Series No. 1iO6, Cambridge, National
     Bureau of Economic Research, November 1979.

Corden, W.M., Monetary Integration, Essaysin International Finance No. 93,
     Princeton, April 1972.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of
     Political Econoir, December 1976, 1161-1176.

Girton, Lance and Henderson, Dale, "Central Bank Operations in Foreign and
     Domestic Assets under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," in P. Clark,
     et al., eds., The Effects of Exchange Rate Adjustments, U.S. Treasury,
     Washington, 1977.

Fischer, Stanley, "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability," in K. Brunner
     and A. Meltzer, Stabilization of the Domestic and International Econonw
     Vol. 5 of Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
     Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1977, 107-1)48.

Herring, Richard J. and Marston, Richard C., National Monetary Policies and
     ternational Financial Markets, Contributions to Economic Analysis
     No. 1O-i-. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co., 1977.

Gray, Jo Anna, "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of
    Monetary Economic, 2, April 1976, 221-235.

Henderson, Dale, "Modelling the Interdependence of National Money and Capital
     Markets," American Economic Revi, 67, February 1977.

Ingram, James C., The Case for European Monetary Integrations Essays in
     International Finance, No. 98, Princeton, April 1973.

Marston, Richard C., "Cross Country Effects of Sterilization, Reserve Curren-
     cies, and Foreign Exchange Intervention," Journal of International
     Iconomics February 1980, 63-78.

McKinnon, Ronald I., "Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic Reyi3,
     53, September 1963, 717-725.
Modigliani, Franco and Padoa-Schioppa, Tommaso, The Management of an Open
     Econoniy with "lOO Plus" Wage Indexation, Essays in International
     Finance No. 130, Princeton, December 1978.

Mundell, Robert A., "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic
     Review, 51, September 1961, 657-665.

Sachs, Jeffrey, "Wage Indexation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and Macro-Economic
     Policy," International Finance Discussion Papers No. 137, Washington:
     Board of Governors, April 1979.

Thygesen, Niels, "The Emerging European Monetary System: Precursors, First
     Steps and Policy Options," 1979.

Tower, Edward and Willett, Thomas D., The Theory of Optimum Currency}reas
     and Exchange Rate Flexibiliti, Special Papers in International Economics
     No. 11, Princeton, May 1976.
