                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    WILL THE REAL EXCESS BURDEN
                         PLEASE STAND UP?
           (oR, SEVEN MEASURES IN SEARCH OF A CONCEPT)

                       Alan J.   Auerbach

                        Harvey S. Rosen


                     Working Paper No. 495




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper 1/495
                                                                  June, 1980




         Will the Real Excess Burden Please Stand Up?
          (or, Seven Measures in Search of a Concept)


                           ABSTRACT



     It is well understood that a tax wbich distorts relative prices

generates a welfare cost or "excess burden" in addition to any associated

transfer of resources, but there remains considerable controversy and

confusion with respect to procedures for measuring this excess burden.

     The purpose of this paper is to clarify matters concerning what is

one of the most basic concepts in welfare economics. We describe and

evaluate a number of alternative conceptual experiments which might lie

behind an excess burden calculation, showing how these notions can be

represented graphically and algebraically and how they can be approximated

numerically.




Harvey S. Rosen                            Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics                    Econom es Department
Princeton University                       Harvard University
Princeton, N.J. 08544                      Cambridge, MA   22138
National Bureau of Economic Research       National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                        Cambridge, MA 02138

(609) 452—4022                              (617) 868—3927
I. Introduction


     It is well understood that any tax (or subsidy) that distorts relative

prices away from a pareto optimum generates a welfare cost or "excess burden"

in addition to any associated transfer of resources. With respect to proce-

dures for measuring excess burden, however, there is considerable controversy

and confusion. We think this Is attributable to two main causes. First of

all, various investigators have had different conceptual experiments in mind

when computing excess burden. Second, given the choice of conceptual experi-

ment, methods used to represent and numerically approximate excess burden

can vary, and few authors have made their choices

explicit.

     The purpose of this paper is to clarify matters concerning the theory

and measurement of what is one of the most basic concepts in welfare economics.

In the following section, we describe a number of alternative conceptual

experiments which might lie behind an excess burden calculation, how these

notions can be represented graphically and algebraically, and appropriate

methods for approximating them numerically. In Section III we evaluate the

various measures on the basis of several criteria. Section IV contains

explicit numerical simulations to illustrate some of the issues raised in

Section III. We conclude the paper with a summary and suggestions for future

research.




II. Alternative Measures of Excess Burden


     Suppose that the government levies a proportional tax on a commodity.

The excess burden of the tax equals the loss in welfare due purely to the
                                    —2—


tax—induced distortion in relative prices. Though this is the standard

definition, it begs two important questions. First, there is no indication

of how this loss in welfare ("utils") is to be converted into a dollar

measure. Second, though this loss may depend on the disposition of tax

receipts, the definition fails to specify how they are used. Although

various resolutions of these ambiguities have been suggested, it is not

always clear how their differences affect the excess burden measure. This

section shows how various concepts of excess burden arise, and how these

measures can be represented and approximated.



A. Consumers' Surplus Measures

     The simplest representation of any welfare change resulting from a change

in price is Marshall's notion of consumers' surplus. Consider an individual

with endowment y0 who consumes some quantity of a commodity x when its price

is p0. Figure 1 depicts the ordinary demand curve for x, D(y0), where the

presence of y0 in parentheses indicates that money income is held constant

as price varies. Suppose first that, for some reason, the price of x rises

to    with no change in income or other prices. Consumer demand drops to

and the loss in consumers' surplus is defined by the area pTACPO. The intui-

tive idea here is that the height of the demand curve represents a willingness

to pay for each successive unit of x, so that the integral over x of the

difference between this amount and the actual price represents a rent to the

consumer.

     Now, suppose further that this price increase from p0 to p is due

entirely to the imposition of a tax; that producer prices are fixed and

profits are zero.1 Under these circumstances, government collects revenue
                                             —3—


equal to the area p1ABp0 which, by assumption, is disposed of in a way which

has no repercussions on the demand for x. Thus, the loss in consumers'

surplus exceeds collected revenue by the area ABC, which we may view as the

excess burden due to the tax.

    As drawn in Figure 1, the demand curve D(y0) is not linear. Typically,

investigators use some second—order Taylor approximation in calculating the

area ABC, which has the effect of assuming the demand curve to be linear and

therefore makes the measured area a triangle. One such approximation is

represented in Figure 1 by the area A'B'C, which is obtained by taking the

excess burden to be a function of price and expanding around the initial price
                             x(y0,p)
p0. This area equals —                                  . (Ep),   where x(.) is the ordinary

                                                 p=pO

demand function and Lp = p    —          One could just as easily have expanded
                                  p0.
around the final price p, which would yield the area ABC', or around one of

the quantities x0 and x. This is entirely an arbitrary decision, as is that

to use a second—order rather than a higher—order approximation.2 In this

paper, we will generally follow the common convention of using a second—order

expansion around the initial point suggested by the conceptual experiment.

     Figure 2 presents the general equilibrium analogue of Figure 1 for the

case where there are two goods, consumption x and leisure 9., and the consumer

has an initial endowment y0 of labor, which we take as numeraire. The slope

of the initial budget line is —              .      Point   c represents the initial
                                        p0
consumption point and corresponds to point C in Figure 1. At this initial

equilibrium, the consumer attains a utility level U00, as shown by the

tangency of the initial budget line and the indifference curve labelled u00.

The rise in price to p is depicted by a flattening of the budget line, with
                                    —4—


utility dropping to U0 at point a, corresponding to point A in Figure 1.

As the budget line pivots downward, the purchases of x trace out the demand

curve D(y0) between p0 and p. The tax revenue collected, corresponding to

the area pTABpO in Figure 1, equals the horizontal distance between the two

budget lines starting at point a.

     Although the consumer's surplus measure is used fairly often4 to repre-

sent the extent to which the utility loss between U00 and U0 exceeds in

money terms the revenue collected, it suffers from a number of problems, the

most important of which is the way it converts utils to dollars. As is well—

known, consumers' surplus is a consistent measure of any price—induced welfare

change only when there are no income effects in the demand for the affected

good(s). In general, if more than one price changes, the measure of the

total welfare effect is not single—valued, but depends on the path of the

price changes. For example, if two prices increase, one will find two

different measures of the induced welfare loss depending on which price is

assumed to increase "first." Related to this problem of path—dependence is

the result that if several prices change, leaving utility unaffected, the

consumers' surplus change taken by adding over affected markets in any

particular order is unlikely to be zero.

     In their efforts to "rehabilitate" consumers' surplus, Hicks (1946)

and, more recently, Willig (1976) have discussed the potential error involved

in using consumers' surplus as a measure of welfare loss. Willig has shown

that in many cases, the difference between consumers' surplus and other

measures which do not suffer from the above shortcomings is very small relative

to the size of the welfare loss itself. However, these results relate to the

accuracy of the area pACpo as a measure of total welfare loss, not to the

accuracy of area ABC as a measure of the excess burden. Indeed, because
                                    —5—

excess burden is a second—order effect, it may well be true that consumers'

surplus leads to a very poor measure of excess burden.5 We will elaborate

upon this point once we have introduced the other methods for measuring

excess burden.



B.   Income Compensation Measures

     As just noted, in the consumers' surplus measure of excess burden, taxes

are assumed spent in such a way that there are no repercussions on the demand

for the taxed goods. Harberger (1974), reasoning along lines suggested by

Hotelling (1938), offers a different conceptual experiment:

     When a new tax or set of taxes is imposed, we conceive of it

     as being counterbalanced by a pattern of lump—sum subsidies

      (and possibly lump—sum taxes) which keeps the relative distribution

     of income unchanged. (p. 22)

For our one—consumer, two—good economy, this experiment is illustrated in

Figure 3, where the initial equilibrium of point c is again depicted.. Here,

as the tax is levied, causing the slope of the budget line to decrease,

revenues are simultaneously rebated. The consumer takes these rebates to be

unrelated to purchases of x. Thus, the equilibrium must be characterized by

two conditions:

       (i) the marginal rate of substitution equals the post—tax price ratio

                  and

      (ii) the optimizing bundle, shown at point d, lies on the initial budget

           line through point c.

In effect, then, the equilibrium is found by taking a budget line whose slope

is given by post—tax prices, and 'sliding' it down the original budget line
                                       —6—

until a tangency with an indifference curve occurs at the intersection of the

two lines, as is true at d. Note that at this point, the individual's

endowment y2 is implicitly defined by the expression


              =
                  y0   +p x(y2,p)                                              (1)




     Following our earlier convention, we denote the utility attainable at

endowment y2 and price p as U2. Since U00 > U2         ,   and the government keeps

no revenue, there is an excess burden, measured in utility terms by (Uoo_U2T).

In his writings, Harberger devotes his effort to developing and explaining a

second—order Taylor approximation, which is pictured in Figure 4. If we let

Dh(y0) represent the demand curve generated when the government rebates all

revenues as p rises, then point D in Figure 4, the point on this demand curve

at p =   T' corresponds   to point d in Figure 3.   (Note that, by construction,

the regular demand curve D(y2) would also pass through point D.) The drawing

of this income—compensated demand curve as steeper than the ordinary one

corresponds to the assumption that x is a normal good.

     Harberger measures excess burden by the area DEC, and, following Hotelling,
                                                                        h
suggests a Taylor approximation around the initial price of —       i
                                                                    ,x(y,p)
                                                                         0
                                                                                          .p )
                                                                    2    p
                                                                                     p0
where xh(.)            is the income—compensated demand for x. This approximation

yields the familiar "Harberger triangle" D'E'C as a measure of excess burden.

However, as we shall see later, the conceptual experiment depicted in Figure 3

lends itself to other interpretations which lead to alternative measures.

Unfortunately, Harberger's method suffers from the same difficulties as the

simpler consumers' surplus approach. Once again, by taking an area under a

demand curve where different points correspond to different levels of utility,
                                        —7—


path—dependence and related problems are encountered. These problems are,

perhaps, "less bad" here because the utility changes are smaller along Dh than

along D, but in general one cannot obtain a quantitative measure of the

relative errors.



C. Utility Compensation Measures

     Building upon the work of Mohring (1971), Diamond and McFadden (1974)

have proposed a definition of excess burden that differs from Harberger's:

     •   . .We shall define the deadweight burden, or loss, as the excess

     of the income we give a consumer to restore him to his pre—tax

     indifference curve over the tax revenue collected from him... While

     it is not clear that this is the most intuitive notion, for consis-

     tency we measure the tax revenue for this definition as the level

     collected at the consumer equilibrium after the consumer has been

     restored to his original Indifference curve.         (p. 5)

Note that the compensation process is defined in terms of utility, not income

as in the Harberger experiment.

     Figure 5 presents a general equilibrium representation of the Diamond—

McFadden experiment. Again, the initial budget line has slope —    and passes
                                                                p0
through c. Its intercept on the horizontal axis is y0, the consumer's labor

endowment. The new budget line faced by the consumer is one which allows

attainment of the initial utility level, at point f, and has slope —          •   By

construction, this new budget line must intersect the horizontal axis at the

endowment necessary to attain utility level 1J00 at price p. A convenient

algebraic representation of this distance is given by the expenditure function6

E(U00,p) =             (We use the convention here that      =   E(U.,p.).)
              E0   •
                                            —8—

     Within the framework, the excess burden is measured by the extent to which

tax revenue raised in the new state falls short of the increment in endowment,

(E0 —          needed to attain U00. It is depicted in Figure 5 by the distance
        y0),
between y0 and the horizontal intercept, z0, of the line which has slope —
                                                                                            p0
and passes through the new equilibrium point f. Since y0 =                              we may
                                                                           E(U00,p0),
express this distance as

          E(U00,p) - E(U00,p0)        -
                                          LIp.xC(U,p).                                    (2)

where c(.) is the utility compensateddemand for x.

     To interpret this conceptual experiment in terms of the area beneath a

demand curve, note that by definition the demand for xalong u00 as p increases

from p0 to p is xC(U00,p), represented by the demand

curve D'(U00) in Figure 6. Point F corresponds to point f in Figure 5. It is

not hard to see that the area p FCp0 is in fact exactly equal to the increase

in expenditure (E0 —               Since the derivative of the expenditure function
                        y0).
E(U,p) with respect to p is Xc(U,P),7 it follows that

                               p                      pT E(U00,p)
           area(pFCpü) =   f TXc(U        p)dp   =                    dp                  (3)

                           p0                        p0
                           E(UOO,pT) — E(U00,p0) =                —
                                                             E0       y0


Moreover, since the revenue collected is the area pFGp0, the area of FGC

equals the excess burden (z0 —
                                     y0) shown in Figure 58 That this measure is
not path—dependent is evident from the fact that its expression in (2) depends

only on the initial and final equilibrium.9

     Even though the region FGC is smaller than the "Harberger" area DEC

(again, assuming that x is a normal good), its Taylor approximation around
    10 .                              1
                                         Xc(U             oo"'
                                                            2
                     .    .
       is the same, since it equals —                  CAp)   and the slopes of
p0                                            p     p0
                                         —9—


income—compensated and utility—compensated demand curves are equal at their

point of intersection.     Thus, once again, excess burden is approximated by

the area of the triangle D'E'C. This result is, in a way, unfortunate,

because it obscures the fact that the underlying measures really do differ.

      The form of the utility compensation approach just outlined is described

by Hicks( 1946) as "compensating variation": the additional income that must

be given to the consumer to compensate for the introduction of the distortion

assuming all tax revenues as rebated. One can also imagine constructing a

measure based on Hicks' "equivalent variation": the amount of income the

consumer would be willing to relinquish to be rid of the distortion. To

derive such a measure,11 we imagine starting out at the post—distortion equil-

ibrium shown by point d in Figure 7 (repeated from Figure 3), where y =          and
                                                                           y2
  =      and ask how much we can lower y if p is lowered to p0, given that

utility must remain at U2. By definition, the income required to attain

utility level U21 at price p0 is E(U2 ,p0), shown as Ein Figure 7. Thus,

since tax rebates drop from (y2 —
                                     y0) to zero as p drops from p1 to p0, and
the equilibrium shifts to point h, the consumer is willing to give up an addi-

tional sum equal to12


          E(U2,p) — E(U2    ,p0) —   L\p.xC(U2,p)   .                       (4)

It is at once evident from comparing (4) to (3) that the two utility—compensa-

tion measures of excess burden differ only in the choice of base utility

level. In particular, the measure in (4) will equal the area under the com-

pensated demand curve calculated at utility U2. This is shown by the area

DEll in Figure 8, the left shaded area. Note that the utility—compensated

demand curve Dc(U21) intersects the income—compensated demand curve Dh1(y0) at
                                        — 10 —




point   D, the starting point of the conceptual experiment just described. (The
                                             x(U ,p               2
                                                                           For purposes
corresponding Taylor approximation is —                    (Ap)       ).


of comparison, we also shade the area FCC, which we showed represents the

compensating variation of the distortion. Note that, as long as x is normal,

each of these areas must be smaller than the area DEC, Harberger's measure of

excess burden.

        Though this equivalent variation measure is also path independent, it is

distinct from the compensating variation approach of Diamond and McFadden.

This difference may be represented as an index number problem in the choice of

which prices to use in measuring a change in real income. Looking first at

the compensating variation, we recall that equation (2) defines the distance

between y0 and z0 in Figure 9. Since the original budget line through point

c also passes through point d, we are also measuring the income required to

move from point d to point f. These are the points on the indifference curves

U2 and U00 which would be chosen by the consumer when       =              Now consider

our equivalent variation measure, which equals (y0 —    E).       This also measures

the income required to go from point h to point c, the points on u2T and u00


which would be chosen at p =         Thus, our two measures of excess burden
                               p0.
offer two measures of the real income difference between u00 and                one,

compensating variation, at post—tax prices and the other, equivalent variation,

at pre—tax prices.

    We suggested earlier that the problem with Harbergers notion of excess

burden lies not in his conceptual experiment, but in its implementation. As

we have just demonstrated, both of the measures discussed in this section are

nothing more than income measures of the utility loss caused by introducing the

price distortion while refunding revenue, which is precisely Harberger's way of
                                         — 11 —




looking   at the problem. Unfortunately, his demand curve measure corresponds

to neither of the Hicksian variations.

     The choice between compensating and equivalent variation is no easier

than the choice of a price index. To paraphrase a point first made by Hicks,

the compensating variation of introducing a distortion equals the equivalent

variation of removing it. We could ask how much the consumer must receive to

compensate for a distortion being introduced, or how much he must be given in

place of the distortion being removed. Thus, our choice may depend on which

we consider to be the logical "initial situation." As pointed out by Hause

(1975), if we are starting at some situation a, the equivalent variations of

going from a to    and a to y (where    and y are two alternative situations)

are the same if and only if the consumer's utility is the same at     and y.

The measures are comparable because we use the same set of prices, those effec-

tive at a, in the two calculations. Since the compensating variations of

these two movements use different price ratios (those prevailing at     and y,

respectively) they are not exactly comparable. Thus, if a is the initial

point, we may wish to use equivalent variation as a measure of the welfare

change between a and .    However, if    is the initial point, the same argument

suggests that we should use the equivalent variation between     and a, which is

the compensating variation between a and 13.



D. The Disposition of Revenues

     In the previous two subsections, we have focused on measures centered

around the Initial, pre—tax point, labelled C in Figure 8 (and c in Figure 9).

We could just as easily have started at point A, assuming the initial condi-

tion to be with the tax already imposed. For example, performing Harberger's
                                       — 12 —




experiment, we could have asked how much lower utility is in the post—tax
situation at A than it would have been had the same revenue been raised

through lump sum taxes. This experiment is depicted in Figure 10. Point a

represents the post—tax equilibrium, chosen at income y0 and price p and

yielding utility UQT (see Figure 2). Point i is the equilibrium which would

have occurred had the government instead collected the same amount of revenue

through lump sum taxes. Here, the individual would begin with net endowment

y1 and face price p0. Because of the distortion, U0< U10 even though

government revenue is the same in the two cases. The relationship between

points i and a is the same as that between c and d in Figure 3, except that

the first two points lie on the post—revenue budget line through y1, the

latter set on the initial budget line through y0.

      As before, we can measure the utility loss (U10—UY by compensating

variation or equivalent variation,13 measuring the distance between the indif—

ference curves at points chosen when p = p      (starting at point a) or at points

chosen when p =
                  p0 (starting at point 1). In terms of the expenditure function,
we express these measures as:


          E(U10,p) — E(U10,p0) — LpxC(U10,p)              (compensating)
                                                                             (5)
          E(UqP) —     E(U0 ,p0) —   pxc(U0,p)            (equivalent)


We could picture them in Figure 8 by drawing the income—compensated demand

curve D1'(y1) which passes through point A, and then adding the utility—compen-

sated demand curves Dc(U0) and Dc(U10). The first of these two curves passes

through point A, and the second passes through the point where the Dh(y1)

curve intersects the p0 price line. The corresponding Taylor approximations

are
                                                   — 13 —



— 1
                                   2
 --           p
                            (ip)       for the compensating variation and
                       P0
         C
             (1J0,p)               2
—
    -                       (np)       for the equivalent variation.



E. Summary

        In Table 1, we collect the various measures of excess burden.

(The blanks in the table are due to the fact that, as stressed

above, neither simple consumers' surplus nor the area under the

income—compensated demand curve lends itself to an interpretation in terms

of the underlying preference structure. A natural question at this point is

whether the. various measures are all that different. We provide below some

simulation results which illustrate how the measures and their approximations

depend on the size of the distortion and the structure of consumer preferences.




III. Evaluating the Measures


        The investigator trying to decide whether or not to use a given measure

is likely to ask at least three questions:

        (a) Is the conceptual experiment appropriate?

        (b) Are the informational requirements necessary to implement the measure

               reasonable?

        Cc) How serious are aggregation problems?

We consider each of these questions in turn.



A. The Conceptual Experiment

        As Table 1 illustrates, the various measures differ with respect to the

"initial" level of income and the set of prices used for comparing alternatives.
                                       — 14 —



We   pointed out above that the second of these differences is an index number

problem, with the basis of choice being what the actual initial state of the

economy is. The issue of which income level to use is a bit tricky. One

might want to argue on a priori grounds that the pre—tax level is appropriate,

since in a general equilibrium setting, if the economy as a whole is to stay

on its budget constraint, the resources raised through taxation must be

returned in some form. From a behavioral point of view, however, a case can

be made for the post—tax measures. For many taxes, it is unclear in what form

individuals reclaim the receipts, if at all. (See, e.g.,Kay 1980, p. 112.) To the extent

this is the case, then, measuring excess burden around post—tax income will be more approiate

      A third way in which measures differ is thether they are exact or some

Taylor approximation of an exact measure. Since use of the latter must

inherently introduce some error (assuming the exact measure is appropriately

chosen), there must be some other argument in its favor. Typically this deals

with the amount of information necessary to use it.



B. Informational Requirements

      An important consideration for the applied welfare economist is how much

information is required to implement each measure. In this section we consider

this issue in a setting where the investigator has data on the individual's

economic behavior (e.g., from a cross—section sample). In section C below we

examine the problem when only aggregate demands are known.

      The consumers' surplus appears to be the easiest measure to implement.

All that is required is an econometric estimate of the ordinary demand curve.

With that in hand, it is a simple matter to integrate underneath it, and find

the relevant areas.
                                     —15—


    On the other hand, the "exact" formulations of Table 1 seem to have

greater informational requirements. One must "know" the entire utility

function into order to implement these measures.'4 But the differences in

informational requirements are more apparent than real. In order for the

whole welfare economics exercise to make sense, it must be assumed that the

ordinary demand curve is generated by some utility function. But if this is

the case, then it is in general possible to integrate the demand function to

find the utility function that generated it)5 Alternatively, one can postulate

ordinary demand curves based upon a specific utility function from the coef-

ficients of the demand equation.16

     In short, the information requirements for the consumers' surplus

measure and the exact measures are virtually identical. Why, then, are the

consumers' surplus measures used so much more than expenditure function

measures? There are several explanations. In some cases, the functional

specification of the ordinary demand curve is sufficiently complicated that

integration is infeasible. In other cases, consumers' surplus measures are

implemented without an explicit demand function. Rather, 'consensus' values

of price elasticities are culled from the literature, and these are used to

approximate the excess burden triangle.'7 Thus, there is no function under

which to integrate. Finally, it may be that some investigators believe that

their econometric estimates are only a rough approximation to the demand

curve, and are not willing to view them as having been generated by a utility

function.

    We turn now to the second—order Taylor approximations of Table 1. All

the information required to implement them is also in the ordinary demand

curve, The latter allows estimation of income effects and uncompensated price

effects, and the Slutsky equation shows how to combine these in order to find
                                       — 16 —




approximations to the compensated price responses needed in Table 1. In a
sense, then, it is hard to understand why one would ever use an approximation.

If the utility function itself can be inf erred from the ordinary demand curve,

why settle for the approximation? As before, the approximations may be

preferred to their exact analogues when either: (a) The investigator has

elasticity estimates but no explicit demand curve, or (b) integration of the

ordinary demand curve is infeasible.

     We conclude that if the ordinary demand function for an individual is

available and feasible to integrate, then the expenditure function formulations

can and should be implemented. In cases where only price and income effects
                                                                              18
are available, then the corresponding Taylor approximations should be used.

Only when the sole piece of information is the ordinary price elasticity of

demand is it necessary to rely upon the consumer's surplus measure.



C. Aggregation Problems

     We now turn to the question of the relative merits of the various

measures when information regarding behavior comes to the investigator in

aggregate form. For example, much of the debate concerning the excess burden

of capital income taxation is based upon elasticities from aggregate savings

functions.

     There are two separate problems which arise when an investigator must

deal with aggregate data. First, as is well—known, aggregate demand functions

will correspond to some underlying "aggregate" preference ordering or utility

function only under very special conditions: in general, the Engel curves of
                                                         19
each household must be linear and possess the same slope.     If these condi—

tions fail to be met, there exists no "aggregate individual" to whom we can
                                     — 17 —




apply the exact measures derived above. However, even if these conditions do
not obtain, it may be feasible to compute an exact utility function by applying

Roy's Identity to the aggregate demand equation, either by imposing the

assumption that the equation correspond to an underlying utility function, or

being fortunate enough for this constraint to be satisfied by unconstrained

estimates. Should this "pseudo—utility function" be used to calculate excess

burden? The answer is, not necessarily. If preferences differ among house-

holds, then by applying one of the exact measures to the aggregate consumer

we will misrepresent the actual loss, which should be calculated by summing

the losses incurred by individual households. This leaves us in a rather

unsatisfactory position. What should we calculate when we lack the disaggre—

gated data necessary for an exact answer? There are two possibilities:

        Ci) An exact measure generated by the aggregate individual's

            expenditure functions if the latter can be computed

        (2) A second—order approximation of (1) (If no utility function can

            be computed, this is the only option.)

In the next section we evaluate these options using simulations.




IV. Simulation Results

     In this section, we seek to answer two questions. First, given that any

of the four exact measures of excess burden seem equally preferable a priori,

how different can they be? In some sense, we are asking how wide the bounds

are on the excess burden being measured. Second, how good are the exact and

second—order measures as estimates of the excess burden when applied to

aggregate data?
                                                      — 18   —

      Consider a simple example. Suppose that, as above,
there are two commodities, goods and leisure, the

former having relative price p. Suppose further that each consumer maximizes

a Cobb—Douglas utility function:
                                       1

              U1 =    (x')°'()                                                    (6)



where x1 and           are consumption of goods and leisure by individual i and

is a taste parameter. The consumer's budget constraint is:

               i
              DX +i              I
                                                                                  (7)


where y is individual i's endowment or "full income" (including compensating

taxes or transfers where appropriate).

       To solve for the various measures in Table 1, we must know the compensated

demand function for x, the indirect utility function, and the expenditure

function which correspond to (6) and (7). These three functions are, respec-

tively (suppressing superscripts)


             Xc(U,P) =
                       a
                                 l1_a)p(l)U                                     (8a)

                              (1—a) —a
             v(y,p) = a (1—a)      p y                                          (8b)

              E(U,p) =      a(l_a)paU                                           (8c)



All that remains before applying the formulas in Table 1 is to calculate y1

and y2. The first is less than y0 by the amount of revenue collected when

y =        and p = p       ; the second equals the amount of income which results when
      y0
the price is raised to, p with all revenues rebated. Thus,


                  =        —                                 c         20
             y1       y0       ip.x(y0,p   )   = y0   —
                                                          tpx (U0,p)            (9a)


                  =        + ip.x(y2,p )       = y0 + px(U2,p)                  (9b)
                      yO
                                             — 19 —



                                                                pT—p0
Substituting (8) into (9a) and (9b), and letting i equal                 ,   we obtain:


          y1 = y0(l—aT)                                                            (l0a)

             =                                                                     (lOb)
                 y0/—cT)

     We can now use (8) and (10) to solve explicitly for the four utility—

compensated measures outlined in Table 1. The results are shown in Table 2.

The four exact measures can be summarized by the expression


          [(lT)a(1cLT) — 1]                                                         (11)
                                    (P0/P)Y
where i and j are the indices that correspond to the subscripts of the utility

level, U1, appropriate for the particular formulation. Because (l_T)a < (1—aT)

for all a between 0 and 1, the largest estimate of excess burden is compensating

variation at pre—tax income (CV1), the second largest is equivalent variation

at pre—tax income (EV1), with the two post—tax measures following in the

same order. From largest to smallest, the measures differ by a factor of

(1T)a. For a =    .5,   this means the smallest measure is about lO—l/2 percent

lower than the largest if t =       .2,   but almost 30 % lower if T =   .5.    As one

would expect, the bigger the price change, the more severe the Index number

problem. Similarly, the bigger is a, the share of the taxed good, the bigger

the differential. For T =     .2,   If a equals .8, the differential is 16%. If

a equals .2, it is reduced to 4%. In general, then, there is sensitivity

among the measures to tax rates and tastes, but the bounds present for a

typical case do not seem unreasonably large. Perhaps what we should gain from

this exercise is the realization that even ttexactH measures do differ, and

substantially so if one Is considering substantial tax changes.
                                        —20—


        Turning to the Taylor approximations, the four measures are suimnarized

by the equation

               T               2
                                   y.                                         (12)



where i and j are, as before, the indices of the utility level appearing in

the relevant expression. Here, the differences can be quite substantial, even

for reasonable parameters. For example, if T =      .2,   the CV1 measure is more

than 50% larger than the EV11 measure. Clearly, the linearization of demand

curves makes the choice of initial point important.

     We now consider the aggregation question. First note that the

individual's demand for x is


            x1(y',p) =                                                        (13)

However, the investigator using aggregate data estimates


            x(,p) =                                                           (14)

where      is aggregate income and a is the average value of c, weighted by

income. Clearly, it is easy to apply Roy's Identity to (14) and find the

associated utility function. But a glance at equation (13) indicates that

the income slopes of our two individuals differ. Therefore as noted above,

the use of equation (14) to compute excess burden for the aggregate individual

will generate an erroneous result.

     In light of that fact, an investigator faces several questions:        (a) If

he uses an expenditure function based on (14), how far will his exact measure
                                               21
of excess burden depart from the "true" one?        (b) If all he has are price

and income responses from the aggregate demand function, (and cannot work back
                                                   — 21 —




to   the "aggregate individual" expenditure functlon), how far will measures

based upon the second order approximation depart from the true one? (c) When

there is a choice between (a) and (b), which should be used? Question (c) is

non—trivial: Given the fact that approximion error is involved in either

case, the additional error caused by the second—order approximation might be

unimportant or, conceivably salutary.

         In Table 3 we present simulation results for the first measure of compen-

sating variation for the case where

     =   .3   and   =   .7,   so that a =    .5.   Reading from

left to right, the columns present the tax rate t,                the   correct measure of

excess burden (expressed as a fraction of measured income), the measure calculated
                                            22
from the aggregate demand curve,                 and their respective Taylor approximations.

For small tax rates, the aggregation error is small, as is the approximation

error. For example, for t           = .05,    the aggregation error is only 5.6 %,     while
the approximation error is —5.00 %.                Making both errors actually helps; the
approximation of the aggregate measure is only .4 % above the correct value.

         When taxes increase, the aggregation error remains roughly constant at

5.6 % of the actual excess burden. However, though the second—order approxi-

mations differ little from each other, they both misrepresent substantially
                          23                            .
th,e actual excess burden.            Other simulations not presented corroborate this

qualitative result. While this is of course a rather specific example, it

does suggest that even though the aggregate individual expenditure function

does not "really" exist, it may nevertheless be a very useful tool for welfare

cost measurement. When available, it should be given as serious consideration

as second order approximations.
                                     —    —




V.   Concluding Remarks


      Our intent has been to provide for the practitioner a guide to the theory

and estimation of the excess burden of taxation. The first step was to

explain precisely the differences between the several measures that have

appeared in the literature. We then indicated how the choice of a measure

depended upon the conceptual experiment relevant to the investigator's

concern.

     A major practical problem we discussed was how much information is

required to implement each measure. This question is particularly important

because for a number of issues, the relevant data come to us only in aggregate

form (say, in a time series), and we therefore lack information on the under—

lying structure of preferences in the population. Some simulation results

suggest that treating an aggregate demand function "as if" it were generated

by a single utility function yields quite reasonable estimates of excess

burden.
                 Figure 1                                          Figure 3
            Consumers' Surplus                                Income Compensation Illustrated

    p                                                   x

                                                            U00
                   D(Y0)


                                A
1T



                                                                     C


p0




                        x_
                            T
                                         x0        x                            YO Y2




                 Figure 2
     A General Equilibrium Analogue                                Figure 4

 x                                                            The "Harberger Triangle"
                                                        P
                                                                            DF(Y0)
                                                                     D (Y
Yo
P0
                                                       P
Yo                                                      T
P
 T


                    C

                                                                                          C
                                     slope =   —       P0
                                                   0




                                    YO                                                        x
                                                                                     xO
                                                               Figure 7
             Figure 5                                 An Equivalent Vatiation Measure
        Utility Compensation Illustrated
x                                                x

        00

                                                      U
                                                          2t




                        f
                                                                          d




                            YZ   E
                            0 0 00                                            E:
                                                                                   Yo '2




             Figure 6                                          Figure 8
        An Exact "Partial Equilibrium" Measure
                                                      A Comparison of Approaches

P                                                P
                                                                                    DC (U00)
                                                                 D (Y




P                                                P                                   F
    t                                             T




P0




                                     x                                                         x
     Figure 9
 An Index Number Problem



00




                                        —
                                             1
                              slope =
                                              0




                      Y         Z
                .r        0         0




     Figure 10
Post—Tax Measures




                  1

                 P0




                yl Y0                   2.
                                                   Table    1


                                            Excess Burden Measures
                             Initial    Initial                       Exact                            Taylor
     Concept                 Income     Prices                       Measure                        Appr oximation

                                                                                                1   x(y0,p)                           2
Consumers' Surplus
  (Laidler 1969)
                                                                                            —-           p                p0

                                                                                                     h
                                                                                                1X(y0,p)
Consumers' Surplus           pre—tax                                                                                           (p)2
                                                                                                2        Bp
w/income compensation                                                                                                     p0
  (Harberger 1964)

                                                                                                    xy,p)
Consumers' Surplus           post—tax                                                                                          (L )2
w/ income compensation
                                                                                            -            p                p0


                                                                                                1   X(U0,P)
Compensating Variation       pre—tax    post—tax                                                                                   ( p) 2
                                                      E(UOO,pT)—E(UOO,pO)                   -            p
  (Diamond and McFadden                                                                                                    p0
                     1974)
                                                      _Apx'(Uoo,pT)

Compensating Variation       post—tax   post—tax                                            —
                                                                                                i X(U10,P)
                                                      E(U00,p)—E(U00,p0)                        2        p
                                                                (U
                                                                          'T
                                                                                                1   _________
Equivalent Variation         pre—tax    pre—tax       E(U2      'T2T ,p0                        2        a
                                                      px(U2 'T                                        c
                                                                                                1         (U        ,p)
                                                                                                               UT                         2
Equivalent Variation         post-tax   pre—tax       E(U       'p       )—E(U      'p 0)
                                                                     T         OT               2        p
  (Kay 1980)                                                                                                                   T
                                                       APXc (U0 1T
                                       Table 2

                                A Cobb—Douglas Example


          Initial    Initial                        Exact                            Taylor
Concept   Income     Prices                        Measure                      Approximation


C.V.                                                                            T
          pre—tax    post—tax         [(l—T)                                (
                                               — (l—cxr)—l]y                        )a(l—a)y    —
                                                                                                (l—T)


          post—tax                                             •
C.V.11               post—tax                                      (1—ar)   (
                                      [(l—T)(l—aT)—lJy0                         - )a(l—a)y0     (l—T)



E.V.1     pre-tax    pre—tax                                                (
                                      [(l—T)(l—aT)—l]y0                         - )a(l—a)y0
E.V.11    post—tax   pre—tax                                       (l_T)a   (       )a(l—a)y
                                      [(l—T)(l—aT)—lJy0
                              Table 3


              Aggregation Error —   Simulation   Results



               Exact           Exact                 SOA           SOA      S

Tax Rate    Disaggregate     Aggregate           Disaggregate   Aggregate

0.0500000   0.0003114         0.0003289           0.0002958     0.0003125

0.1000000   0.0013139         0.0013679           0.0011833     0.0012500

0.1500000   0.0031275         0.0033034           0.0026625     0.0028125

0.2000000   0.0058992         0.0062306           0.0047333     0.0050000

0.2500000   0.0098129         0.0103630           0.0073958     0.0078125

0.3000000   0.0151001         0.0159443           0.0106500     0.0112500

0.3500000   0.0220577         0.0232866           0.0144958     0.0153125

0.4000000   0.0310723         0.0327956           0.0189333     0.0200000

0.4500000   0.0426579         0.0450098           0.0239625     0.0253125

0.5000000   0.0575131         0.0606602           0.0295833     0.0312500
                                      Footnotes



     'The assumption of fixed prices and zero profits allow us to ignore the

possibility of efficiency losses on the production side of the economy.

     2See Green and Sheshinski (1979) for further discussion of third—order

vs. second—order measures.


     3The linear budget line corresponds to the fixed—producer price assump-

tion made above: we continue to focus on this case rather than the more

general one where relative prices depend, through a convex production possibil-

ities frontier, on the mix of production. This framework is probably adequate

for most problems in applied welfare economics, although it is clearly inap-

plicable in some special cases (e.g., a Leontief technology).

     4
         See, e.g., Laidler (1969).

     5mis point has been made by Rosen and Small (1979) and Hausman (1979).


          concise and elegant treatment of expenditure functions is given in

Diamond and McFadden (1974).


     7See Diamond and McFadden (1974).


           is now easy to demonstrate the point made earlier about the possible inade-

quacy of consumers' surplus as an excess burden measure even when it is a good approx-

imation to the total welfare loss. While the area p          may be a reasonable
                                                      ACp0
approximation of the area p FCp0, the same cannot be said of ABC as an approximation

of FGC.


         9For the case where there are several goods and price changes, x and p

can be interpreted as vectors, with no change in the result.
        101t might seem more sensible to expand around      T' since   we are compen-

sating in the presence of the distortion. However we follow conon practice

here.

        11
          We are unaware o any previous use in the literature on excess burden.


        By the definition of y2 in (1), we could rewrite (4) as E(U00,p0) —

        ,p0); however, the current expression permits easier comparison with the
E(U2
previous measure using compensating variation.

        13The equivalent variation measure has been used by Rosen (1978) and

Kay (1980).

        14More precisely, for each of the measures Itall that is needed is the

shape of one indifference curve. (See Hause 1975). In most contexts, however,

an investigator infers the shape of any given indifference from the overall

utility function.

        To do so, one need only take advantage of Roy's identity, which relates

the ordinary demand curve to partial derivatives of the indirect utility

function. See Hausman (1979).

             See, for example, Wales and Woodland (1976).


        17See, for example, Laidler (1969) for Harberger (1964).

                  Taylor approximation is chosen will depend in part on the points

at which income and price eUects are known,

        19
             See Gorman (1953).

        20                                        c
             Here, we use the fact that s(y,p) = x (v(y,p),p).


        210f course, "truth" is conditional on choice of conceptual experiment.
      221f anything, we are understating the error normally incurred by using

the aggregate demand curve since we have taken the distribution of income over

a, and hence a, to be constant. Normally,    would vary, and the use of a

constant aggregate taste parameter when computing the underlying utility

function would introduce additional error.


      23The negative bias is due to the positive second derivative of the

compensated demand curve which we ignore in using a second—order approximation.
                                  References


Diamond, P. and D. McFadden, 1974, "Some Uses of the Expenditure Function in
     Public Finance," Journal of Public Economics, February, pp. 3—21.

Gorman, W.M.,1953, "Community Preference Fields," Econometrica, January,
     pp. 63—80.

Green, J. and E. Sheshinski, 1979, "Approximating the Gains from Welfare
     Reforms," Journal of Public Economics, April, pp. 179—195.

Harberger, A.C., 1964, "Taxation, Resource Allocation, and Welfare," in
     J. Due, ed., The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes in the Federal Revenue
     System (Princeton: NBER).

              1974, Taxation and Welfare. (Boston: Little, Brown).

Hause, J.C., 1975, "The Theory of Welfare Cost Measurement," Journal of
     tical Economy, December, pp. 1145—1182.

Hausman, J., 1979, "Exact Consumers' Surplus," mimeo, MIT.

Hicks, J.R., 1946, Value and Capital, 2nd ed. (Oxford: Oxford University
     Press).

Hotelling, H., 1938, "The General Welfare in Relation to Problems of Taxation
     and of Railway and Utility Rates," Econometrica, July, pp. 242—269.

Kay, J.A., 1980, "The Deadweight Loss From a Tax System," Journal of Public
     Economics, February, pp. 111—120.

Laidler, D., 1969, "Income rrax Incentives for Owner—Occupied Housing," in
     A.C. Harberger and M.J. Bailey, eds., The Taxation of Income from
     Capital (Washington: Brookings).

MQhring, H., 1971, "Alternative Gain and Loss Measures," Western Economic
     Journal, December, pp. 349—368.

Rosen, H.S., 1978, "The Measurement of Excess Burden with Explicit Utility
     Functions," Journal of Political Economy, April, pp. S12l—S135.

Rosen, H.S., and K. Small, 1979, "Applied Welfare Economics with Discrete
     Choice Models," NBER Working Paper #319, February.

Wales, T.J., and A.D. Woodland, 1976, "Estimation of Household Utility
     Function and Labor Supply Response," International Economic Review,
     June, pp. 397—410.

Willig, R., 1976, "Consumers' Surplus Without Apology," American Economic
     Review, September, pp. 589—597.
