NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY INFORMATION
AND MACROECONOMIC FLUCTUATIONS

John Boschen
Herschel Grossman

Working Paper No. 498

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

July

1980

Revised version of a paper presented at a colloquium on Recent
Developments in Macroeconomics at the European University
Institute, Florence, May 13—1)4, 1980. The National Science
Foundation and the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation have
research. We have received useful comments from
supported
Mark Edwards, Oliver Hart, Robert King, Axel Leijonhufvud, and
Edmond Malinvaud. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

this

NBER Working Paper /498
July, 1980

Monetary Information and Macroeconomic Fluctuations

ABSTRACT

This paper Introduces contemporaneously available monetary data
into an "equilibrium" model that combines rational expectations, market
clearing, and incomplete information about monetary disturbances. Data
on the current money stock involve a preliminary estimate that is subject

to a subsequent process of gradual revision. The model implies the
testable hypothesis that aggregate output and employment are uncorrelated

with the contemporaneous measure of money growth implied by the difference
between the currently available estimates of current and past money shocks.
Rejection of this hypothesis provides strong evidence againat the equilibriums
approach to modelling the relation between monetary disturbances and macro—
eocnomic fluctuations.

John Boschen
Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, R.I. 02912
(401) 863—2606

Current research in macroeconomics focuses considerable
attention on models that appeal to incomplete information about
monetary disturbances in an attempt to reconcile assumptions
of rational expectations and market clearing with a relation
between money and macroeconomic fluctuations. Evaluation of
these so—called "equilibrium models" requires understanding of
the precise content in this context of the three key ideas.
(1) Rational expectations mean that private agents gather and
use information efficiently and, more specifically, that they
behave as if they understand the economy's essential stochastic

structural relations, including the pattern governing the
determination of the stock of money.
(2) Market clearing means
that transactions in individual markets realize all perceived

gains from trade. This assumption has taken two alternative
forms. Specifically, Lucas [1972; 1973] and Barro [1976]
assume that prices and quantities equate spot demands and supplies,
whereas Azariadis 11978) assumes that quantities are set contractually to satisfy perceived Productive-efficiency conditions,
which are similar to spot market—clearing conditions, but that
certain prices are set contractually to satisfy risk—sharing—

efficiency conditions, which mean that wages are not equated to
perceived marginal products. For present purposes, these two
forms of market clearing have the same implications. (3) Incomplete
information means that only local inrormation about prices is
contemporaneously available and that a part of the behavior of
monetary aggregates is neither anticipated nor contemporaneously
perceived. Specifically, equilibrium models assume that monetary
policy is partly stochastic and, with the exception of the
recent work of King f1980], existing equilibrium models also
assume that no data on the current money stock is available.
These models, however, assume that accurate data about past
values of the money stock is currently available.
The most striking implication of equilibrium models, derived
explicitly by Barro [1976], is a neutrality proposition that says

—2—
that macroeconomic fluctuations——specifically, the time pattern
of differences between actual and natural levels of real
variables such as aggregate output and employment-—evolve
independently of those monetary actions that reflect systematic
responses to macroeconomic fluctuations. Because private agents
correctly anticipate systematic monetary policy and understand
how monetary policy affects the market—clearing conditions,
which govern the determination of real variables, their
behavioral responses to systematic monetary policy impact on
market-clearing prices but do not affect the difference
between actual and natural levels of real variables. As a
complement to this neutrality proposition, existing equilibrium
models also imply that the pattern of macroeconomic fluctuations
depends in a significant way on the subset of monetary actions
that is nonsystematic.
Because of incomplete information,
private agents are unable to distinguish random monetary disturbances from relative disturbances. Consequently, their
behavioral responses to random monetary disturbances, in
contrast to th3ir behavioral responses to systematic monetary
policy, produce changes in real variables.

One troublesome feature of existing equilibrium models
is their cavalier and unrealistic assumptions about the
The Federal Reserve Board
availability of monetary data.
currently issues preliminary monetary data with only an
eight—day lag and then revises this data over a period of months
or years. These revisions result from such factors as computational corrections, semi—annual benchmark changes reflecting
fuller reporting, and conceptual changes reflecting financial
innovations. Existing equilibrium models, however, abstract
from both the existence of contemporaneous preliminary monetary
data and the process of gradual accumulation of revised monetary
data. The neglect of contemporaneous data implies that private
agents act as if they ignore readily available and apparently
relevant information, an implication that seems inconsistent

—3—
with the idea of rational expectations. The neglect of the
process of data correction implies, in contrast, that private
agents act as if they have an unrealistically large
amount of information.
In his recent paper, King [1980] makes a start at
rectifying this problem by introducing contemporaneously available
monetary data into an equilibrium model.
In King's model, this data takes the form of an estimate of the
current money stock, subject to a random error that is fully

corrected in the next period. The important new implication
derived from King's analysis is that real variables such as
aggregate output and employment are uncorrelated with this
contemporaneously available monetary data.

The model developed in the present paper expands on King's
analysis by taking explicit account of the gradual process of
accumulation of revised monetary data. Our model, like King's
model, includes a contemporaneous estimate of the money stock,
but instead of King's assumption that this estimate is corrected

in the next period, we assume that developing the finally
reported value of the current money stock involves more than
one revision and takes more than one period. Our model also
allows explicitly for systematic monetary policy in the form
of a target monetary growth rate that responds to the past
behavior of aggregate output.
The main result from the analysis that follows is that,

despite the more complete specification of the accumulation of
monetary data, systematic monetary policy, and their interaction, the present model turns out to have implications
Specifically, our
similar to those derived by Barro and King.
analysis implies that aggregate output and employment are
independent of systematic monetary policy and are uncorrelated
with the contemporaneous measure of money growth implied by
the difference between the currently available estimates of
current and past money stocks.

—4—
This latter implication would seem to be a readily testable
hypothesis, and an obvious conjecture would be that it is not
consistent with the relevant data. In fact, econometric results

reported by Barro and Hercowitz 119801 as well as more
extensive econometric analyses reported in Boschen and Grossman
[1980] confirm this conjecture. These results provic1e
apparently strong evidence against the equilibrium approach to
modelling the relation between monetary disturbances and
macroeconomic fluctuations.
1.

Setup of the Model

In the existing literature, the development of the
incomplete—information paradigm has focused on various, but
mutually consistent, stories about information. The following
setup is based on the story told by Friedman 11968] in which

the representative worker infrequently purchases many of the
items that he consumes and, hence, infrequently observes
their p.i..ices. The representative worker, consequently, does
not know precisely the extent to which a change in the nominal

value of his product involves a change in his terms of trade

between leisure and consumption. His subjective belief about
consumption prices and, hence, about the relevant real value
of his productive services is the critical expectational variable
in the model. The incorporation of rational expectations in
the model means that this subjective belief is equal to a true
mathematical expectation conditional on available information.
The structural equations of the model describe the supply and
demand for a representative good, the market—clearing condition
that determines the output and price of this good, the
behavioral pattern of the monetary authority, the nature of
available monetary data, and the formation of rational
expectations about average prices.

The current supply of representative good z depends on
the subjective belief of the representative producer of this

—5—
good about the relation between the current price of this good

and average prices. Specifically, we assume the log-linear
form

(1)

S

yt(z) = a Ip(z) —

Et(z)pt]

+

n(z),

where y(z) is the log of the current supply of good z,
pt(.z) is the log of the current money price of good z,

Et(z)pt is the current subjective belief of the

representative producer of good z about the
average of the logs of money prices,
a

is the positive and constant elasticity of supply
with respect to the difference, pt(z) Et(z)pt,
and

ntz)

is the log of the "natural" level of output

of good z.
The current demand for good z depends on the value of
aggregate money balances deflated by pt(z) and on a random
disturbance to the relative demands for the various goods.
Specifically, we assume the log—linear form
(2)

where

ytz) =
d

[Mt

—

Pt(z)]

+

ytCz)

is the log of the current demand for good z,

Mt

is the log of the finally reported value of
the current money stock,
is a positive and constant elasticity of demand
with respect to the difference, Mt —
pt(z), and
is a random variable distributed according to

N(O,a), uncorrelated serially,
uncorrelated with the other random variables in

the model, and summing to zero across all goods,
i.e.,
t

ct =

0.

—6—
A more general formulation of the supply and demand
functions would include the terms,
Mt —

pt(z),

pt(z) —

E(z)p

and

in both of the functions and also would allow for

random disturbances to supply and to aggregate demand. These
and other possible generalizations
would complicate
the algebraic analysis of the model without
changing
the main conclusions regarding the role of monetary information.
Note that we are careful not to define Mt to be the log

of the true value of the current money stock. This implied
distinction between true values and finally reported values is
necessary to make the setup of the model strictly consistent
with the rational—expectations assumption that private agents
behave as if they know the structure of the economy. Presumably,

individuals can acquire this knowledge only from observational
experience, a process that implies, as regards the relations
between aggregate variables, that, because producers of good z
would not directly experience aggregate variables, these
variables as contained in the specified structural equations
can represent only the most accurate available measurements as
reported in revised and corrected published data. The
construction of this data implies that individuals, like
statisticians and econometricians, c.nnot know the remaining
inaccuracies in this data and, hence, cannot learn from
observational experience the structural relations between the
true values of these quantities.

The market-clearing condition for good z is that
adjusts to satisfy the equality,
s

y(z) =

d

where y(z) is the log of the actual current output of good z.
This part of our model is the same as King's model except that
King sets
equal to unity and includes an additional random
disturbance to aggregate demand. For present purposes, these

—7—
The rest of the
differences are inconsequential.
specification of available information, of the
model
determination of Mt, and of the formation of Et(z)pt.

Currently available monetary data include a preliminary
estimate of the finally reported value of the current money
stock and reported values of the money stocks of previous periods.
These reported values include some estimates that have already

been revised but, like the estimate of last period's money
stock, iot yet finalized. For the current money stock, we
assume a log-linear estimating relation, which is identical to
King' s formulation,
(.4)

where Mt is the log of the latest published estimate of the
money stock and
is a random variable distributed according to
uncorrelated serially, and
uncorrelated with the other random variables in
the model.

Monetary policy involves a target monetary growth rate,
which incorporates both a constant term and a systematic
response to past differences between actual and natural levels
of aggregate output, and a random factor. specifically,
we assume a log—linear relation of the form,
(5)

=

where

+

- n)

and

is the log of the current estimate of last period's

where

money stock,

is the aggregate across all goods of the logs of
=
output last period, i.e.,

n

is the aggregate across all goods of the logs of
the natural levels of output, i.e., n =
z

n(z),

is the constant element in systematic monetary policy,
is the elasticity of the variable element in

systematic monetary policy, and
is a random variable distributed according to
N(O,c2), uncorrelated serially, and uncorrelated
with the other random variables in the model.
Within the context of equation (5), the random variable,

has at least two possible interpretations, corresponding to
different monetary policy processes. One possible process is that
Mt results from adding c and a random variable, x, directly to
ii_i—_that is,

Mt =

Mt_i

+ x.

+

is equivalent to x. A second possible process

In this case,

is that Mt results from adding

Mt = Mt

and x to M 1——that is,

1+ t + xt.

This equation is identical to King's formulation of monetary
Given a log-linear
policy except for the inclusion of
estimating relation for Mti in the form
Mt_1 =

where

Mti

+

is a random variable, we can express the second monetary

policy process as

Mt =

In

this case,

Mt_i +

t+x

-

is equivalent to the difference, x. -

In

and
general, these two processes imply different values for
and hence have different quantitative implications for
for
the behavior of y. These two processes, however, have the
same implication for the relation between y. and

—9—
The assumed rationality of expectations prescribes that
the subjective belief, Et(z)pt, is equal to the true
mathematical expectation of Pt conditional on the information

currently known to producers of good z. Specifically,
(6)

Et(z)pt = E [Pt I

It(z)],

where I(z) is the assumed information set. This set contains
useful knowledge about the structure of the economy that includes
the form of the structural equations (i) - (6), the values
of the parameters, a, , 4), and 4), the natural levels of

output of good z and of aggregate output, n(z) and n, and
the form of the stochastic disturbances, ct(z),
and
The information set also contains useful data that includes

the current price of good z, pt(z), the past level of
aggregate output,

and the monetary data,

and

Note that, by implication, the information set includes the
current value of systematic monetary policy,
The

potentially useful information that is not in It(z) includes
current and past average prices, Pt and

the current level

of aggregate output, y, the finally reported values of the
current and last period's money stock,

and Mt_i, and the

realizations of the stochastic disturbances, c(z),

and

Note that if -1 were in the information set, introduction
of a random disturbance to aggregate demand would be necessary
to prevent individuals from inferring Mt_i exactly.
2.

Solution of the Model

Theoretical analysis of the model specified by equations Ci) — (.6) involves finding a solution for the current

output of representative good z and, hence, for aggregate
output that satisfies the market-clearing condition, given

— 10 —

by equation (3), subject to expectations being formed rationally,
as specified by equation (6). The method of undetermined
coefficients, applied in similar contexts by Lucas [1972] and
Barro [1976J, provides a solution procedure. The first step
is to substitute equations (1) and (2) into the market-clearing
condition, given by equation (3), to obtain an equation that
relates ptz). to
Et(z)pt, and other variables,
pt(z) =

Ca

+

)1

[aEt(z)pt +

Mt

+

c(z)

—

n(z)].

The second step is to use either equation (4) or equa-

tion (5) to eliminate Mt from equation (.7). As a check of

the solution, we work out both strategies. Combining equations (.4) and (.7) gives
(8a)

pt(z) = (ct +

)l

[aEt(z)pt + (J4 —

&) +

Ct(z) -

n(z)].

Combining equations (5) and (7) gives
(8b)

pCz) = (a + )

+ ct(z) -

n(z)J.

The third step is to conjecture a solution for p(z) that
is a linear combination of a constant term, which allows for
known variables, and each of the stochastic disturbances,
=

ll(z)

+

+ 1126t + llc(.z).

Aggregating equation (9) across all goods yields a solution for
average prices in the form,
(10)

Pt = 1T +

+ ll.

The assumed rationality of expectations means that the subjective
belief, Et(.z)pt, is equal to the true mathematical expectation

of equation (10) conditional on It(z). This expectation is given

by

— 11 —

(11)

Et(Z)pt =

where E(z)g and

+

llE(z)g + lIEt(z)6t,

Et(z)5t are true mathematical expectations

conditional on I(.z).
The fourth step is to calculate

E(z)g and Et(z)ot.

In forming these expectations, producers of good .z can combine
the known structural equations describing market clearing,
monetary policy, and monetary information, as in equations (8a)
and (8b), to obtain the following two equations between linear
combinations of stochastic variables and linear combinations
of known variables. Rearranging equation (8a) gives

+ c(z) = (c + )pt(z) —

(12)

cEt(z)p

—

+ n(z)

Rearranging equation (8b) gives
(13)

+ c.(z) = (c + )pt(z) —

cEt(z)p

—

(Mti +

)

+ n(z).

Equations (12) and (13) enable the producers of good z to infer
the values of the sums,
+
and
+ ct(z).
Given the linear normal structure of the model, the
relations between the conditional expectations and the known
linear corithinabjons of stochastic variables have the form of
regression equations,
Et(z)

+

Et(z)

t +

(.14)

where SRI is a matrix of regression coeffcients given by

— 12 —
—1

cyg 2G2

0

ER] =

_ci2

0

_

+

c

22g +

c

G2c2

gC

g

cY2(2Y2 +

and

c

2c
+ 2)

G)

g

2ci2a2 + cy2a2
óc + a22.

=

The fifth step is to determine the coefficients, II, ...'

3

The procedure is to substitute into equation (11) the values of
given by equation (14), and then to

E(z)g and Et(z)

substitute into either equations (8a) or (8b) the resulting

value of Et(z)pt given by equation (11). Equation (8a) or (8b)
then gives an expression for p(z) that is a linear combination
of the predetermined and exogenous variables, where the weights
involve the undetermined coefficients, II ,
, the
0

..., II

3

and , and the variances of the stochastic
parameters,
variables. Equating each of these w'ights to the corresponding
ci.

coefficient in the trial solution given by equation (9) yields
a system of four simultaneous equations that we can solve for
Using equation (8a) , these solutions are
=

— n(z)1,

=

G22

fl' =
IT' =
3

Al(a+

-[+ a2(2c2
(c +

—

a2c2c2

222 A1),
+

2)l]

l)1

Using equation (8b), the solutions are

22GZ A1)

and

— 13

=

1

1

=

I•I

11'

2

2

— n(z)B1,

t—l +
11' +

11

—

1,

+ 1, and

= 11'.

11

3

3

The final step is to use these expressions for

'

113

together with the market-clearing conditions and either the
supply function or the demand function to obtain a solution for
current aggregate output in terms of the predetermined and

exogenous variables. Substituting equation (2) into equation (3) implies
=

(15)

[Mt

—

pt(z)]

+

e(z).

Aggregating equation (15) across all goods gives
(16)

Using either equation (15) to replace Mt with
+
+
—
or equation (4) to replace Mt with
and using equation (10) and the solutions for 11 , 11 ,and 11 to eliminate p
0

1

2

t

yields the expression for current aggregate output,

= n + (1

(17)

Straightforward
of 1 -

11

—

— 112st•

algebraic manipulation reveals that the values
and of 11 are both positive but less than unity.

— 14 —

3.

Implications of the Solution
Equation (17) indicates that current aggregate output,

equals the natural level of aggregate output, n, plus a linear
combination of the realizations of the exogenous random van—
ables that represent the unanticipated part of current monetary
and the currently unperceived part of current
policy,

monetary policy, S. The coefficients of this linear combination are, as indicated by the expressions for II

and II,

themselves functions of the variances of these random variables,
a2 and 2-, and the variance of the random disturbance to
g
The calculated value for TI implies
relative demands, a2.

that y is positively related to

This

result obtains

because producers of good z mistake some of the increase in
the money price of good z that results from a positive value
to be an increase in the relative price of good z.
of
The calculated value of II
to

implies that y is negatively related

This result obtains because, as King points out, a high

preliminary estimate of the money stock causes the expectations
of producers of good z about average prices to be too high
and their expectations about the relative price of good z to
be correspondingly too low.

The correspondence between the solution for y given by
equation (17) and the solution that King obtains for his
discussed
model depends on which of the interpretations of

above is relevant. For the case of

equivalent to x.,

equation (17) is identical to King's solution, except for
equal to unity and includes an
the fact that King sets

additional random disturbance to aggregate demand. For the
equivalent to x - ,' equation (17) also differs
case of
from King's solution to the extend that
zero.

and

differ from

— 15 —

The models of Lucas, Barro, and King imply that fluctuations
of aggregate output relative to its natural level require the
existence of random disturbances from all of the three sources——
relative demands, monetary policy, and contemporaneously
available estimates of the money stock. To confirm that this
conclusion also applies to the present model, consider the
effect of setting either ct(z) or
or
equal to a known

constant. Any one of these changes in the model would mean
that producers of good z either know or are able to infer
and 6 exactly from equations (12) and (13). In this case,
equation (i4) would not be the relevant for calculating

E(z)g and Et(z)ot. Instead, the solution of the model
would involve setting
to

E(z)g equal to

and Et(z)5t equal
in equation (11). Solving for the undetermined

coefficients would then imply that IT equals unity and that II

equals zero, so that y equals n.
King shows that in his model the covariance between y and
his contemporaneous measure of money growth,
is

Mt_i,

equal to zero. Now, let us calculate the covariance between
and the contemporaneous measure of money growth,

—

that

applies in the present model. Observe that combining
equations (4) and (5) implies
(18)

Thus, we have from equations (17) and (18),
(19)

coy

—

Mti)

Lov
= (1—TI

+

(l—ll)g

+

+

2
a)a2 g 2

Substituting the calculated values of IT

we obtain

—

II

and
2

into equation (19),

— 16 —

(20)

coy

Mt

—

Nti)

=

0.

Equation (20) provides the basis for the econometric
tests reported in Boschen and Grossman [1980]. These tests
imply rejection of the hypothesis, represented by
equation (.20), that current aggregate output is independent
of the contemporaneous measure of money growth. Because
this hypothesis seems to be an inescapable implication of
the equilibrium approach to macroeconomic modelling, these
empirical results also imply rejection of this approach.

— 17 —
REFERENCES

C. Azariadis, "Escalator Clauses and the Allocation of Cyclical
Risks," Journal of Economic Theory, 18, June, 1978,
119—155.

R.J. Barro, "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary
Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, January, 1976.

R.J. Barro and Z. Hercowitz, "Money Stock Revisions and
Unanticipated Money Growth," Journal of Monetary Economics,
6, April, 1980.

J. Boschen and H.I. Grossman, "Tests of Equilibrium Macroeconomics Using Contemporaneous Monetary Data," Working
Paper in progress, 1980.
M. Friedman, "The Role of Monetary Policy,1' American Economic

Review, 58, March, 1968, 1—17.

R. King, "Monetary Information and Monetary Neutrality,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 6, 1980.
R.E. Lucas, Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"
Journal of Economic Theory, 4, April, 1972, 103-124.

R.E. Lucas, Jr., "Some International Evidence on Output—
Inflation Trade—Off s," American Economic Review, 63,
June, 1973, 326—334.

