                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE TRANSMISSION OF DISTURBANCES UNDER
               ALTERNATIVE EXCHANGE-RATE REGIMES
                     WITH OPTIMAL INDEXING


                      Robert Philip Flood
                     Nancy Peregriin Marion

                     Working Paper No. 500




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           July 1980




The authors wish to thank Willem Buiter, Dale Henderson, and David
Lipton for helpful comments. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Faer #500
                                                              July, 1980



      The Transmission of Disturbances Under Alternative
         Exchange—Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing



                            ABSTRACT


     The paper develops a general stochastic macroeconomic model which
can be used to study the international transmission of disturbances
under alternative exchange—rate systems.

     Four types of exchange—rate systems are considered: uniform
flexible exchange rates, uniform fixed exchange rates, two—tier exchange
rates in which the current—account exchange rate is fixed and the capital—
account exchange rate is flexible, and two—tier exchange rates with
separate, floating rates for current and capital—account transactions.
It is assumed that expectations are rational, so only the unexpected
portion of macro policy alters the level of output. In addition, private
contracts form the underpinning of the aggregate supply function, and
they can be adjusted optimally in response to the country's choice of
exchange—rate regime.

     It is shown that when the home country takes all prices as exogenous
and wages are optimally indexed, the country is fully insulated from
foreign disturbances under the two fixed—rate regimes but not under the
two flexible—rate regimes. Even so, the fixed—rate regimes are inferior
to the flexible—rate regimes in terms of their ability to minimize
output variance. When the home country is large in the market for its
own produced good, these results must be modified.

     The analysis makes two general points. First, one cannot assume
stability of structure when assessing the consequences of alternative
exchange—rate regimes. For example, the slope of the aggregate supply
curve and the rationally—formed expectations in the asset markets can
respond dramatically to the government's choice of exchange—rate regime.
Second, exchange—rate regimes that provide full insulation from foreign
disturbances may nevertheless be inferior to other regimes in terms of
their ability to maximize social welfare.




Robert Philip Flood                             Nancy Peregrim Marion
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Virginia                          Dartmouth College
Charlottesville, VA 22901                       Hanover, NH 03755

804—924—7894                                    603—646—2511
     En a widely cited 1972 paper, Victor Argy and Michael Porter examined

the effects of domestic and external disturbances under alternative exchange-

rate systems. Our aim is to investigate the same issue in light of recent

developments in macroeconomic modeling.1

     The model used by Argy and Porter, hereafter A-P, was that of a small

open economy under perf'ect capital mobility in which output was demand-

determined. The novel feature of the A-P model, was the explicit incorporation

of the forward exchange market, with the forward rate linked to the spot

rate by a simple regressive expectations mechanism.

     With their model, A-P examined the transmission of disturbances under

three exchange-rate regimes: (1) uniform flexible exchange rates (FLEX),

(2) uniform fixed exchange rates (FIX), and (3) two-tier exchange rates (TT)

in which the commercial (current-account) exchange rate is fixed and the

financial (capital-account) exchange rate is flexible. They found that the

introduction of exchange-rate expectations significantly modified the trans-

mission process.

     Our model differs froni the A-P model in five important respects, all

of which have gained professional prominence or institutional relevance since

the A-P paper was written.

     (1) We employ rational expectations instead of the ad hoc scheme used

by A-P.

     (2) The aggregate supply function that we use builds into our model the

now familiar rational expectations natural rate hypothesis. Only the unexpected

portion of macroeconomic policy alters the level of output. Our attention to

the economy's supply-side structure contrasts with A-P's focus on demand-

determined output.

     (3) Private contracts form the underpinning of our aggregate supply
                                      2


function, and they can be adjusted optimally in response to the country's

choice of exchange-rate regime. This feature reflects the increased impor-

tance of indexing schemes since the A-P paper was written,2 as well as the

recognition (Lucas, 1973) that some structural characteristics are not invariant

to the government's policy choices when expectations are rational.

     (4) We assume that residents of the small economy possess sufficient

information about the structure of the rest of the world to associate foreign

price and interest-rate fluctuations with underlying real and monetary distur-

bances abroad. This "extended small country framework" is borrowed directly

from Flood (1979) whose analysis draws on Fischer (1977a).   In contrast,

A-P followed the standard practice of assuming that foreign demand shocks

are uncorrelated with foreign interest-rate shocks.

     (5) Tn addition to the three exchange systems examined by A-P, we

analyze a new exchange rate regime which did not exist in 1972. This regime

is a two-tier exchange market with separate, floating rates for current and

capital-account transactions (TTF). Several versions of this system have

been tried, or are now used, by major countries,3 and apart from brief

treatments in Lanyi (1975) and Marion (1977), we are unaware of any existing

analysis of this system.

     The A-P model portrayed a country which was small in the sense that it

could not affect foreign variables. We retain that notion here, but consider

two types of small countries. First, we consider a small country which takes

all goods prices as exogenous. Second, we examine a case where the country

is not small in all commodity markets. Rather, it faces a less than perfectly

elastic demand for its own output. Here, the relative price of domestic

output is determined endogenously.

     Our examination of the transmission process yields some key results which

can be stated at the outset. When the country takes all prices as exogenous
                                      3

and wage indexation is optimal in the sense used by Gray (1976), then the

small country is perfectly insulated from foreign disturbances under the FIX

and TI exchange-rate regimes. It is not insulated from any foreign disturbance

under the FLEX regime, since both real and monetary foreign disturbances pene-

trate the small country via an interest-rate channel as well as a price channel.

We also find that the insulation provided by the TTF regime, which is designed

to protect the country from both current-account (price) and capital-

account (interest-rate) disturbances, depends on            the country's net

foreign asset position. Insulation becomes complete in the special case where

the country's net foreign asset position approaches zero.

     Further, when the country is a price-taker, we are able to rank exchange-

rate regimes according to their ability to maximize social welfare, i.e.

minimize the loss function of the model. We find that although the FIX

and IT regimes yield the same loss and insulate the economy fully from foreign

disturbances, they are inferior to the FLEX and TTF regimes.

     Our strong results concerning full insulation and regime ranking must

be modified when we assume that the country is large in the market for its

own produced good. In this altered circumstance we can no longer say that the

home country is fully insulated under the FIX and TT regimes, nor can we pro-

vide a welfare ranking of the regimes independent of specific parameter vilues.

     The plan of the paper is as follows. In section II we set out a

general stochastic macroeconomic model which can be used to study the various

exchange-rate systems when the home country is a price taker in all markets.

In section III we describe the solution of the model for each exchange-rate

system. In section IV the insulation properties of the systems are

compared and the systems are ranked in terms of our chosen loss function.

Section V examines some implications of assuming the home country is large

in the market for its own output. Section VI contains some concluding remarks.
                            Section II - The Model


     In this section we develop a simple open economy model of a small

country which faces real and monetary disturbances, both foreign and domestic.

There is one traded commodity whose world price is exogenously given to the

small country. The financial sector consists of domestic money and an

internationally-traded security issued abroad and denominated in foreign

currency, with fixed price and variable interest rate. It is assumed that

domestic residents hold both domestic money and the international security.

     The model can be summarized as follows:


                                    Notation


Note: lower-case letters generally denote logarithms of variables, the
       levels of which are represented by upper-case letters
       Greek letters represent parameters;
       an asterisk indicates "foreign";
       superscripts refer to supplies or demands;
       subscripts refer to the time dimension


y         real output

          desired real output

p         the price level

s         commercial exchange rate (home-currency price of foreign exchange)

x         financial exchange rate

m         nominal stock of money balances

k         domestic holdings of foreign securities

i         interest rate (level)

b         price-elasticity of nominal wages

u         white noise supply disturbance

v         white noise monetary disturbance

          variance of i, i =    u, v u, v


                                        4
                                                                                        5

E             mathematical expectation operator

t_iEit        expected value of j at time t, conditional on information available
              at time t-l


                                                                            The Model


(1)                =        +
                                    z(p          -
                                                         t_1Ept)
                                                                                +
                                                                                    u
      (l.a)                 z =             t(l—b)

(2)
               d   -
                       Pt
                                =               - c1ht                +                 '           l'2       >       0)

(3)           ht =     [i           +
                                            yE(s1                     -
                                                                           xt+i)]           +
                                                                                                    tE(xt+1
                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                          x)      ,   y   >   0


      (3a)                  s =x                                 FLEX


      (3b)
                            5 =x=                                     ,     FIX

      (3c)                  s= ,                                 TT




               s        d
(4)


      (4a)               m =                m1               +
                                                                  v         ,       FLEX, TTF


(5)           Pt
                       p* + S


(6)           tn(m+i - m)                                +
                                                                 (l_fl)[(x+1
                                                                                                -
                                                                                                    x)   +
                                                                                                              (k1 - k)]}
                                        +
                                                                 +y         -
                                                                                nm
                                                                                            -
                                                                                                    (l_fl)(x          +
                                                                                                                           kt)]
      (6a)               kt =               k        ,           TT,        TTF

      Rest   of the World


                   =            +                                 +                 +
(7)
                                            7T1m                          7r12V*            1T3U

(8)                =            +                                 +
                                            ii21m1                        7r22V* + 7123U*
                                        6

       The social objective is to minimize the loss function:


(9)            L =
                     E[(y
                            -
                                )2]
        (9a)           Y+Pu , 0<p<l
       Equation (1) is a natural—rate aggregate supply function, based on

the work of Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1970). Current output, expressed

      in terms of its deviation from the normal level, y, is a function of

price prediction errors and Ut, a stochastic disturba.nce term having zero

mean and constant variance. The particular form of (1) that we use requires

z, the slope of the supply curve, to depend on b, the degree of indexation,

where b is the elasticity of nominal wages with respect to price and b=l

signifies full indexation. The justification for (1) and (la) is based on

Cray (1976) and Fisher (1977b) and is described in detail in the appendix.

We follow these authors in assuming that the value of b can be chosen by

the private sector to minimize the loss function in (9). For the open economy,

this means that the government's choice of exchange-rate regime systematically

influences the degree of indexation and consequently the slope of the economy's

aggregate supply curve. In turn, the slope of the aggregate supply curve

has important implications for how effectively various exchange-rate regimes

insulate domestic output from unanticipated disturbances.

        Equation (2) states that the demand for real money balances depends on

real income and the opportunity cost to domestic residents of holding money

instead of foreign securities. This opportunity cost, ht, is shown in (3)

to consist of expected repatriated interest foregone plus expected capital

gains on foreign securities due to exchange-rate changes.

        In the case of two-tier exchange rates, where the principal on foreign

bonds must be acquired and repatriated at the financial exchange rate but

 interest income (a current-account item) must be repatriated at the commercial
                                                           7

    rate,4we calculate the actual opportunity cost of holding one unit of domestic

    money as follows: one unit of domestic money will purchase 1/X units

    of capital-account foreign exchange, which may be repatriated next period

    at the rate X1 for a capital gain of X1/X. During the period the
                                                                                                   l/X.
    units of foreign exchange earn i/X in interest income which may be repatriated

    into domestic money in amount i S1/X. These two elements of actual

    yield may be combined into an overall yield of Xt+l                         *St+l
                                                                                        + 1). We
                                                                          t       t+l
•
    define the actual opportunity cost of holding domestic money to he (1 + h) in (10)

                                 x           S
                             =    t+l    .       t+l
    (10)         (1 +
                        h)       —r--
                                     t
                                             x
                                                 t+l
                                                       + 1)



    A good logarithmic approximation to (10) is given in (lOa)


    (lOa)
                 h i + y(si              -
                                             x1)       + x1 -
                                                                  x
            We define h, the expected opportunity cost of holding money, to be

            or


    (lOb)        ht =   i     tE.t+i -       x+1)      +
                                                           tE(xt+1
                                                                      -
                                                                          Xt)

            The above expression for ht,which is a linearization of a similar

    expression in Marion (1980), gives the expected opportunity cost of holding

    money for all regimes. The term ytE(sti -
                                                                 xt÷i) in h disappears       when the

    exchange market is unified: for FLEX,

    for FIX, s1 =
                        x+1      and x+1 =
                                                 x so h = i.
                                                              s1 = x1 soht =      +
                                                                                    i
            Equation (4) represents equilibrium in the money market. Equation (4a)

    describes a simple money supply rule for the FLEX and TTF regimes, under

    which money is exogenous. Here,                    is a domestic white noice disturbance

    with mean zero and constant variance. Under the FIX regime, the supply of

    money is entirely endogenous, since residents can always swap domestic money
                                       8


for international securities at any point in time.     Under the TT regime,

money is determined by a domestic policy component and by reserve changes

that accompany current-account imbalances. Tn the short-run, the policy-

determined stock of money must be held by domestic residents since any attempt

to exchange money for international securities merely bids up the financial

exchange rate. Over time, the money supply is endogenous since current-

account imbalances bring about reserve changes that alter the money stock.

     Equation (5) is the "law of one price"; in logs, commodity arbitrage

equates the domestic currency price of output to the foreign-currency price

plus the current-account exchange rate.

                                                  We assume that planned saving
     Equation (6) specifies saving behavior.

(the P.IIS of (6)) depends positively on
                                           real income and negatively on real

wealth.6 Planned saving must be equal to expected asset accumulation (the
                                               domestic-currency wealth in    several
LIIS of (6)). Residents may increase their

ways. If there is a fixed exchange rate for commercial transactions (FIX, TT),

 residents can add to their money holdings as the economy acquires reserves

 through current-account surpluses. If the exchange market is unified (IIX,FLEX),

 residents can increase their holdings of foreign securities through the capital
                                                                           financial
 account: this is not possible under the two-tier regimes since a flexible
                                                if there is a flexible financial rate
 rate prevents net capital flows. Finally,
                                           capital gains on their foreign bond holdings
 (FLEX, TTF), residents may experience
                                                coefficient n represents the share
 due to exchange-rate changes. In (6), the

 of money in the portfolio of domestic residents and (1-ri) represents the
                                                                  as a para-
 fraction of wealth held in international securities. We treat ri
                                      which we return to later in Section III.
 meter, an uncomfortable convention
                                                 equations for the foreign price
      Equations (7) and (8) are reduced-form
                                                    macro model of the rest of the
  level and interest rate, derived from a simple

 world. The rest-of-the-world model and the derivations of (7) and (8) are
                                                9


provided in the appendix. We assume that residents of the small country

have complete information about this structure and the processes that

generate p and i. In particular, they recognize that foreign real and

monetary disturbances bring about fluctuations in both foreign prices and

the foreign interest rate. Since the home country is small, foreign prices

and interest rates are exogenous with respect to domestic variables.

       The   quadratic   loss function in equation (9) indicates that society

wants to minimize squared deviations of actual output from desired output.

The loss function and definition of desired output are identical to these

introduced by Cray (l976). It will be helpful to note that we may use (1)

and (9a) to write the loss function (9) in the following form:


             L =            -                                   =1
(11)
                   E[(z(p       tiEpt)   +
                                             u)2]   ,   0   <        - p < 1



       Tho final points about the specification of the model need to be made

explicit. First, for the operator t_1E, t—i denotes the t-i information

set, which we assume to contain the structure of the model plus all variables,

domestic and foreign, dated t-i or earlier. Second, we assume that the four

white noise disturbances in the model, v, u, v, u, are mutually uncorrelated

at any point in time and over time.
                                   Section III


        In this section we calculate loss functions for the small economy under

four different exchange-rate regimes: FIX, FLEX, TT and TTF. These loss

functions will enable us

(1) to determine what degree of wage indexation will minimize the loss function

under each exchange regime, and

(2) to compare exchange-rate regimes according to their insulative properties.

        In order to derive the various loss functions in the form specified by

                                                                -              that accompany
(11), we must calculate the price-prediction errors                 t_iEpt)
unanticipated disturbances under each exchange regime. This means that we

must solve the model for each possible choice of exchange-rate regime, since

the log of the domestic price level, p, is determined as part of a general

equilibrium system. The solution technique we use is the method of undeter-

mined coefficients as used by Lucas (1972). This solution procedure requires

the absence of speculative bubbles.8

        FLEX. To obtain a solution of the model under the FLEX regime, we

use equations (1), (2), (3), (3a), (4a) and (5), which describe the output

and monetary sectors of the home economy, and equations (7) -           (8),    which give

expressions for the foreign price and interest rate. The model can be solved

for Pt and s. Note that for the FLEX regime, the model is block recursive,

so that the solutions can be obtained independently of the savings equation, (6).

        Given that the solution may be obtained as indicated above, we take

advantage of the model's linearity in logs in order to write p as a linear

function of the system's predetermined variables and disturbances. The

reduced-form equation for Pt is


                                         +          +           +          +
 (12)        Pt = A10 +         + A12v       Ai3u       X14m1       X15v

                                             10
                                                                  11

where the x1. are functions of structural parameters, with


       (12a)           A10 =       constant             term


                       All =       1




                       A12 =       T(l+1)

                       X13 = T(-c22)


                       A14 = 0


                       A15 = T(ir22            -           +



                       X16         T(3         + l3l
                          T =                                    —l
                                   (1 +                + ct2z)

The unexpected part of p, which is


(13)          Pt -   t_lEpt
                               =
                                       A12vt
                                                   +    Au        +    Xv*   +
                                                                                 X16u

can now be substituted into equation (11) to yield the loss function for the

FLEX case. This loss function is written in Table I (page 15).

       FIX.     Obtaining the price solution for the FIX regime is straightforward.

We substitute equations (3b) and (7) into (5) to obtain:


(14)          Pt =   l0   +
                              ir11m1
                                           +                     + 1r13u   + 5



The unexpected part of (14) is


(15)          Pt -   t_iE1t        7T12V       + l3Ut

which may be substituted into (11) to yield the loss function for the FIX

case. This loss function is found in Table I.
                                                      12

       Ti'. Since the standard two-tier exchange-rate regime has a fixed

exchange rate for current-account transactions, the price solution is not

significantly different from the FIX case. We find the price solution by

substituting (3c) and (7) into (5), yielding


                        + x11m         +          +              +
(16)        Pt =                   1       r12v        r13u          S




Since (16) may differ from (4) only in the value of the fixed exchange rate,

the unexpected part of Pt for TT regime i.s given by (15). The loss function

for the TT case is identical to the one for the FIX case.

                We will report the price solution for the TTF regime with repatria-

tion of interest income through the current account. The solution for the

case where repatriation occurs through the capital account is presented in

the Appendix.



        In the TTF case, the endogenous variables x. s and Pt are determined

jointly by money market equilibrium, the savings relation and the commodity

arbitrage condition. In particular, we employ equations (l)-(3), (4), (4a), (5),

(6), (6a), (7)., and (8).As before, our procedure is to conjecture that the

solutions are linear functions of the state variables in the equations just

listed. Our solution for Pt is:


                                       +          +              +                    +              +
(17)            Pt 2O +   A21m             A22v        X23u          A24m     1            X25v          X26u*

where


        (17a)         X20 =       constant term


                      A21 =   1




                      A22 =                           +a1)
                                                             +
                                                                     ai(l-)       +
                                                                                          ct1'Y1n1
                                                     13


                                                          -
                    A23 =              2(1-l)(l-n)
                           =
                    A24            .1Tiiaiy(l_n)/(1_n         +nc1y)
                                                                                A        ctX
                           —
                           - Q(l-n)(Y1-l)[a1ir22+a1y(A24 +                          24    1    24   1 24
                    X25                                                         — - i) + 1-n               J

                           =
                    x26

                           = [(l(l2                              +



In   addition, we impose the assumption A23<O to ensure that a positive output

disturbance will reduce Pt.

        In reporting the price solution for the TTF case, we have allowed ktrk

to enter the constant term. Such a procedure is legitimate because we have

assumed that the internationally—traded security is a fixed-price bond in

terms of foreign currency.9 This point is related to our earlier decision

to treat n, the share of money in wealth, as a constant. The only time ri

enters into the price solutions is in the TTF system, and in this case,

kt=k and money at home and abroad follows a random walk. Consequently, the

actual share of money in wealth will stay roughly constant and we should feel

no less comfortable with treating ii as a constant than with any other linear

approximation -

        Given the solution for Pt in (17), the price prediction error under

the TTF regime can be expressed as


                               =          +          +
(18)        Pt -   tiEpt           X22v       A23u       X25v
                                                                     +
                                                                         X26u

Substituting    this expression into (11) yields the loss function for the TT['

case,   which is written in Table I.

        We can use the loss functions in Table I to determine the optimal

degree of wage indexation (denoted b) under each exchange-rate regime. Since

welfare is maximized when the value of the loss function L is minimized, b
                                         14

is obtained from the first-order conditions for a minimum. A useful shortcut

is to recognize from equation (la) that z is a linear function of b, so

choosing the optimal value of b is equivalent to choosing the optimal value

of z (denoted ).     Thus we calculate the optimal degree of indexation for

each exchange-rate regime by differentiating the various loss functions in

Table I with respect to z,, setting the result equal to zero, and solving

for z. The solutions are given in Table II, which shows that full indexation

is always   optimal for the fixed rate regimes but partial indexation is
generally optimal for the flexible rate regimes. Note that the effects of
indexing on the real economy depend on the source of price prediction errors.
Full indexing prevents the transmission       of domestic monetary shocks to the

real   economy. In the open economy   it also    insulates the real sector from
foreign   disturbances. However, when domestic prices depend on the quantity

of domestic output, full indexation exacerbates the real effects of domestic

output disturbances.

       in the FIX and 'FT regimes the commercial exchange rate is fixed, so

fluctuations in the domestic price level occur only as a result of fluctua-

tions in the foreign price level. This means that foreign disturbances are

the only source of domestic price prediction errors and it is optimal for

the private sector to index fully by setting b=1 and thus z=O.

       In the FLEX and TTF regimes, domestic price prediction errors depend not only

 On     unexpected fluctuations in foreign prices hut also on unexpected changes

in the commercial exchange rate. Since domestic supply shocks form part of

the stochastic structure that brings about unanticipated changes in the

commercial (uniform) exchange rate3 the optimum degree of indexing is

generally less than unity in order to moderate the real effects of supply

shocks.
                              15




                           TABLE I



LFLEX =
           E{[z(Xi2v +A1u         + x15 v    +   A 16u)   +

                                      +
LFIXTT E{[z(12v + 7rl3Ut)                 L1tI)
       =               +                    +             +
'TTF       Ef[z(X22v       X23u                 A26u)
                                                                       16




                                                                TABLE II




ZFLFX
             1+a )
                      1
                          2 2
                           a
                            v
                                +   a
                                        2
                                        2
                                            1-)au2+ 2
                                                        a21 )2
                                                        a
                                                            1
                                                                  Tr
                                                                    22
                                                                        1   ii


                                                                            -
                                                                                 11
                                                                                          + it      2 2
                                                                                                 12) a v
                                                                                                          —+
                                                                                                               23
                                                                                                                    +
                                                                                                                        13
                                                                                                                             2 2




                 0
ZPEXTT



                                            +
                                                W1a1}
         1   -                                   +
                     F{('Y1-1)(1-n)a2


                                                                                      2
                                                                       +
                                                                                      U
                                          a2 + A 22
where            F =
                                                                                 2 2
                                X2 a2 +A2
                                 22 v   23 u     25a +


From (la), z = -r(1--b).                    Full indexation (b=1) implies z=O.
                   Section IV: Comparison of Exchange-Rate Regimes


       In this section, we examine two important issues.              First, what are the

 insulative properties of each exchange-rate system when wages are indexed

 optimally? Second, which exchange-rate regime provides the minimum value of

 our chosen loss function? This second question is the traditional fixed-

 versus-flexible exchange-rate question, broadened to take account of some

 untraditional exchange-rate systems.

      The insulative properties of each exchange-rate regime are defined in

 terms of our loss function. The home country is said to be fully insulated

 from foreign disturbances when foreign real and monetary variance do not

affect the value of the loss function. In Table III we report the values of

the loss function under optimal indexation for each exchange-rate regime.

The Table shows the FIX and TT regimes provide complete insulation from foreign

disturbances, while the TTF regime provides             full   insulation only when the
net   foreign_asset   position   is   zero,   and the FLEX regime never provides full
              10
insulation.

      The full insulation provided by the FIX and TI regimes is evident from

the fact that no foreign variance terms
                                                    enter L(FIX) or L(TT). Recall that
when the exchange rate for commercial transactions is fixed, domestic price

prediction errors arise only when foreign disturbances bring about unanticipated

fluctuations in the foreign price level.              But, with wages fully indexed under
the FIX and IT regimes)wages respond in
                                                    proportion to the price prediction

error. Full indexation implies =0, and this removes all foreign influences
from the loss function.

      When the economy operates a TTF regime, insulation is incomplete unless

the domestic net foreign asset position is zero. The coefficients attached

to foreign monetary and real variance                             2                2
                                               are (Z(TTF)X2ç) and (z(TTF)26)
respectively, where A25 and X26 are the coefficients attached
                                                                           respectively

                                               17
                                            18




                                        Table    III


                                                       +                    +
L(FLEX)      (;(FLEX)X15)2o + (z(FLEX)X16)2c2              (;(FLEX)X12)2        (z(FLEX)A13+)2o2


L(TT)      L(FIX) =   22
                                            22                       22                   2o'
                                   (z(TTF)X2() o +
                          22
                           o   +                                      o+
L(TTF) =    (z(TTF)X25)                                (z(TTF)A22)         (z(TTF)X23+)


Notes: L is     the optimal value of L. In this table the values of X. are
           calculated using the relevant optimal values of z from Tab13JI.
                                            19

to v and u in the TTF price solution. Note that A25 is a linear function of

both       and it11.    The presence of ri22 1n A25 indicates that foreign monetary

disturbances are transmitted to the small economy by an interest rate channel;

the presence of           in A25 indicates that the price channel also transmits

foreign monetary disturbances. Our previous results further show that X26

is proportional to 7123; indicating that foreign real disturbances are

transmitted through         the interest rate. Since none of the ii1.(i=O,l,2,3)

enters A26, the TTF regime insulates the economy from real disturbances

which are carried by the price channel.

     An interesting feature of the TTF regime is that insulation becomes complete

as the home country's net foreign asset position ,       1-ri, goes to zero. Formally,
A25=A26=O when l-rO. This result should not be surprising. Having a

balanced net foreign asset position under the TTF regime is equivalent to

operating a FLEX regime when there is no financial integration, tinder such

circumstances, only the price channel transmits foreign real and monetary

shocks and the commercial exchange rate can fully offset such disturbances.

       When the economy operates a FLEX regime, insulation is incomplete since

foreign disturbances enter through both price and interest-rate channels.

The coefficients attached to foreign monetary and real variance in L(FLEX)

are (z(FLEX)A15)2 and (z(FLEX)A16)2. Both A5 and A16 go to zero as o. goes

to zero, indicating that foreign disturbances enter the domestic economy

through their influence on domestic interest rates. We should note that

       is a linear function of n, Till and 7112 and A16 is a linear function

of       arid it13;   the presence of ll' ir2 and l3 in these expressions indicates

that the price channel is transmitting both real and monetary disturbances.

Further, the presence of          and      in A15 and A16 indicates transmission

of monetary and real disturbances via the interest rate channel.

     Foreign disturbances under FLEX influence the domestic economy through
                                                     20

domestic interest rates)and both foreign interest rates and foreign prices

transmit disturbances to domestic interest rates. The interest rate channel's

influence is direct; the domestic error in predicting foreign interest rates,

   —
        t_'     =
                     22"   +
                               7r23u   ,   results     in an equal domestic error in

predicting domestic interest rates. The influence of the price channel is

more indirect.           An unexpected change in foreign prices leads to an unex-

pected revision in the expected rate of depreciation of s. This revision,

           -
                    - t_1E(st+1   -         causes an unexpected change in h.

       Our striking results--that fixed exchange-rate regimes fully insulate

while flexible exchange-rate regimes do not--are quite different from those

obtained by A-P and others. The difference can be explained by our use of the

extended small-country framework and by our incorporation of Lucas' point

(1973) that agents' behavior may respond to the government's policy choices.

In the open-economy context, this means that structural characteristics may

in fact he a function of the choice of exchange-rate regime and should be

treated as variables rather than parameters in questions involving the choice

of regime. In our model, both expectations and the slope coefficient of the

aggregate supply curve respond to the government's choice of exchange regime.

This dramatically influences the insulative properties of various regimes.

       An examination of the loss functions in Table III also reveals some

interesting welfare properties. We find that even though the FIX and                   TTregimes
fully_insulate       the home economy when indexation is optimal, the loss is

greater under these two regimes than            under_either_uniform     floating rates   or
the two-tier float.

       The proof of this result is simple. From Table I it can be seen that

full indexation (z=0) makes the loss function for each of the four exchange-

rate regimes equal to 22 For the FIX and TT regimes, this is the best

the private sector can do, since the loss function is minimized when
                                               21

2(FIX) =    (TT)   =   0.   For the FLEX and TTF regimes,       is a feasible value

for the loss function, but it is not generally the chosen (minimum) value

of the loss function since (FLEX), 2(TTF)           0.   Consequently, it must be the
case that

                                 I   L(FLEX)
(19)        £(FIX) = £(TT)

                                 [L(TTF),
Comparing the loss functions of the FLEX and TTF regimes is more difficult as

savings parameters occur in L(TTF) which do not occur in L(FLEX).

       We view our results on insulation and welfare as interesting and impor-

tant, but recognize that they are applicable only to the special case in which

the home country is small in all markets and the covariance of the domestic

supply disturbance with foreign price is zero. Our next task is to see

how the results are modified when the analysis is extended to a home country

with some market power.
                                   Section V: The Case of Market Power


        In this section, we extend the model in order to consider the case

where the home country is large in the market for the commodity produced

at home but remains small in other goods markets and in the world bond market.

Such an extension not only draws our model closer to the case considered by

A-P, hut serves to illustrate that the strong conclusions of the previous

section hold only for the special small-country case considered.

        Since our strongest insulation result was that fixed-rate regimes provide

full insulation from foreign disturbances under optimal indexation, we shall

consider only the case of uniform fixed rates in this section.

        In a two-good world, equation (1) from Section II must be replaced by



                           -       1        t-l (P-) - (-i) -              (1-b)   (q1Eq)} +
(20)         y    =




where    Pt is    the log of domestic price              of the   good produced at home and

is the domestic consumer price index, with


                   =           + (l-)(p+s)         ,    0 < w <   1,


and p +     s    being the domestic price of the imported good.

        Equation (20), which is derived in the appendix, is based on the assump-

tions that: (1) only one good is produced at home, (2) two goods are consumed

at home, and (3) wages are indexed                     to the consumer price index.
        Ve assume that domestic and foreign demand for the home good is given by


                       A       -               +           +
 (21)           y =                A1(pt_ps)       A2yt        A3y        A1, A3>0, 0<A2<1


where we have grouped together all relative price terms and have assumed

the Marshall-Lerner condition to hold. For the FIX regime, Pt is determined


                                                          22
                                                      23

by equating aggregate supply (20) to aggregate demand (21). The value of
Pt that clears the domestic output market may he expressed as


(22)        Pt      A30 + A31m        +
                                          X32v
                                                  +
                                                      Au       +
                                                                   A34m1 + A35v + X36u

where


            A30 =   constant    term


                    0
            A31


            A32 = 0


            A33 =


                  = 1
            A34


            A35 =               +             +
                                    OA3r32        (1-A2) (l—O)b(l—u)r12I

            A36 =               +             + (l-A2)(l-O)b(1-w)ir13J

             p    = [(1-A2)(l-O)(1-bw)+ 0A11.

In the appendix we derive the function y
                                                           i30     + ir31m   + ir32v + rr33u,
which has been used in obtaining (22).

       We retain the loss function proposed in Section II, and find that

when the country is large in the market for its own output, the loss function

may be written as

                                          -
(23)        L =   E{(
                        (1-0) (P-)
                            [
                                              1E(P-q)      +                       +   (l-)
which shows that both unexpected movements of the CPI, (q_1Eq), and

unexpected movements in relative prices,                                         will cause

deviations of actual output from desired output.

       The degree of indexation which minimizes the loss function in (23)
                                      24


is generally less than one. This may be seen from equation (22), where we

observe that domestic supply disturbances can alter the price of domestic

output when the country is large in this market. Consequently, domestic

supply disturbances are a cause of price prediction errors and to fully index

under these conditions would only exacerbate the real effects of supply-side

shocks.

     Moreover, equation (23) shows that even if there were full indexation,

the economy is not completely insulated since foreign disturbances also cause

unexpected changes in relative prices, and no amount of indexation can prevent

these unexpected changes in relative prices from entering the loss function.

In conclusion, fixed exchange-rate regimes do not provide full insulation

from foreign disturbances unless the home country is small in all markets.
                          VI Concluding Remarks


    Two general points are worth reemphasizing and should prove robust to

alternative model specifications. First, the policy-maker cannot assume

stability of structure when assessing the consequences of alternative exchange-

rate regimes. Certain aspects of private behavior that might be parametric

under one regime may adjust fundamentally to an alteration in regimes. In

our model, for example, the slope of the aggregate supply curve and the

rationally-formed expectations in the asset markets responded dramatically

to the government's choice of exchange-rate regime. Second, the analysis

powerfully demonstrates the notion that insulation from foreign disturbances

is not necessarily a desirable policy goal. For the small open economy in

Section IV, fixed-rate regimes provide full insulation hut are unambiguously

inferior to flexible-rate regimes.




                                      25
                                                  Appendix


I -    Derivation      of Equations (1) and (la)


        Equation (1) in the text is derived from a model which specifies the

behavior of firms, labor, and contract-setting. The model originates with

Gray (1976) and Fischer (1977h).

        Let production be a function of labor inputs and a productivity factor:


(Al)                   exp(Et)Lt'°, 0 < (1-0)                <    1


Converting to logs, we have


(A la)            =
                       (l-0)     +
                                     Et

Labor demand is derived by differentiating (Al) with respect to labor,

equating     the resulting marginal product of labor expression to the real wage,
and converting to logs:

(A2)               =
                       -- (w-Pt)
                                      + - ln(1-0)      +
                                                             E.
Labor    suppiy is assumed to be an increasing function of the real wage


                   =                  ,       >   0.
 (A3)                      (w-p)
The wage-contracting scheme can be written as


 (A4)          w =     w    +
                                b(p1Ep)
where w is the nominal wage that clears the labor market in           the   absence of


 uncertainty      and b is the indexing parameter.
         Setting (A2) equal to (A3) and                      we get

 (AS)          w = t_iEpt        +   —    1
                                     8(S+ -)

                                                       26
                                                            27

 Next we substitute (A5) into (A4) to get wt,substitute w into (A2) to get

        (since labor inputs are demand-determined), and substitute                    into (A la)

to get our expression for
                                         y:

 (i6)            =
                           + z(pt.t      1Ep) +        u
              where y =          (1-0)   9



                           =
                                             9n(l-0)

                       Z =     T(l-b)

                       T — (1—0)
                                  0

                           = Et
                      Ut



2   -   Derivation of

         The log of desired output, ,                  is   the amount of output that would obtain

in a frictionless world. In order to calculate                           equate labor demand (A2)

to labor supply (A3) under the assumption that there are no binding contracts

and solve for equilibrium employment,
                                                                 Substituting 2 into (A la) yields


(A7)                       + p



              where


                 =    (l-O).

                           < 1



3 -     Rest-of-the-World         Model


        The model for the rest of the world consists of a goods market and a

money market. The equations governing behavior in the rest of the world arc:
                                                                             28


           y =                       -                    +
(A8)               z*(p                      1Ep*)

(A9)       y. =          +                   + ó(m             -pt)               ,
                                                                                        0   <           < 1,   >   0


(A 10)     m* -    p=                        - ci cy      +                       ,
                                                                                        c,      c >       0



(A 11)     m =    m1             +
                                         v
Equation (A8) is the aggregate supply function. Equation (A9) is aggregate

demand, which depends positively on real income and real money balances.

Aggregate demand is not dependent on the stock of international securities,

since foreign residents do not consider these securities as part of their

wealth. Equation (A 10) states that the demand for real money balances

depends on real income and the opportunity cost of holding money. Equation

(A 11) specifies the money supply process.

       We assume market-clearing behavior and solve the model for p and i

by the method of undetermined coefficients. The solution for y can be

obtained by substituting the equilibrium value of p into (A8). The

solutions are as follows:


              =              + 11m1                   +                  +


              = 20                                +
                                                          22v        +



              = 30           +
                                     31m1             +
                                                          132v
                                                                         +
                                                                             3u
           where                 =       constant             term
                                     =1
                    it11

                                                                     '            0 <
                                                                                        'l2     <   1

                                         (1—ó) z*+

                    IF
                                             -
                                                 (l-)            <0


                                     = constant               term
                    7T2()
                                                                       29


                               = 0


                                     a2        -   6i*)
                    22                             cS2ct1
                                                                   1    Tr - 0

                               =         2
                                      zk


                               =
                    30

                    3l

                    32              zir12 > 0

                               =    Z1113 + 1 >                0
                    7133




4    - Real Rate of Return on Savings


        When savings depends on the real rate of interest as well as on real

income and real wealth, equation (6) of the model must he modified to:


(A 12)       tE{n(mt+1_m) +(1-n){(x-x)+(k-k)i} =

                                                                       -
                     0
                           +
                                   q'1{p
                                               +
                                                   y   -
                                                               nm           (l_n)(xt        +
                                                                                                kt)]
                                     -
                                             tE(pt÷i
                                                           -
                                                                             ' '2   >   0


As shown in Section II of the text, the price of domestic output can be solved

for independently of the savings function under a FIX, FLEX and TT regime.

Hence    the inclusion of the real rate of return in (A 12) has                                        no hearing

on our insulation results for these three regimes. The inclusion of the real
rate of interest in the savings function does matter for the TTF regime,
                                            30

however, since the solution for Pt depends, in part, on (A 12). Now TTF

no longer provides complete insulation of the home economy as (1-n)-O.

A balanced net foreign asset position will prevent changes in the financial

rate from penetrating the small economy via a wealth channel, but will not

prevent financial exchange-rate fluctuations from altering aggregate

demand via an interest-rate channel. This interest-rate effect prevents the

commercial exchange rate from fully offsetting foreign price disturbances.




S -   Derivation   of Equation (20)


       Equation (20) in the text is derived from a model which specifies the

behavior of firms, labor, and contract-setting. The derivation is like that

of equation (1), only extended to the two-good case.

       Production is a function of labor inputs and a productivity factor:


 (A 14) Y =        exp(ct)L0),        0 <   (1-e)   < 1




 converting (A 14) to logs:
                                                31



(A 14a) y =        (l-e)     +



      Labor demand is derived by differentiating (A 14) with respect to labor,

equating the resulting marginal product of labor to the real wage in terms

of the domestic good, and converting to logs:


(A 15)         =
                   —h- (w-p)
                                 +    2n(l-e)   +



      Labor supply is assumed to be a positive function of the real purchasing

power of wages:


(A 16)         =



where


(A l6a) q = wp          +                   0 < w    <   1
                            (l-w)(p-fs),
        Nominal wages are indexed to the CPI in the following manner:


(A 17)       w w + b(q           -
                                     1Eq)
where w is the nominal wage that clears the labor market in the absence

of uncertainty and h is the indexing parameter.

        Setting (A 15) equal to (A 16) and Et=O. we get


(A 18) w =

We   then substitute (A 18) into (A 17) to get w, substitute w into (A 15)

to get 9 and substitute              into (A 14a) to get the expression for y

when the country is large in the market for its own produced good:

                   -
                       - i e         1E(p—q)
(A 19) y =                           l+O
                                                -
                                                     (P-)    -              +
                                                                                Ut
                                                          32


where
        -
            =       (lO)        ___

                =
                    1




6 -   Capital            Account Repatriation of Interest Income Under TTF


        In the text we assumed that all interest income is repatriated through

the current account under TT and TTF. If interest income goes through the

capital account instead we must replace (6a) with


(A20)                   i = kt+l    -
                                        k
which is a logrithmic approximation to the condition that the capital account

he in balance. In addition to (A20) we also set y=O in ht.

        The         model's     solution under this regime is


                        Pt = A40 +               +
(A21)                                   )41m1        X42Vt + X43ut

                        with


                        A40 =   constant     term


                        A41 =   1




                        '42 =   l/(l+ct2z)

                        A43    = -a2/(l+2z).

It is evident that the economy would be fully insulated under this regime.

However, we feel that this regime is not really a viable long term alternative

to the regimes studied in the text. The problem with the regime is that the

only rational solution to the model yields
                                           33


                     =        - xt)
(A22)
                 i

                implying


(A23)                    0.
                ht


Equation       (A23) states that the opportunity cost of holding money is zero. In

such a world we do not see any reason for foreign securities to be held by

domestic residents. A second problem is that the gap between x and

is expected to widen indefinitely with this system. Such an expectation can

only be consistent with the expectation of the eventual demise of the regime.

However, if agents view this regime as temporary then it would he a viable
          12
System.
                                        34




                                  Footnotes



     'Since 1972, much attention has been devoted to stock-flow distinctions,

the role of asset markets in exchange-rate determination, supply-side behav-

ior and the formulation of expectations, to cite just a few examples.


     2For a survey of indexing schemes in industrial countries, see the ref-

erences in Sachs (1979) who along with Rehm (1979) examines indexing in open

economies.


     3ltaly and France experimented briefly with a TTF regime during the

1973-74 period. The BLEU has operated such a system since 1973, although

it maintains margins for its commercial exchange rate against certain

European currencies. The U.K. and the Netherlands have had a more limited

version of this system, with a flexible rate for most transactions and a

separate floating exchange rate for certain types of capital transactions.


     41n the Appendix we discuss the case where interest income is repa-

triated   through the capital account.
     5We use two approximations in obtaining (lOa).        First, for small h,
n(l + h)     h .   Second,   i 5t+l          +
                                                 i(st+, x+i).
                                                       -        We have used
                                t+ '1



                                   +     +        where y is the mean value of


and x is the mean value of (s+1_xt+i). For simplicity, we have chosen

the normalization X =   0.

      6The implications of a savings function which depends on the real rate

of return as well as on income and wealth are explored in the appendix. The

RHS of (6) is a special functional form (log linear) of private savings be-

havior, where saving is homogeneous of degree 1 in income and wealth and

 thus is homogenous of degree zero in those arguments when we examine saving

per unit of wealth.
                                            35

        7
            For the derivation of       in (9a), see the appendix.

        8The assumption of absence of speculative bubbles is an issue which

has been explored theoretically by Brock (1974), and was tested by Flood

and Garher (1980).


        91t would be only slightly more difficult to handle a foreign security

whose price in logs varies inversely (but linearly) with the foreign rate

of interest and directly with expected future output abroad. If we allow

such securities, we introduce another channel for foreign disturbances to

enter the small country.
      10
           Our main results are robust to some generalizations of our loss func-

tion. In particular our insulation results would be duplicated for b set

to                                          -2             or       .   .
                                                                to minimize some functions
     minimize output variance, E[(y_y) ],

future deviations of output from '        or       .       For instance if we minimize


E[( z
     1=0
           (yt+i_t+i)_1)21,     where    > 1       is the social discount rate, our

results follow exactly.

      11
            In the two-good case, real income is not equivalent to real output.

It is more appropriate to assume that society wishes to minimize real in-

come variance rather than real output variance. Thus the loss function

might be specified as


               L =
                     E{(yt_y)   +
                                                   -
                                                       -
                                                            [pt_pt_s])
                                                                            -2   }



which simplifies to


               L =
                     E{(y_yt)   +
                                    (P-p)      }




where         is derived in a similar fashion to the small country case, and

is the level of Pt which would prevail in an equilibrium with y =
                                                              36




For our purpose this loss function is really no different from the loss

function in Section II. The proof is as follows. Using equation (21),

we can write equilibrium output and desired output as


              =         - lt               Pt -       + 2t +

                                                  -
         yt   =         - Ll(P.t - p - s)             +
                                                          A2y
                                                                   +




Subtracting           from            gives


                  -           -            = - lt         -




so


          (Pt -           =
                              _(l_2)
                                       l              -




Substituting      this expression into the loss function written above gives



                         (1_2)2                           " 2
         L = (1 +                             E{(y -               1.
                                  2




     12We study agents' expectations in temporary TTF regimes in Flood and

Marion (1980).
                                        37




                                   References


Argy, V. and Porter, M. (1972). "The Forward Exchange Market and the Effects

    of Domestic and External Disturbances Under Alternative Exchange Rate

    Systems," I.M.F. Staff Papers, Volume 19, No. 3.


Brock, W. (1974). "Money and Growth: The Case of Long-Run Perfect Foresight,"

    International Economic Review, 15, 750-77.


Fischer, S. (l977a). "Stability and Exchange Rate Systems in a Monetarist

    Model of the Balance of Payments," in R. Aliber, ed. The Political Economy

    of Monetary Reform, Montclair, N.J.: Allanheld, Osmun and Co.


           (l977b). "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability," in K. Brunner

    and A. Meltzer, eds., Stabilization of the Domestic and International

    Economy, Amsterdam: North-Holland Press.


Flood, R.    (1979). "Capital Mobility and the Choice of Exchange Rate System"

    International Economic Review, Volume 20, No. 2.   ,   405-416.


Flood, R. and N. Marion (1980). "Exchange Rate Regimes in Transition:

    Italy 1974", unwritten.

       and   Garber, P. (1980). "Market Fundamentals vs. Price Level Bubbles:
    The First Tests," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Friedman, M. (1968).     "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic   Review,

    58, March, 1-17.


Gray, J.    (1976). "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of

    Monetary Economics, 2, 221-235.


Lanyi, A.    (1975). "Separate Exchange Markets for Capital and Current Trans-

    actions, IMF Staff Papers, Volume 22, No. 3.
                                        38

Lucas, R. (1972). "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis", in

    0. Eckstein (ed.), Econometrics of Price Determination Conference,

    Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve and S.S.R.C., 50-59.


           (1973). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in K. Brunner

    and A. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Amsterdam:

   North-Holland, 19-46.


Marion, N.     (1977). "Two-Tier Exchange Rates and the Role of Monetary Policy,"

   unpublished PhD dissertation, Princeton University.


           (1980). "Insulation Properties of Two-Tier Exchange Rates in a

    Portfolio-Balance Model," Economica, forthcoming.


Phelps, E. S.     (1970) et. al. Macroeconomic Foundations of Employment and

    Inflation Theory, New York: W. W. Norton.


Rehm, D.     (1979). "Exchange Rate and Income Stability: A Preliminary Analysis,"

   unpublished, Columbia University.


Sachs, J.     (1980). "Wage Indexation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and Macroeconomic

    Policy Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
