                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             ADJUSTMENT TO VARIATIONS IN IMPORTED
         INPUT PRICES: THE ROLE OF ECONOMIC STRUCTURE



                 Louka Kat sel i—Papae fst rat iou


                     Nancy Peregrim Marion


                     Working Paper No. 501




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                             July 1980




The authors wish to thank William Branson and Robert Flood for use-
ful comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper 1/501
                                                                    July, 1980



         Adjustment to Variations in Imported Input Prices:
                   The Role of Economic Structure



                               ABSTRACT


     This paper introduces an imported input into a model of art open

economy with developed financial markets, a flexible exchange rate,

and some degree of market   power on the export side.
     The model is designed to investigate the impact of an increase

in imported input prices on the exchange rate, domestic interest

rate, income and nontraded—goods prices. The analysis reveals that

changes in various structural parameters, such as the degree of

market   power or the extent of   "demand—side openness" or "financial

openness,"   alter the transmission of foreign price disturbances fo
the domestic economy.




Louka Katseli—Papaefstratiou                       Nancy Peregrim Marion
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
P.O. Box 1987, Yale Station                        Dartmouth College
New Haven, CT 06520                                Hanover, NH 03755
203—436—8414                                       603—646—2511
       One of the most important economic disturbances in recent years
was the fourfold increase in oil prices in 1974. Preceded by a
series of harvest failures and a period of expansionary domestic
policies in most countries, the explosive rise in oil prices was a
factor behind the acceleration of price increases and the formation
of adverse inflationary expectations. It also worsened unemployment
and current—account positions in most oil—importing countries.
       Table     1 shows the improvement in OPEC's terms of trade over the
last decade. The terms of trade improved by 270.3 percent in 1973-74,
5.6   percent in 1975—76 and          35.8   percent in 1978—79.




                           Table 1:    OPEC Terms of Trade
                 Period   averages as Index Numbers, 1974 = 100

                          Oil   Pricesa         Import             Terms of Trade
      1970   —   72              19                   66                28
      1973                       31                   84                37
      1974                      100                  100               100
      1975                       98                  111                89
      1976                      106                  113                94
      1977                      114                  124                92
      1978                      117                  144                81
      1979                      178                  163               110
      Q4 1979                   233                  172               135

      Source:     World Financial Market, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of
                  New York, May 1979, p. 3.
      Notes:      a. Official sales price of OPEC "market crude" in ii. S.
                      dollars through 1978; weighted average of all OPEC
                      prices thereafter including surcharges.
                  b. Wholesale prices of nonfood manufactures in industrial
                      countries expressed in U.S. dollar terms and weighted
                      by these countries share in OPEC imports.
                                         2




        The adjustment of oil-importing countries to the higher oil prices

has not been uniform. As can be seen in Table 2, inflation

rates have differed considerably across most oil—importing countries

despite the common external oil price shocks.



                                      Table 2


          Annual % Change of the Consumer Price Index in Selected
                                  OECD Countries


Country/Year            1965_701       1974—75     1975—76    1976—77   1977—78
United States             4.3             9.2           5.8     6.5        7.5
Canada                    3.9            10.7           7.5     8.0        8.9

Japan                     5.5            11.9           9.3     8.0        3.8
Switzerland               3.4             6.7           1.7     1.3       1.1
Federal Republic
   of Germany             2.4             5.9           4.5     3.9       2.6
United Kingdom            4.6            24.2       16.5       15.9       8.3
France                    4.5            11.7           9.2     9.5       9.2
Netherlands               5.0            10.5           8.8     6.4       4.1
Belgium                   3.3            12.7           9.2     7.0       4.5
Denmark                   6.6             9.6           9.0    11.1      10.1

Italy                     3.0            17.0       16.8       16..9     12.2


Source:    II'4F, International Financial Statistics

Notes   on Table 2
1Average   annual %   change    for the whole period.


This differential response can be partly attributed to differences in
policy reaction and partly to more fundamental differences in economic
structure. Such structural characteristics as an economy's openness,1
                                    3



its   degree of market power, the elasticity of substitution among    goods,
factors or financial assets, the composition of trade, and the extent

of wage indexation may affect the way an economy adjusts to an oil

price increase.

      The implications of variations in structural characteristics for

the transmission of external price disturbances have not been adequately

or systematically studied. Both the theoretical and empirical literature

is relatively sparse with the exception of some pioneering work in the

development field (Harberger 1964) and some more recent studies in

international finance (Whitman, 1969; Bruno and Sachs, 1979; Katseli-

Papaefstratiou, 1980; Flood and Marion, 1980).

       Section 2 of this paper develops a simple general equilibrium model

to analyze   the impact effects of a one—shot increase in the price    of

an imported intermediate good, such as oil, on    domestic prices, income,
the   domestic interest rate and the exchange rate of an oil-importing

economy with developed financial markets and a flexible exchange rate.

This framework would apply to most European countries which have various

degrees of market power on the export side but can be considered "small"

on the import side. The proposed framework of analysis is an extention

of some earlier work by both authors (Marion, 1977, 1979; Katseli—

Papaefstratiou, 1979, 1980) and others (Findlay and Rodriguez, 1977;

Buiter, 1978). The   analysis shows that an   increase in   imported input
prices depreciates the nominal exchange rate and reduces the domestic
interest   rate. Both nominal and real income fall. The impact on

nontraded goods prices and on the real exchange rate depends upon

specific parameter values.
                                       4




       Section 3 of the paper discusses the role of structural characteristics

in the transmission process. While the model can be used to isolate the

effects   of numerous structural parameters on the transmission process,
we choose to focus on   four:     (1) market   power, (2) the marginal propensity
to   save, (3) the substitutability of financial assets (financial open-

ness), and (4) the share of traded goods in total consumption (real

demand—side openness). The present study, which concentrates on        the.
theoretical   foundations   of the problem, indicates that these structural
characteristics affect the transmission process in significant ways.
For   example, it is shown that   decreased market power dampens both the
depreciation of the home currency and the       drop in nominal income that

follow   a rise in imported input prices. Increased asset substitutability
exacerbates the depreciation of the home currency but dampens the drop
in nominal income. An increased marginal propensity to consume traded
goods exacerbates the depreciation of the exchange rate but does not
modify the drop in income.
                                 5




                            2. The Model



     Consider an economy with a financial sector and a goods sector.

The financial sector consists of two domestic, nontraded assets,

namely money and interest—earning bonds, and an internationally—traded

bond. The goods sector is composed of four goods. The economy

produces and domestically consumes a nontraded (home) good, imports a

finaland añintermediate good, neitherofwhich is produced domestically,

and exports a final good which is produced domestically and consumed

at home and abroad. While there is some degree of market power on the

export side, the country is a price—taker in both import markets. The

disaggregated financial and goods sectors together determine four

endogenous variables: the domestic interest rate, the exchange rate,

the price of nontraded goods and income. The full model is set out

and described below.
                                     6




                                Notation



Asterisks refer to foreign variables of foreign—exchange denominated

     variables

Superscripts s and       d refer   to supplies or demands of goods


A    —   the financial wealth of domestic residents, nominal terms
L    —   domestic money
B    —   domestic nontraded bonds, with fixed price and variable
         interest rate

F    —   net   claims on foreigners, with fixed price and   variable
         interest rate, denominated in foreign currency

e    —   exchange rate, domestic—currency price of foreign currency
     —   fraction   of income held as money balances

b    —   domestic demand for nontraded bonds
f    —   domestic demand for net claims on foreigners
r    —   interest   rate on domestic bonds

V    —   national income (value added), nominal terms
H    -   nontraded (home) goods
X    —   export goods          -
R    -   intermediate   goods, imported
     -   imports of final goods
W    —   nominal wage
     -   price of nontraded goods
pX   —   price   of export goods in domestic currency

P —      price   of final—good imports in domestic currency
                                   7



    —
        price of intermediate goods in domestic currency
C   —
        desired nominal consumption expenditures
S   —   desired nominal saving
g   -   desired   wealth

A   -   speed   of adjustment of actual wealth to desired wealth
    - shift parameter reflecting domestic supply conditions
    —   shift   parameter reflecting world market conditions
                                              8




                                          The Model



(1)    L — 2(r)V          = 0



(2)    B — b(r,       r*, V,A) = 0



(3)    eF —    f(r,       r*, A) = 0



(4)    A =L +         B     + eF



(5)                   —    Hd[P, X' MP'            = 0


(6)    V =
             PHH
                   + PXS        -
                                    PRR



(7)    c=v-s

(8)    S =   A[g(r,       r*, V) —     A]

         =    P(e,        P0, q)

              *
(10)   pNP =ePMP

(11)          eP
                                             9




         The asset—market specification draws on the work by Tobin (1969),

Ko.uri    (1976),    Branson (1977) and others. Asset demands can be written

in   nominal terms as:

              Ld = 9(r,       V)   2(r)V;        r < 0,     > 0


              Bd =   b(r, r*, V, A) ;            b, bA > 0 ; b, by <

             eFd =     f(r,    r*, A)   ;        r < °
                                                                  fr*   A0
The demand for money depends on the              domestic interest rate and income.
The demands for both interest-bearing bonds depend on the domestic

and foreign     interest rates and          on wealth. The demand for domestic

bonds also depends on income. The specification assumes •that changes

in   income affect only the demands for domestic assets while changes
in wealth affect only the demands for interest—earning assets. In
addition, it is assumed that the demand for money is homogeneous of
degree one in income.2
         The specification of asset demands does not take into account

wealth    holders' expectations of future exchange—rate            movements. These

are worked out in Appendix 1. Since we are interested in the short-

run effects of the          oil price rise, and since the 1974 price hike
was generally unanticipated, it does not seem inappropriate to assume

static    expectations.
      Asset demands are stock demands, and they are realized instan—
taneously so        that   actual holdings of assets always reflect the desired
composition    of the portfolio. Because exchange rates are flexible, the
                                         10




nominal   stock of money is exogenously determined by the central bank
and equal    to the money holdings of the private sector:

           L = -L      =       d
                               L


In the short run, the stocks of interest-bearing assets available to
domestic residents are also fixed and equal to the demands for those
assets:

           B=     B    =       Bd


           eF =       eF   =       eFd




b.   Labor Markets
     There   are two domestically—produced goods in this economy:   Cl)


the exportable good, which uses labor (N) and a fixed stock of capital

(K) in the production process, and (2) the nontraded good, which uses

labor, a fixed capital stock and an intermediate import good. The

production function for the exportable good is:


                           =                  0
                               F(Nxi     ;




and for the nontraded good:


          H =                                 0
                min{G(NHI 1(H), —R} ;

It is assumed that while capital and labor are gross substitutes in

domestic production, value added in the home goods sector and the

imported input are used in fixed proportions, with bHI the input-output

coefficient, set equal to unity for convenience.3
                                                    11


       Profit-maximizing              behavior in the two sectors would imply that the

nominal   wage is equated to the value of the marginal product of labor
in the export-good sector but to the net value of marginal product
in   the nontraded good sector. Thus,


             XS: pxS
                 X
                     =                w




             HS: (PH _P)HS =
                                     R NH

       The   supply of labor in both sectors is assumed                 to   depend on the expected
real wage (i), where the expected price level is assumed to be a function
of the consumer price index. Thus,
                        w
             q(N.) =                        > 0 ,   i=    X, H
                                       qN
             P = h(P)       ;         1 > h' > 0

                                                                         3
             P =
                   a1PH
                            + a2P + a3PMP ;              1 > a. > 0 ,        a. =   1


       This   is the most general specification of the labor markets. Several
specific cases can              be   examined. If there is complete money illusion,
     = 0; if there is no money illusion, h' = 1.                    If real wages are rigid,

then d(-) =                       0; if instead nominal wages are fixed, then

dW =   d(Pq(N.))    =   0.           It turns out that whether real or nominal wages

are   rigid or whether money illusion prevails or not makes                    no

qualitative     difference for the impact effects of an oil                  price rise.5

So   long as entrepreneurs watch their own prices while workers watch the
CPI, the supplies of nontraded goods and export goods will be positively
related to their respective prices. The proof                      is presented in Appendix
                                       12




2. Consequently, we will proceed with the analysis assuming nominal

wage rigidity. The results hold equally well for the other cases

mentioned.



c.      Commodity   Markets
        Equations (5)-•(ll)   describe the market for nontraded goods, which

is continuously        cleared, the income identity and prices.

        Given the assumption of nominal     wage rigidity,   the supply of

nontraded goods in (5) is negatively related to the net real wage
inthatsector. The demand for home goods depends on the relative
prices of all final consumer goods, which are assumed to be gross

substitutes in demand, anddesiredconsumptionexpenditures,which is defined

in equation (7) as the difference between income and desired saving. (The

distinction between national income and disposable income is ignored.)

The demand function is homogeneous of degree zero in all prices and

consumption and the indifference curves are assumed to be homothetic.6

        In the presence of intermediate goods, GNP is equal to value added

which, in    turn, is equal to the total value of production minus the
value    of imported inputs (equation 6).

        Desired real saving, which is equal to the flow excess demand for

wealth, is homogeneous of degree one in real income and real wealth,

yielding (8) in nominal terms. If desired wealth exceeds the actual

stock of wealth, domestic residents save. In the absence of government

debt creation or domestic money creation, the private sector accumulates

wealth through the balance of payments.

     The price equations for all traded goods are given by equations
                                       13




(9)—(l1). The country      is   assumed   to   be small on the import side so

that (10) and (11) simply convert the international prices into

domestic currency units. The country is not small on the export side,

however. It is assumed to possess some market power (k) which is

measured by decreasing elasticity of demand (in absolute value) for

exports. Thus, the domestic—currency price for the exportable is

not fixed but is itself a function of the exchange rate, domestic

supply conditions, and     world   market conditions.7



d.    The Solution

      The model can be solved for four endogenous variables —           the   price

of nontraded goods, the exchange rate, the interest rate and value

added. Since we are interested in the short-run effects of an increase

in intermediate good prices, the model is solved holding asset stocks

fixed.    In Appendix 3 we show that a sufficient condition          for local

stability   of the system is that the country not be too large on the
export side — or more generally, that a depreciation of the home currency,
ceteris   paribus, must increase value added. In the present model, where

an increase in value added implies an           increase   in saving and hence an

improvement in the current account, this condition is equivalent to the
Marshall—Lerner    condition. Whereas most portfolio—balance models stress
the importance of the Marshall—Lamer condition              for dynamic stability,

in   this model the condition becomes relevant for local stability as well.
      Imposing   the   Marshall—Lerner condition, we report the effects of an
increase in the international price of the           imported   input on the endogenous
variables in Table 3.
                                                           14




                                                   Table 31




                                             Effect

                       DiSturbanc'N\ —u.
                                                                              --e
                                                                                       dr      dv    d(
                                                                                                          P   d()/()
                                    dP*               I



                                                                   ?            +



                dP    P                                        P
                     HIH      =                          RDl
 PP                                              + )'5] —.

                                                  p
                dele                 frB H2. H PHHS(l                     +           D1
Zep* =                                                                          EH)


                                                                   p
Zrp* =
                  dr       = eF      (1—f ) B                            P H5(1+EH) D1
                                                 A H      2.
                                                                         H
            dPlP
                                             p
             dv
Zq* =*                 = -eF(1       - f )v2. — P HS(l + E )B
                                             A     r H H                              H H



where
     E. > 0; i = X, H is the price elasticity of supply
        1
            > 0                is the own price—elasticity of demand for home goods
     BH

     B    >0; j            = X, MP are the cross—price                                elasticities of demand
      H,J
                     dH
            =
                H              is   the marginal propensity to consume home goods


    1=                    +          —
                                                   (1 +                   = ?
                HR            m.(l
                                         p
                                                                   EH)


            =                  H5(l+EH)                                   > 0          for stability
                PxXs(l+Ex)k_P
                           H
                             H




                                                                                            continued. .
                                               ]4a




                                      Table   31 (cont'd)




          = —f       2.y — VZ eF (1— f.) > 0
      3          r     2     r        A
           EP
            HR  +B k+B        {(1—Aq)y2 +                                AeF   }   >0
             HR H,X H,MP HPHH
            p—P


     y.
      5
        —P HS(l+E
           H
                  )[mH
                  H
                                      PHHd
                                              Agr eF (1-f ) —
                                                            A
                                                                 fr4
                                                                   y I    <0
     D =         —
           (y        BH)13
                             +
                                 15
                                      < 0




1)   The sufficient condition for stability                 is that 2 > 0
                                 15



                                                                 p
      The sign of ZpH p is ambiguous on account of y1, where
                                                                 H
represents the supply—inflationary and demand-deflationary effects in

the nontraded goods market following the increase in the price of the

imported input. If the supply—inflationary effect outweighs the demand-

deflationary effect, then     < 0 and ZpH    is unambigously positive.

     Table 3 also shows that the increase in the price of the imported

input unambigously depreciates the home currency, lowers the domestic

interest rate, and reduces nominal income. As has been shown elsewhere

 (Katseli—Papaefstratious, 1980), the income response depends on the

character of the underlying production function. If the imported input

is a gross complement to the domestic factors of production, then an

increase in the price of the input will, ceteris paribus, increase its

total share in income, reducing value added. Table 3 also indicates that

an increase in imported input prices lowers real output but has an am-

biguous effect on the real exchange rate.

     The results in Table 3 are consistent with those obtained by Findlay—

Rodriguez (1977) and Buiter (1978) even though their models abstract

from a nontraded—goods sector, specify perfect asset substitutability,

and are dissimilar in some other respects. In the Findlay—Rodriguez

model, an oil price rise reduces real output and has an ambiguous effect

on the real exchange rate. In the Buiter model, it reduces real value

added and depreciates the nominal exchange rate.
                                           16




                    3.    The Role of Structural Characteristics



      As can   be    seen from Table 3,         all   the   solutions   are themselves
a function of a number of structural parameters, such as the degree
of market power on the export side (k), the marginal propensity to
save out of income (g),           the    substitutability of domestic and         foreign

interest—earning          assets (f) ,    the marginal propensity to consume
nontraded goods (m.H)l the own and cross-price elasticities of demand

(B11, B11.; i =      x,    mp), the elasticities of supply (E11,
                                                                           E)   and so

forth. The solutions in Table 3 can be partially differentiated

with respect to each of these parameters in order to determine what

effects changes in structure have on the transmission of external

price disturbances. The differential path of adjustment experienced

by industrialized countries after the series of price increases in

oil and other raw materials may be understood, in part, by differences

in these structural characteristics.

      Rather than provide a complete taxonomy, we choose to focus on four

structural parameters, namely the degree of market power in the export

market (k), the marginal propensity to save (g), the degree of financial

substitutability               and the marginal propensity to consume traded goods

(mT 1-rn11). The results of partially differentiating the solutions

in   Table 3    with respect to each of these structural parameters are

reported   in Table 4.
                                           17


                                      Table 4


                   Effect
                            ZPH,P           Zep*         Zrp* Zp*
Disturbance\\
         k




                                                +
         -f
              r
     m =   (1—rn       )
                                                +          0           0
      T            H




Notes:
1.   A positive sign indicates that the change in structure exacerbates

     the impact effect.

2.   A negative sign indicates that the change in structure dampens
     the impact effect; note that in cases where the impact effect is
     negative, a negative          sign   in Table 4     indicates   a positive second
     derivative.

3.   An increase in k signifies decreased market power on the export side.

4.   An increase in g signifies an increased marginal propensity to save.

5.   A greater negative value for f signifies increased asset sub-

     stitutability.
6.   An increase in mT signifies an increased marginal propensity to

     consume       traded goods.
7.   The signs in the fourth row are                derived assuming perfect asset

     substitutability.
                                         18




a.     Market Power

       As noted in footnote (7.), market power in the export market can

be measured by k, where


(12)       kI =        _X
                       d
                      d-s
                      XX
                          = __l s              0< k —
                                                    <          i
                                ,
                                    d
                                     x

If   a country faces an infinitely elastic demand curve for its exports
(d =    co), i.e., if the country is "small" in the export market,                   k =   i.8
Alternatively,        as demand becomes less than perfectly elastic (d ->                0),
k-     0 and    the country can be said to possess                 market power in the

export sector.

       Table    4 shows that decreased market power dampens the depreciation
of the home currency and moderates the drop in the domestic interest
rate and value        added that follow an        increase in P. The effect of
decreased      market power on the   percentage change in domestic prices is
uncertain,      however.

       These findings can best be understood by recognizing that as the

country   becomes "small" in the export market, the indirect effects of
a given depreciation become larger. From footnote (7) we have

          dP            dq°                            dP°
           pv
                  =   k (—0
                              + —) + (1       —
                                                  k)       0
                         qX                            P
                                                           x

As k increases, the depreciation caused by the increase in P produces a
larger increase in the domestic price of exportables and thus a smaller
drop in value added than would otherwise be the case. The increase in
now causes a smaller drop in money demand, dampening the depreciation of
                                          19



the   home currency and the drop in interest rates       required   to restore

money-market equilibrium.

        Decreased market power     also   implies that a given depreciation

reduces the demand—deflationary effect of a rise in            since there

is   now a higher 2<, which    implies a greater substitution towards home

goods    and also a bigger income effect. However, since decreased
market power actually dampens the depreciation of the home currency,
its net effect on the demand        for home goods and consequently   on the
percentage    change in home good prices is uncertain.

        In summary,   the   results suggest that economies which differ in

market power but are otherwise similar in structure and policy attitude

should experience different degrees of currency depreciation. Countries

with relatively less market power on the export side should experience

a   smaller depreciation of their currencies following an increase in
imported input prices. The results also suggest that countries which
differ in market power may experience different degrees of income
decline. These observations might be relevant in analyzing the impact
of the oil price increase on various European economies.
                                   20




b.    The Marginal Propensity to Save
      An increased marginal propensity to save (g) also affects the
way an external price disturbance is transmitted to the economy.
Table 4 shows that an increased marginal propensity to save dampens
the depreciation of the home currency and moderates the drop in
interest rates and income that accompany a rise in P. Its effect
on the percentage change in nontraded—goods prices depends on specific
parameter values.
      These findings can be understood, in part, by examining expres-
sion (13)


(13)P.        y   =
                      —EP
                       HR +   m
                                          P
                                  (1—Ag) —(l+E)
                      HR                  9H
                                              H




The terms on the right-hand side of (13) represent the supply—inflationary
and demand—deflationary effects in the home goods market brought about
by the increase in P. If the drop in supply exceeds the drop in
demand, (13) is negative and home—good prices will increase.
      Expression (13) indicates that an increase in the marginal pro-
pensity to   save reduces the demand—deflationary effect of an increase

in   P, requiring a greater increase in home—good prices to restore
equilibrium   in that market. Consequently, if an increase in imported

input prices raises home—good prices -   that   is, if the supply-inflationary

effect dominates so that ZPH,P > 0 —    then   an increased marginal

propensity to save will exacerbate this price increase. If, on the
                                        21




other hand, the demand—deflationary effect dominates, so that domestic

prices fall, an increased marginal propensity to save will dampen or

even reverse this price decline.

       Since   an increased marginal propensity to save requires a greater
increase in    home—good   prices, it   causes   a smaller drop in value added
than   would   otherwise be the case. Consequently, the drop in money
demand will be moderated, dampening the depreciation of the home
currency and the drop in -interest rates required to restore money—
market equilibrium.
     These results suggest that differences in the marginal propensity
to save can cause economies to react differently to changes in imported
input prices. Economies       with a greater marginal propensity to save

will   tend to experience increased upward pressure on home—good prices,
a smaller depreciation of their currencies and         a   smaller drop in
nominal   income.
                                                    22




c.     Asset Substitutability

       The substitutability of foreign and domestic bonds, which might

be considered an index of financial openness, can be approximately

measured by r' the partial derivative of the demand for foreign

assets with respect to the domestic interest rate. To see this,

suppose that the demand functions for both foreign and domestic

bonds are exponential functions:


(14)       eFd           exp + r*               ;        a, ,   0 > 0


                                   —
(15)       Bd =         exp            Src   At ;          5         > 0


       From the specification of the asset demand functions we know that

           b
            r
                   =    -fr -r         V


so that


           y= a + Z                     where Z =

We   also know that

                       = —b
           f *
               r           r
                               *




so that

                   S


It   follows that the ratio of the two demand functions is


                       = exp—(2a+Z)r + 2r V
                                          —E A (0
           eFd                                                   —

           B'
                                         23




Converting to logs, we have


           2n(—) = —r(2a+Z)        +   2r*    -   c(in   V) +          (0 -   )ZnA

so that


                          1
(16)                 -
                           d
                               =   —(2a+Z) =      2fr    +   2.
                                                                  r
                                                                      V <     0
                         eF
                         Bd

       As can be seen in equation (16), there is a correspondence between

   and the substitutability of interest—earning assets given a change

in the domestic interest rate.

       The results of differentiating the solutions in Table 3 with

respect to f are reported in Table 4. Greater asset substitutability

(i.e., a larger negative number for f) implies that there will be a

larger shift in the demand for foreign assets for any given change

in the domestic interest rate. Thus an increase in                            which reduces

the interest rate will create a larger excess demand for foreign bonds

and a larger excess supply of domestic assets, thereby exacerbating

the depreciation of the home currency and dampening the fall in

income and the domestic interest rate. The effect of increased asset

substitutability on the percentage change in home—good prices is

unclear.

       In summary, one would expect countries which are more financially

open — whose domestic assets are closer substitutes for foreign

assets —   to   experience a larger depreciation of their currencies and a

smaller drop in their interest rates than those which are relatively closed.
                                               24




d.   Demand—side Openness

     Real demand—side openness can be measured by the value share

of traded goods in total expenditures:

                  p xd÷PM Mpd
                              P
         mT = _X                           1 - ____

Since we have assumed the indifference curves to be homothetic, it

follows that

                          =       dH'
                      C           dC

so that demand—side openness can be rewritten as

                                       d
                                  dH       =        -
         mT =     1
                           HdC                 1


Note that increased demand—side openness is inversely related to an

increase in the   marginal        propensity to consume nontraded goods (ma).

Differentiating   the solutions iii Table 3 with respect to mT gives
ambiguous results. If it is assumed instead that the economy faces
a world of perfect asset substitutability then an increase in the price
of the intermediate input will have the same qualitative effect on
home—good price3 nd the exchange rate but will not alter the domestic
interest iate or nominal value addec. The reasons for these latter
results are straightforward. With perfect asset substitutability and
static expectations, the domestic interest rate cannot deviate from
the foreign interest rate. Nominal value added does not change because
the direct dampening effect on value added due to the increase in imported
input prices will be offset exactly by the depreciation of the home cur-
rency.
                                    25




     Differentiating   this new set of solutions with respect to mT we
find that increased demand—side openness exacerbates the depreciation
of the home currency but has no effect on nominal value added or the
domestic interest rate. Its effect on home—good prices depends on
specific parameter values. If the increase in imported input prices
raises home—good prices-——that is, if the supply—inflationary effect
dominates the demand—deflationary effect in the home—goods market———
then increased consumption of traded goods dampens the inflationary
pressures. If an increase in imported input prices lowers home—good
prices, this drop is exacerbated.
     These results can best be understood by recognizing that greater
demand—side openness increases on net the demand—deflationary effect
of a rise   in    It   reduces the substitution effect away from traded
goods as the home currency depreciates and it increases the substitution
effect away from home goods towards traded goods once the price of home
goods starts rising. Both substitution effects tend to increase the
net demand—deflationary effect in the home—goods market.

    The results suggest that the    degree   of demand—side openness has

important implications for the way an economy adjusts to a change in

imported input prices. Economies with a relatively greater fraction of

traded goods consumed should experience a larger depreciation of their

currencies but a smaller inflationary effect on nontraded—goods prices.
                                     26


                              4.    Conclusion



       The macroeconomic model shows that an increase in imported raw

material prices will depreciate the home currency and lower nominal

value added, real output and domestic interest rates. The effects on the

real   exchange rate and on nontraded—goods prices depend on specific
parameter values. If the supply—inflationary effect dominates the
demand—deflationary effect in the nontraded—goods market, then prices
in   that market will rise.

       The analysis also suggests that differences in economic structure

do affect the transmission of external price increases t. the domestic

economy. This might    account,    in part, for the varied experiences of

oil-importing countries following the oil-price increase in 1974. Much

research still needs to be done to isolate the effects of other struc-

tural parameters on the transmission process and to test the resulting

hypotheses empirically.
                                   27




                               Footnotes



1.   Openness is measured in different ways. Real—side openness can

     be measured by the value share of exportables in total GDP or

     by the value share of traded goods in total consumption expend-

     itures. It can also be measured by the degree of dependence

     on imported inputs. Financial—side openness might be measured

     by the proportion of foreign assets in total wealth or by the

     degree of substitutability between domestic and foreign interest-

     earnings assets.


2.   It follows that

     (a)r b +V+f
             r  r
                  =0 =>                 b
                                            r   >jQjv
                                                   r      ;   b
                                                                  r   >lI
                                                                        r


     (b)    b + fr* = 0             >
                                        fr*     =


     (c)    b   +   .Q   = 0        >   b        =   -2




      (d)   bA+fAl

3.   For the implications of relaxing these assumptions, see Katseli—

     Papaefstratiou (1980).


4.   The interesting question of how differences in wage structure

     qualitatively affect the transmission of external price distur—

     bances is not explored in this paper.
                                                        28



5.   The economy-wide supply of labor is fixed, but labor can move

     freely between the export and nontraded goods sectors.

6.   This set of assumptions implies that:

     (a) BH_BH,j=BH,c; j=X,MP
                     J


     (b) BHc = 1

     where BH and BHj are the own— and cross—price elasticities of

     demand, respectively, and BH                                is the consumption elasticity.

     The homotheticity assumption will be important when the role of

     demand—side openness is examined.



7.   For a full description of how one can incorporate market power into

     a macro model, see Branson and Katseli-Papaefstratiou (1980).

     Given the supply of exports, which is expressed in

     home currency units nP = 2,rip° ÷ S1 9.nX, and the demand for

     exports, which is expressed in foreign exchange units

     ZnP = £nq + d12nX, we can solve for the market—clearing price,

            Converting the solution into percentage terms yields

                                           o                             o
            dP             -s         dP                 d             dqx
                 X
                     =          x          x
                                                +
                                                             x                +   de
            P
             X
                         d—s
                          xx          P   o             d—s
                                                         xx '0
                                                            q                     e
                                          x                             x


                                x
                                          dP°              x     dP°
                                                                             do
                     =    (1—k)—
                               o
                                                    +   k(—
                                                          o
                                                                        +    —)
                                                                             e
                                          P                      qx
                                           x

                           d
                              X       =         1
     where                                                   '
                          x       x
                                                    x

      and   d , s        are price—elasticities of demand and supply, respectively.
             x       x
                                   29



     If the country has no market power, the demand for exports curve
     is   infinitely elastic (dx   _co)   and k = 1.   As demand becomes

     less than perfectly elastic (as d rises from —°°),       k falls from
     1.



8.   It should be noted that k =   1 if    S=   0, regardless of the degree
     of   market   power.
                                    30



                               BIBLIOGRAPHY




Branson,    W. H., 1977, Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange

     Rate Determination, Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen, Band 1.

Branson, W. H., and Katseli—Papaefstratiou, L. T., 1980, Income

     Instability, Terms of Trade and the Choice of Exchange Rate

     Regime, Journal of Development Economics, 7, March, 49—69.

Bruno, M. and Sachs, J., 1979, Supply vs. Demand Approaches to the

     Problem of Stagflation, National Bureau of Economic Research

     Working Paper No. 382.

Buiter, W., 1978, Short-run and Long-run Effects of External Distur-

     bances Under a Floating Exchange Rate, Economica45, August, 251-272.

Findlay, R., and Rodriguez, C., 1977, Intermediate Imports and

     Macroeconomic Policy Under Flexible Exchange Rates, Canadian

     Journal of Economics 10, May, 208-217.

Flood, R., and Marion, N., 1980, The Transmission of Disturbances

     Under Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing,

     mimeo.

Harberger, A., 1964, Some Notes on Inflation, in Baer W., and

     Kerstenetzky, I. edts., Inflation and growth in Latin .nterica,

     R. D. Irwin, Homewood, Illinois.

Katseli—Papaefstratiou, L., 1979, Transmission of External Price

     Disturbances in Small, Open Economies, Garland Press, N.Y.

________ 1980, Transmission of External Price Disturbances and the

     Composition of Trade, Journal of International Economics,

     May.
Kouri, P. J. K., 1976, The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments

     in the Short Run      and in   the Long Run: A Monetary Approach,

     Scandinavian Journal of Economics Th, May, 280—304.

Marion, N., 1977, Two-Tier Exchange Rates and       the   Role of Monetary

     Policy, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University.

________     1979,   Real—Wage Rigidities, Real Disturbances, and Exchange—
     Rate Overshooting, inimeo.
Tobin, J.,   1969, A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,

     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, I-i.

Whitman, M. v. N., 1969, Economic Openness and       International   Financial

     Flows, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1-4, November.
                                              32




                                           Appendix 1



     The model specified in the text can be modified to reflect the
fact that the private sector has              nonstatic           expectations about the
future behavior of prices and              exchange      rates. Nonstatic expectations
will alter the   expected      nominal rates of return in the asset demand
functions and    the   expected real rates of return in the savings func-
tion. Letting rt1 and 2        represent           the   expected         rate of change in
exchange   rates and prices respectively, the model can now be specified

as follows:


Asset Markets

     (1—Al)       L —    V2(r) = 0
     (2—Al)       B —   b(r,       r* +       V, A) = 0

     (3—Al)       eF -      f(r,    r* + Trr A)          0

     (4—Al)       AL+B+eF
Goods Market

     (5—Al)                            —                                    = 0
                                            Hd(PH,      pX MP'
     (6-Al)       V =          —             +

     (7-Al)       C=V-S
     (8—Al)       S =    X[g(r     —         r*    +         —
                                                                 1121
                                                                        V) — A]


     (9—Al)       dir2 =
                            a1_! + a2                        + a3'MP

                        =
                            a1          + (a2k      +
                                                        a3) diT1
                                                33



       Expectations can be endogenized in many ways. One simple way is
to   assume regressive, or inelastic, expectations. This means that a

percentage increase in a variable generates the expectation of a

percentage decrease.

       For example, the expected            depreciaUon of the   exchange rate is:



                dir
                      1
                          =
                              e   ;    -l   <
                                            —    ct<O


When a = —1, expectations are completely inelastic. The future exchange

rate is expected to return completely to its previous level. When

-l <   a   <   0,   the future exchange rate is expected to be at a level in-

between the past rate and the currently prevailing rate. Of course,

when a =       0,   expectations are static.

       The     expected rate of change in home—good prices can be expressed
in   a similar fashion:


                          =           ; —l<y<O

       The three equations (1-Al), (3-Al) and (5-Al) can be solved for
the impact effects of a change in international prices on the price
of nontraded (home) goods, the nominal exchange rate and the domestic
interest rate. A sufficient condition for local stability of the
system is that the trade be negative and that the 3 x 3 determinant
be negative, where
                                    34




                      a11    a12       a13          dPI/PH

                       0                —
       Determinant
                      a21    a22                        dr
                                       a23

                       —      +         ?


                      a31    a32       a33              de/e



and where


       a13 = 14 + mH —d{Ag (a2k +
                                  a3)c&
                                             —
                                                 Ag(l    —
                                                             a2k
                                                                   —
                                                                       a3)c&}

       a33 =


and    14 and 2 are defined below Table 3 in the text.



       Stability requires that 2 be positive. In other words, a depre—

ciation must increase value—added and thus saving, improving the

current account.            This condition is equivalent to the Marshall—

Lerner condition.

      In addition, a negative determinant requires that the bracketed term

in
     a13 be positive. This will be true as long as the Marshall—Lerner
condition holds and as long as g "S.   g.        The interpretation of this

second condition is as follows. A depreciation of the home currency

generates an expected appreciation, lowering the expected real return

on foreign assets and increasing the expected real return on domestic

assets. Stability is ensured if the net effect of the actual depreciation
                                    35




on expected real rates of return is to raise consumption on the home

good.

        Imposing stability, a change in imported input prices will have the

same qualitative effects on the endogenous variables assuming inelastic

expectations as it does assuming static expectations.
                                                  36




                                            Appendix 2



         Taking the nontraded goods sector as an example, equilibrium in

 the labor market requires that


 (l-2A)                      = P q(N}) =           W
               (PHPf(NH)

where f(NH) is the marginal product of labor (f(N)H) and where all

initial prices except the price of intermediate goods are set equal

to unity, so that          = P =    W   =   1,    0 <              < 1,   and thus         = 1 and

f(NH) =              1 initially.


         Totally differentiating (l—2A) and substituting in the expressions

for P and P from the text yields



                 -                      =
 (2-2A)
                                            cl-PR
                                                           ha1]dp -            h
                                                                                    a2dP_h a3dPMP
                                                                                                      RR
so that

                                              1
                                                       -h
(3-2A)
             dHS = dHS   H         1-
                             = H[_— -
                                                               a1
                                                                           >    0
                                                   (l_PR)fN]

If real wages are rigid, so that                           0, then. (3—2A) is still positive.

The supply of home goods is also positively related to                                  in the case

of nominal wage rigidity, where in lieu of equation (2-2A) we have


(4—2A)
               (lPR)fNaNH =                                -
                                        'R             H       dPR)

so that


                     —
                     -   s   dNH              s
                                             H[—._____j
                                                               1

(5-2A)
                         H                                                 >   0
                                                 37




                                            Appendix 3



    Totally differentiating equations (1), (3) and (5) in the text

and putting them in matrix form, we have:




             (all
                             a12           a13

                                                      /   H\
(l-A3)                                                    dr   =
                 2l          a22           a23                     a24

                                                 ) (

                 a3          :32           a33   /                 34

where


        all=il_BH<O                              I




                       1
        a12      mH
                             Ag <0
                       Hd


        a13y4 >0
        a21 = 0

        a22 =f r <0

        a23 = —eF(l —              <   0



         a31 =   _2PHS(l + E11) < 0

         a
          32       r


         a33 =    2    = ?


 and y, y2, v4 are defined below Table 3 in the text.
                                 38




     Stability is ensured if the trace is negative and the determinant

is negative. Thus stability requires that the expression    embodied in

a13 and a33 be positive. Economically this means that a depreciation

must raise value added and hence the demand for domestic money. Since

an increase in value added also increases saving and the incipient

current—account surplus, the condition that   > 0 is equivalent to

the Marshall-Lerner condition. Note that stability requires the home

country to be sufficiently small on the export side. As k —> 0 (as the

country possesses increasing market power on the export side),   becomes

negative and stability is jeopardized.
