                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 IRREVERSIBILITY, UNCERTAINTY,
                    AND CYCLICAL INVESTMENT


                        Ben S. Bernanke



                     Working Paper No. 502




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           July 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Flucations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper //502
                                                                      July, 1980




                   Irreversibility, Uncertainty,
                      and Cyclical Investment



                             ABSTRACT



     The optimal timing of real investment is studied under the

assumptions that investment is irreversible and that new information

about returns is arriving over time. Investment should be undertaken

in this case only when the costs of deferring the project exceed the

expected value of inforrnation gained by waiting. Uncertainty, because

it increases the value of waiting for new information, retards the

current rate of investment. The nature of investor's optimal reactions

to events whose implications are resolved over time is a possible ex-

planation of the instability of aggregate investment over the business

cycle.




                                               Ben S. Bemanke
                                               Graduate School of Business
                                               Stanford University
                                               Stanford, CA 94305

                                               (415) 497—2763
      But I suggest that the essential character of the trade
      cycle. . . is mainly due to the way in which the marginal
      efficiency of capital fluctuates... (T)he marginal effi-
      ciency of capital depends, not only on the existing abund-
      ance or scarcity of capital—goods and the current cost of
      production of capital—goods, but also on current expecta-
      tions as to the future yield of capital—goods.... But,
      as we have seen, the basis for such expectations is
      very precarious. Being based on shifting and unreliable
      evidence, they are subject to sudden and violent changes.

                    Keynes, in Chapter 22 of The General Theory



1. Introduction

       The fluctuations of the marginal efficiency of capital, and the

attendant high variation in the aggregate demand for investment goods,

are still an important feature of business cycles. Our understanding

of these fluctuations, however, has not substantially advanced since
                                                 1
Keynes day. The earlier accelerator models             of investment exhibited

the right cyclical properties, but their decision—theoretic bases were

weak. More recent literature on investment demand has stressed long—

run considerations Investment is predicted to occur when expected

returns over the life of the project exceed its costs.2 This later work may

explain average investment over the longer term, but it does not do much

to help us understand the sometimes radical swings in investment spending

that can occur in a relatively short period.

       This paper presents a theory of investment in which optimizing

behavior and short—run investment fluctuations are compatible. Central

to the theory is an analysis of how newly—arriving information — Keynes'

"shifting and unreliable evidence" —   affects       the investment decision.

We will show that, when new information arrives continually over time,

knowledge of long—run expected return is not very helpful for determining

current optimal investment levels. Of much greater importance is the
                                    —2—



short—run consideration of whether deferring projects in order to

receive additional information is likely to be worthwhile.

      Two assumptions are crucial to our theory. First, we assume that

real investments are strictly irreversible. This is a reasonable

description of most investments. Once a machine tool is made, for in-

stance, it cannot be transformed into anything very unlike a machine

tool without a loss of economic value that we can take to be prohibitive.

This assumption does rule Out some interesting possibilities of partial

reversibility, e.g., the conversion of oil—fired plants to coal; however,

the model can be extended (profitably, we think) to handle such cases.

The existence of second—hand markets is not an important problem for this

assumption; on this point, see Part 6 (expecially Note 8).

       Our second assumption is that new information relevant to judging

investment returns arrives over time. This appears innocuous, but it is

a departure from the usual specification. Most theories distinguish two

classes of information ——   that   which the investor already possesses, and

that which he will not receive until after the investment has been made.

(Ignoranceof-the latter is the source of "risk".) We add here the class

of information which the investor does not have but can obtain at the

cost of waiting. The distinction between reducible and irreducible

ignorance ("uncertainty" and "risk") was first made by Frank Knight and

A. G. Hart3 but is not often seen currently.

      Under these two assumptions, investment in a given project be-

comes a problem in stochastic dynamic optimization. In each period the

potential investor must decide whether to commit himself immediately or to

defer commitment. The costs of deferral are lost output, or increased

construction costs. The gain is additional information, which may reveal

that the proposed investment should not be undertaken. The more disparate
                                  —3—




are the probable information—outcomes, the more likely it is that the

investor will defer commitment. "Uncertainty" is seen to retard in-

vestment, independently of considerations of risk or expected return.

Introduction of uncertainty can be associated with slack investment;

resolution of uncertainty with an investment boom.

       The rest of this paper is in six parts.   Part 2 sets up the

model for the case of an indivisible project. A sequential analysis

similar to that used in the theories of optimal search and optimal

sampling is employed. Part 3 introduces a measure of uncertainty and

shows its relation to investment. Part 4 extends the model to divisible

investments and gives an example based on the assumption of Dirichiet

priors. In Part 5 we develop an example in which an investment cycle is

generated by a single event with uncertain implications. Part 6 discusses

the role of irreversible investment in Keynesian and equilibrium macromodels.

Part 7 concludes. Proofs of the propositions are given in the Appendix.




2. The Case of a Single Project

       This section presents a simple model that illustrates the relation

between irreversible investment and newly—arriving information. Assume

that there is a single, indivisible investment project available, and a

single investor. At time t available information allows the investor

to form an estimate of the excess of long—run returns to the project over

the returns to an alternative, liquid asset. The problem is sequential.

In the discrete period of time t the investor has two options: He may

commit himself (irreversibly) to the project; or, he can wait a period,

deferring his decision.4 Each action has a cost. Commitment to the

project risks the possibility that information arriving later will show

him that the investment was a mistake, one that he cannot undo. Waiting,

on the other hand, is assumed to increase the cost of the project (should
                                       —4—



it ever be undertaken); this reflects, for example, output foregone in

the short—run or the higher costs of speedier construction. We would

like to know what strategy the investor should pick to go about maxi-

mizing his expected return.

       In order to answer this question, we introduce some notation.

It is simplest to work mainly with vectors, designated by

capital letters. Vector elements are notated by a superscript. The

problem is made finite by the assumption that there is a period T

after which the project is no longer available, or is prohibitively

costly. We let



             =   the set of possible information states in period t
                 (t'= t, t + 1,.. .,T)




     is of dimension n, x 1, where ni is the number of possible

information—states in t'.

       The information—state vectors are assumed to have a known joint

probability distribution, so that conditional probability matrices of

the form



                                > t"



are well—defined. The matrix P(ItlIt,i) is dimensioned nit x net.

       Define the T X       1    vector



       R =
             R(IT)
                                            —5—




to be the expected long—run excess return of the project, given all

information available in the last period. R may              be   measured in dollars

(for the risk—neutral) or in expected utiles (for other risk preferences).

Note that R is a random variable with respect to information—state

vectors 1' t < T.
       We         let c(t') be the (scalar) cost of building the project

in period t';           we will take              c(t') to be nonstochastic. c(t')

is nondecreasing in tt. For convenience, define



       C (t') =   c(t')x       i




where i is an             x 1 column—vector of ones.

       Applying familiar dynamic programming methods, we can show that the

irreversible project should be undertaken if the expected excess return of

the project less building cost exceeds a non—negative reservation level:


Proposition 1. A necessary and sufficient condition for the investment

in this problem to be optimal, given information set (1) in period t,

is given by



                   x           -   c(t)   > [Q(t,I)]


where the n x 1 vector Q(t,I) Is defined recursively by



       Q (T,IT) =      (0,0,.. .0)
       Q (t',I,) =      P(I,÷ijI,)          x max (P(ITjIt,÷l) x R —   C(t'+l),
                        ,\L 1 T
                        ('if
                                        —6—




where the operator max (A,B) forms a new vector whose j—th element is

max (A3,B).

      A proof sketch of this (and of all the later propositions) is

given in the Appendix.

       The reservation—level—of—return vector, Q(t,I). is the value

function for each of the n possible information—states in period t;

it may be thought of as tithe expected value of waiting". Since the return

to doing nothing has been normalized to zero, Q will always be non-

negative; typically, Q will have some strictly positive elements. Hence,

it may happen that the project's expected excess return less building costs

is greater than zero, yet it is not economic for the investment to be made.

Irreversibility may command a "negative premium".5

       We can also motivate Proposition 1 by analogy to the theory of finance.

The right to build the irreversible project may be thought of as an option.

("an American call", with an increasing exercise price) held by the investor.

The option will be exercised when its expected exercise value (the left side

of Prop. 1) exceeds the option's (typically positive) expected holding value.

       An alternative expression of Proposition 1 is now given:


Proposition 2. An equivalent condition to Proposition 1 is



       c(t+1) —   c(t)   > _{P(A(I+i) I) x (P(ITIA(It+l)) x
                  R -    C(t+l)   —
                                      Q(t+1,A(I÷i))fl
where C(t+l) is understood to have been made conformable, and where

A(I+i) is the subvector composed of elements of 1t+l that satisfy


       {P(ITIIt+l) x RJ -         c(t+l)   < [Q(t+l,I+i)J;
                                     —7—



i.e., A(I+i) is the subset of possible infortnation—states in t+l

in which the investor would choose not to commit to the project.

      The interpretation of this condition is as follows: It will pay

to invest in an irreversible project when the cost of waiting (the

incremental building cost c(t+1)—c(t)) exceeds the expected gains from

waiting. The expected gain from waiting is the probability that information

arriving in t+l will make the investor regret his decision to invest

(P(A(I+i)II)), times what the investor would be willing to pay in that

circumstance to regain his lost option (.P(ITIA(It+l)) x R —           C(t+l)   —

                   Heuristically we write
Q(t+l,A(I+i))).

       Rule: Invest in an irreversible project

                        if and only if

                Costs of delay >      Probability     that a current conmiitment

                will be revealed to be a mistake in t+l x Expected

                magnitude of the mistake, given that a mistake is revealed in t+l



The motive for waiting is seen to be essentially caution—concern over the

possible arrival of unfavorable news. This is made a bit more formal in the

next section.



3. Uncertainty and Investment

       We define a new vector quantity:



       Z(t') =
                 P(ITlIt,)   x R —   C(t')   —
                                                 Q(t',I,)
Z(t') is an n, x 1 vector that gives the excess of net return over the

value of waiting for each information—state in t'.             Those information—
                                 —3—




states in t' corresponding to negative components of Z(t') make

up the set A(I,), the information—states in t' in which no commitment

would be made (if none had been made already).

       Returning to our decision problem in period t, let us define the

random variable z(t+l,I). z(t+l,I) takes on the value of the k—th

element of Z(t+l) with probability p(I+FI). z(t+l,IJ) is the

random outcome of investing in t, as revealed in t+l.

       Approximating the discrete probability density with a continuous

one for esthetic reasons, we draw a possible distribution for z in

Figure 1. The probability mass to the right of zero corresponds to infor-

mation—states in t+1 in which the investment would be made, if still

available; probability to the left of zero corresponds to states in t+l

in which investment would be deferred.

       Figure 1 is not sufficient to tell us whether it pays to commit or

to wait in period t, since, although it describes the gain from waiting

(equal to



       (3.2) -    f(z)z = —E(zjz<O)pr(z'zO)   )
              z<o


it does not give waiting's cost (c(t+l)—c(t)). For a given cost of

waiting, however, we can describe transformations of f(z) that make

investment in period t less and less attractive.

      Consider two arbitrary p.d.f.—c.d.f. pairs, (f,F) and (g,G).

We shall say that g is a negative spread of f if

      i) G(x) >F(x), all x<O

     ii) There is some x < 0 such that G(x) > F(x)
                               —9--




Figures 2, 3, and 4 are pictures of negatively spread densities. The

dotted lines represent the original densities f    Note that what happens

to the right of zero is irrelevant to determining if one density negat-

ively spreads another.


Proposition 3. Suppose that the costs of delay and the density f of

z(t+l,I) are such that the investor is indifferent in period t between

waiting and cornmiting himself to the project. Then, for the same waiting

costs but a new density g such that g negatively spreads f, the

investor will necessarily choose to defer investment in t.



       Thus any of the transformations of f given in Figures 2—4 would

reduce the likelihood of investment in period t. Figure 2 pictures what

is usually meant by "an increase in investor uncertainty"; both very good

and very bad news are more likely, so that waiting to get information be-

comes a more valuable option. As the value of information increases,

the propensity to make a commitment in the current period declines. This

is similar to well—known results in sampling theory and the theory of

optimal search; increased dispersion of possible outcomes makes extra

sampling (or an extra period of search) more attractive. Results of this

sort do not, of course, have any essential connection to risk preferences;

Proposition 3 is true for risk—lovers as well as risk—averters and —neutrals.

       Figures 3 and 4 bring home the asymmetry of our result, however.

The spread in Figure 3 makes the project look less attractive in expected

value terms, while in Figure 4 the spread make the project look more

attractive. Nevertheless, the difference between current expected net

return and the reservation return unambiguously declines under both trans-

formations. For period t<T, only the left side of the outcome distri-

bution is relevant; this formalizes the idea that waiting is done principally
                                  —10—



for reasons of caution.

       In this connection we also note that the net expected present valie

of a project is an unreliable criterion for irreversible coimnitment. The

present value of the project is irrelevant unless it is negative, in which

case the project should be deferred; or, if the investor is in the last

decision period, so that deferral is not an option. For other cases, it

is easy to construct examples where an investment with a small positive

present value should be undertaken, while an investment with an arbitrarily

large present value should simultaneously be deferred.



4. Extension to Divisible Investments, With an Example

       The analysis can be applied to the case of continuously divisible

projects, with similar results. Suppose that, in period t and with

information—state I, the potential investor is not required to make

an all—or—nothing decision about the project. Instead, he may choose to

invest in any positive quantity K of the project (or of the type of capital.

under consideration). In subsequent periods he may increase, but not

decrease, his holdings. The other parts of the problem are modified

appropriately. We let



       R (K,IT) =   the marginal expected long—run return on the

                    project, given final holding K, for each

                    information—state in 1T• Assume, RK< 0.
         c(t') = the cost per unit of constructing capital

                    at time t'. c(t') is increasing in t'.
                    As before, C(t') =   C(t')   x

With these conditions maximal long—run return is achieved by investing in

each period to the point where marginal return equals a given reservation level.
                                  —Il—




Proposition 1'. The optimal capital holding for the investor in this model,

given information set I at t, is the maximum of the inherited

holding and K*, where K* satisfies



       [P(ITIIt) x R(K*,IT)]J —   c(t)   =
                                             [Q(K*,t,It)]i

where the function Q(K,t,I) is defined by



       Q(K,T,IT) = 0   for all K > 0 and all I,E 'T

       Q(K,t',I,) =    It,÷l)   x max (P(ITII '+l x R(K,IT) —

                                             for all K > 0,   E
                       Q(K,t'+l,I,+i))

       Existence of K* is discussed in the Appendix.

       Again, the net excess return required to expand holdings of an

irreversible investment is always non—negative and is typically greater

than zero.

       The optimality condition can be written in a form analogous to

Proposition 2. Define A(K,It,÷1) to be the set of components of

that satisfy



       [P (ITIt÷l) x R(K,IT)}3 -   c(t+l)     < (Q(K,t+l,I1)),


i.e., A(K,I÷1) is the set of information—states in t+l in which an

investor with irreversible holdings K would not increase his investment.

Then we have
                                     —12—



Proposition 2'. An equivalent definition of K* (the optimal unrestricted

holding in t given I) is given by



        c(t+l) —   c(t)   =
                              _P(A(K*,It÷i)lI)     x (P(ITIA(K*,It÷l)) x

                   R(K*,IT) —    c(t+l)   —
                                              Q(K*,t+l,A(K*,I÷i)))]

       This condition says that the holding of K should be expanded until

the cost of waiting (which is independent of K) is equal to the gains from

waiting (which are increasing in K). The gain from waiting is equal to the

probability that the irreversible holding chosen is revealed          in t+l to

be too high, times the premium the investor would be willing to pay at the

margin in that circumstance to "undo" his investment.

       Increased uncertainty reduces the propensity to make divisible

irreversible investments, just as it does indivisible ones. This can be

shown using the idea of negative spreads. Rather than pursue an absolutely

parallel discussion to the previous sections, however, we shall illustrate

this point with an example that we found instructive.


A Dirichiet example. We give a specific structure to the information sets

and the evolution of the agent's priors. Suppose that in each period it is

possible to observe one of only two outcomes, s = 1           or s = 2.    (An in—

formation—state in t' is a history of outcomes from t = 1             to t' .)    These

outcomes are generated independently each period by a binomial distribution

with parameters p and l—p, corresponding to s1 and s=2. The true

parameter p is unknown to the investor; he only has his subjective estimate

Pt? at time t'. Long run marginal returns are given by



       pR1(K) + (l—p) R2 (K)
                                         —13—




and expected long—run returns by



            R(K,IT) = t'T R1(K) +            R2(K).



We take R1(K) > R2(K), all K, so that observations of s1 are favor--

able and of s=2 relatively unfavorable. The investor has an incentive

to improve his knowledge of p; and the higher his p, the happier he is

with his prospective investment (at the margin).

            The investor's priors on the parameter p we shall take to be in the
                                         6
form   of    a Dirichiet distribution.       The Dirichlet has a number of useful

properties, one of which is that it implies a particularly simple belief—

updating rule. For the binomial case, this rule can be illustrated by

imagining that the investor holds an urn containing known numbers of white

and black marbles. His estimate of p at time t, p, can be represented

by the fraction of marbles in his urn            that   are white. Now period t±l

begins, and a new outcome is observed. The investor adds one white marble

to the urn if he observed s=l, one black marble if he observed s2.

His updated estimate of                   corresponds to the new ratio of white

marbles to the total.

        Algebraically, let the investor's priors at t be described h

              This is updated by




                    pn+l            if
                     nt +1
        pt+l=
                      t       t
                                                = 2



                =    +    1
                                  —14—



Note that n, the "number of marbles in the urn,tt is a natural measure

of how certain the investor is about the true long—run returns. With a

high        new observations have very little impact on priors; when

is low, a new observation contains a relatively large amount of information.

We would expect that when the investor is uncertain (his n is low), he

will be less willing to make irreversible investments. This is indeed the

case.


Proposition 4. Define K*(t,pt,nt) to be the optimal holding of the

irreversible asset at t when the investort s priors are given by

           Then aK*/ap > 0, K*/n > 0.



        This result illustrates, in a specific case, the dependence of

desired capital stock on both a measure of long—run return () and a

measure of subjective certainty (n).



5. Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment:
    An Example

        We have developed a model in which the current demand for investment

depends not only on long—run returns but on the presence of reducible

uncertainty. It is difficult to see how the former factor could cause the

short—run "bunching" of investments observed in the business cycle. The

latter factor, however, is likely to cause bunching (if the uncertainty is

pervasive in the system); and, it is intrinsically short—run in its effects.

Indeed, uncertainty which is not likely to be shortly reduced does not

affect the investment decision.

        If we attribute investment swings in the short—run at least in part

to bouts of uncertainty, we may be accused of substituting one deus ex
                                    LD_




machina for another. But it is not necessary, to imagine uncertainty ex-

panding and receding in three—to—five year periods in order to explain the

observed phenomena. Rather, exogeneous uncertainty which arrives in the form

of a single unexpected event, or sequence of events, will create a cyclical

response in the economy as the implications of the event are resolved over

time. We illustrate this principle with another example.


Example: Investment nd an Energy Cartel of Uncertain Duration

          We introduce a simple model of investment and output in an energy—

importing economy after the unanticipated formation of an energy_exporters!

cartel. It will be shown that uncertainty can make investment collapse,

even though capital goods seem to dominate the alternative asset in each

period.

          The identical agents in our model energy—importing economy are

assumed to be risk—neutral. There are three perfectly durable assets

with which they can form their portfolios:

          1) Energy—using capital (Ke)
          2) Energy—saving capital (K )
          3) Investible resources (W)


The two forms of capital can be used to produce a homogeneous consumption

good       according to a relation to be specified shortly. Investible

resources7 have no direct productivity and pay no return; they are

valuable, however, because they can be converted costlessly and on a one—

for—one basis into units of Ke or KS. Conversion of investible re-

sources into a specific form of capital is an irreversible process. For

simplicity, we shall assume that investible resources are rained like

manna from the sky at a constant rate of AW per period; all that is

required for our results, however, is that the supply of W in each period

not be perfectly elastic.
                                   —16—



       The state of nature in each period depends on the status of the

energy—exporters' cartel. We define the state of nature S     by



                  1, if the cartel exists in period t
           t
                  0, otherwise



The cartel is assumed to have formed in period to. Agents' beliefs about

its continued existence are given by




       Pr (s=ll     s1=1) = p
       Pr (st=1tsi=O) = 0                                -




   where       dp/dt > 0, lim    = 1
                          t.-


Thus if the cartel fails, everyone assumes it will be gone forever. The

longer the cartel lasts, the greater is the common subjective probability

of its survival through the next period. If the cartel survives long

enough, it is assumed to be permanent.

       The net production of the consumption good y in each period

by each unit of energy—using capital depends on the contemporaneous

state of nature. If the cartel is in existence (s=l), each unit of

has a (small) net output in period t of Re,l. With no cartel

each unit of KC produces (large) net output Re,O. Energy—saving

capital produces an intermediate quantity of RS per period per unit,

independent of the state of nature. Since machines can be shut down,

net production is assumed to be greater than or equal to zero. In summary:
                                          —17—




              =
                     Re,l K + RS KS   ,    if    s =   1

                     Re,0       + RS KS i          = 0


      where 0 <Re,i < RS < Re,O



         The agents' goal is to maximize their discounted consumption stream,

Et
         t—ty         over the set of possible portfolio strategies. Here we
      t'=t

will chart their optimal investment path under the assumption that the

cartel stubbornly refuses to disappear. ("Investment" in this context

refers to the rate of conversion of investible resources into Ke or KS.)

         A naive approach to this problem is to note that since 1) investors

are risk—neutral, 2) investment in either Ke or KS is guaranteed a

positive return, 3) uninvested resources pay no return, and 4) investment

is free up to the exogenous resource constraint, capital appears to dominate

the alternative in a traditional risk—return sense. Thus it might appear

that the best strategy is to convert all investible resources into some form

of capital as soon as they become available.


         This conclusion is false. It is possible in this model to have an

investment 'pause', during which even risk—neutral investors are content

to cumulate barren liquid resources in order to wait for new information.

This is shown by


Proposition 5. Jointly sufficient conditions for agents to make no in-

vestments in period t are given by


                                                       (1—p )
         1)   R < aRe, 0                    a1 = 1 -       +
and

         2)   Re,l
                     <a2R
                            S
                                            a21+
                                   —18—




Since Pt is monotonic for s1, if either of these conditiOns is true

it will be true over a continuous interval of time. The continuous interval

in which these conditions intersect is the investment tPa Se'     It is

numerically plausible that this intersection will exist. Suppose       =    .9,
Pt =   .5.   Then no investment takes place if Re,l < .82RS and R5 <

        A picture of output, investment, and capital stock over time in

this economy is given in Figure 5. The pause runs from t1 to t2. (We

show t1 > to, the period of the cartel's formation; an alternative possi-

bility is t1 =           The history of the economy is as follows. From
                  t0).                                                     t0
to t1 investors give insufficient credence to the cartel to desist from

energy—intensive investment. By t1 the future has become sufficiently

ambiguous that investors prefer to remain liquid and wait for new information.

Finally, at t2, the continued existence of the cartel seems sufficiently

likely that investors commit themselves with a bang to energy—saving

capital. There is an investment spurt as cumulated investible resources

are transformed to a stock of KS. Output varies over time as capital

composition changes; this minor effect is swamped, of course, if we expand

our definition of output to include the processings of investible resources

into capital. Then a pronounced cyclical effect is observable.

         The value of information in this model depends on three factors:

1) , the discount factor. The less one discounts the future, the more

likely one is to sacrifice current consumption to get more information.

2) Pt, the probability of cartel survival. Values of     Pt far from zero

or one are more likely to satisfy the conditions for a pause. This is the

only factor that changes over time, and hence it is the source of the

dynamics of the result. 3) The disparateness of Re,O, R5, and Re,i.

The farther apart these profitabilities are, the more valuable is new
                                  —i 9—




information, the more likely it is that a pause will occur, and the longer

it will be if it does occur. An example: Say that we have at t,    a   set

of profitabilities (ReO,Rs, Re]) such that agents invest all available

resources. Now suppose that   Re,) were to be multiplied by a thousand,

R by a hundred, and Re,l
 S                         by ten. This huge increase in the value of the

capital stock will likely drive current investment to zero! This is

because the increased return from waiting for more information more than

offsets the improvement in current returns.
       We remind the reader that the joint conditions of Proposition 5 are

sufficient, not necessary. They are emphasized here because of their

simplicity and ready interpretation. Finding the necessary condition is

not difficult and is left as an exercise. As might be suspected, the

necessary condition depends on dp/dt, the rate at which uncertainty is

being resolved.


6. Irreversible Investment In the Macro—Model

       The example illustrates how events whose implications for the economy

are resolved over time can cause fluctuations in the rate of aggregate

investment. To conclude that this is a source of business cycles as well,

we must go one step further and specify how these elements could enter into

a complete model of the macroeconomy. This task is straightforward we

will briefly consider the potential role of our theory in both Keynesian

and non—Keynesian macro—models.

       Our analysis of investment ties in neatly with the standard Keynesian

approach. In terms of the usual IS—LM diagram, investment fluctuations

caused by uncertainty can be viewed as autonomous shifts of the IS curve.

Thus the investment "pause" of our example moves   the IS curve down, driving
                                  —20—



the economy into a period of reduced output and low interest rates. The

end of the pause brings a resurgence. Multiplier effects cause the changes

in output to exceed the magnitude of the shock to investment.

       The notion that the demand for investment, made volatile by the random

arrival of new information, is a source of the business cycle would have

been a congenial one for Keynes; he takes a very similar viewpoint in

Chapter 22 of the General Theory (from which our opening quotation is taken).

That the sources of cycles are essentially exogenous shocks to the efficiency

of investment was also espoused by Schumpeter.

      The irreversible investment theory also fits easily into the principal

non—Keynesian alternative, the models of the cycle proposed by modern

"equilibrium theorists." The occurrence of an event with uncertain implica-

tions for the appropriate level and mix of investment is a real shock of the

type alluded to by Lucas (1977). During the period in which the uncertainty

is resolved, it is desirable that investible resources be saved for future

use and that workers in investment goods industries take more leisure. The

resulting variability of output and employment, unlike that of the Keynesian

case, is completely efficient. As Black (1978) argues, in this line of

reasoning there is no presumption that the government must try to smooth

aggregate production over time.

       It would not be difficult to recast our example of the energy—importing

economy in an equilibrium business cycle mold. As given, the economy of

that example is best thought of as being run by a central planner. However,

it can be verified that the introduction of competitive markets for output,

investible resources, and used capital into that setup does not affect the

path of any real variable. The investment pause still occurs, motivated by

speculation in irivestible resource stocks and the realization by investors
                                     —21—




that    choosing the "wrong" kind of capital will be penalized by low output

and low second—hand values in the future. In particular, allowing firms

to sell old capital does not change any result gotten by assuming irreversi-

bility.8

          The   result of this exercise could be   called an equilibrium business

cycle model in the following sense: The model economy would exhibit serially

correlated      deviations of investment and output away from the average growth
path.     These deviations would be consistent with full market clearing at

each moment and, as in the centrally—planned version, would represent a

completely efficient response to the uncertain events.


7.      Conclusion

          This paper has argued that when investment is irreversible, it will

sometimes pay agents to defer commitment of scarce investible resources in

order to await new information. Uncertainty which is potentially resolvable

over time thus exists a depressing effect on current investment. This may

help explain the short—run investment fluctuations associated with the

business cycle.

          There are many potentially instructive generalizations of this model.

These include

          1) the incorporation of information flows that are not purely

exogenous. For example, the possibility of "learning—by—doing" induced

by the investment process may create a positive incentive for investment

in some uncertain situations.

          2) the removal of the "zero—one" character of irreversibility in

our model. If we allow for partial convertibility of capital stock, we

can analyze the decision to commit to, say, flexible (but higher cost)

technologies versus more restrictive options.
                               —22—




      This work also has microeconomic applications. An example is

the problem of choosing a technique In a field where the technology is

changing rapidly. Should a firm buy the current—generation computer

system or speculate by waiting for a system that is better and cheaper?

The decision to wait in a given period depends not only on expected

system improvement and delay costs, but also on how much one can expect

to learn in the short run about long—run technical possibilities.
                                  —23—




APPENDIX

        This appendix sketches the proof of the Propositions stated in the

text. For the sake of brevity some details are excluded.


        Proposition 1. This is a standard application of backward

induction. Q(t',Ii) is the expected value of deferring the project at

t'. Investment takes place if the expected value of current investment

exceeds that of waiting. Finiteness is assumed to avoid technical problems.


        Proposition 2. Subtract [P(ITkt) x R1 —           c(t+l)   from both sides of the

                                                                        x P(ITIA(It+l)) x
condition in Prop. 1, noting [P(ITjIt) x R] =          {P(A(It+i)lIt)
     + [P(A'(I+i)I) x P(ITIA'(It+l)) x RI3 and that [Q(t,I)] =

                  x Q(t+l,A(It+i)fl3 + [P(A'(I+i)II) x (P(ITAt(It÷l)) x R
[P(A(It+i)lI)
—   c(t+l))}3,    where A'(It+i) is the complement of A(I+i) in


       Proposition 3. The spread unambiguously increases —   f(z)z, which is
                                                         z<O
the right—hand side of the expression in Prop. 2.


         Proposition 1' and 2'. Again we apply backward induction. Q(K,t',I,)

is the value of an option to build an extra unit of capital, given committed

holdings of K and information In,. The value of an option is the maxi-

mum of its exercise value and its holding value. Prop. 1' says the in-

vestor should expand K in t until he is indifferent between exercising

 and holding his marginal option. This maximizes as long as              [P(A(K,I+i)
                                                   —                         < 0, which
      x ((P(ITA(K,It+l)) x R(K,IT)) —    C(t+1))       Q(K,t+l,A(K,I+i)fl3
 can be shown by induction. Prop. 2' is derived from Prop. 1 in a manner

 analogous to the derivation of Prop. 2.

           Since the condition in Prop. 1' and Prop. 2' will have a finite
                                                                           that there will
 number of discontinuities, there is a "measure—zero possibility"
                                      —24—



 be no K* exactly fulfilling the condition. In this case we designat2 K*

 to be such that moving from K*+ to K*_ reverses the inequality.


       Proposition 4. We show aK*/afl > 0.               By Prop. 1', we need


 Q(K*(t,,n),t,,n) < 0.           Will show by induction that aQ/an < 0             fr
all K such that K*(t,,n) <K<K
                                                                   where Kmax(t,tnt)
                                       + (T—t)) is the highest possible desired

holding in T, given information up to t. For T—l: aQ/an a/an
                                                                                   t—l
    1n1+l             (l— —1—1
       +1   R.(K) +         +1        R2(K)) + -—i 0] < 0 for K* <                 K < K
    t—l                 t—l


For t: oQ/an =
                              n+l                   (l—)n                          n+l
                  -. [(max(                R1(K) + nl R2(K), Q(K,t+l,                      n+l))

+ (l_) Q(K,t+l,         n+l)]     <   0,     for K* < K <     K,      using   the inductive


hypothesis and the fact that Q(K,t+l,                          >
                                                   1 '                   R1(K) +
                                                                   n+i              +1        R2(K)

only for K s.t. K >   K*(t+l, tnt+l
                                +1 ,n+l).


       Proposition 5. Sufficient conditions for waiting to be optimal

according to Prop. 2' are



      1) i <                                 and
                (l_p))(ReO_R5)
      2) Re,l <
                  p(Th)(R5_Re1),           which are equivalent to Prop. 5.
                            REFERENCES


Aoki, Masanao, Optimizatton of St3chastic Systems, New York: Academic
       Press, 1967.

Arrow, K. J. and A. C. Fisher, "Environmental Preservation, Uncertainty,
       and Irreversibility," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 88
       (May 1974), pp. 312—320.

Arrow, K. J., "Optimal Capital Policy and Irreversible Investment," in
       J. N. Wolfe, ed., Value, Capital, and Growth, Chicago: Aldine
       Publishing Co., 1968, pp. 1—20.

Bellman, R. E. and S. E. Dreyfus, Applied Dynamic Programming, Princeton,
       N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1962.

Black, F., "General Equilibrium and Business Cycles," Unpublished ins.,
       M.I.T., 1978.

DeGroot, M. H., Optimal Statistical Decisions, New York: McGraw—Hill, 1970.

Eisner, R., "A Permanent Income Theory For Investment," American Economic
       Review, Vol. 57, #3 (June 1967) pp. 363—390.

Hall, R. C. and D. W. Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,"
       American Economic Review, Vol. 57, #3 (June 1967), pp. 391—414.

Hart, A. G., "Risk, Uncertainty, and the Unprofitability of Compounding
       Probabilities," in 0. Lange et.al. eds., Studies In Mathematical
       Economics and Econometrics In Memory Of Henry Schultz, Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press, 1942, pp. 110—118.

Hirshleifer, J., "Liquidity, Uncertainty, and the Accumulation of Information,"
       in C. Carter and J. Ford, eds., Uncertainty and Expectations in
       Economics, Oxford: Alden Press, 1972.

Kaufman, G. N., "Sequential Investment Analysis Under Uncertainty,"
       Journal of Business, Vol. 36, #1 (1963), pp. 39.64.

Knight, Frank, Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit, London, 1933.

Lucas, R. E., "Understanding Business Cycles," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer,
       eds., Stabilization of the Domestic and International Economy,
       Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1977.

McCall, John J., "The Economics of Information and Optimal Stopping
       Rules," Journal of Business, Vol. 38, #3 (1965), pp. 300—317.

Murphy, Roy E., Adaptive Processes In Economic Systems, New York:
       Academic Press, 1965.

 Rothschild, Michael, "Searching For the Lower Price When the Distribution
        of Prices is Unknown," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 82, #4
        (July 1974), pp. 689—712.

 Samuelson, Paul A., "Synthesis Of The Principle Of Acceleration and The
        Multiplier," Review of Economic Statistics, (May 1939).

 Tobin, James and W. Brainard, "Asset Markets and The Cost Of Capital,"
        in Balassa and Nelson, eds., Economic Progress, Private Values,
        and Public Policy, New York: North—Holland Co., 1977.
                           FOOTNOTES




1.   See, for example, Samuelson (1939).



2.   The "fundamenta1 approach (which looks at long—run returns) is
     the basis of standard works like Hall—Jorgenson (1967); Eisner
     (1967); and Tobin—Brainard (1977).



3.   Knight (1933) differentiated uncertainty and risk; but see Hart (1942).



4.   With zero decision—making costs, there is never any point in
     ruling a project out completely.



5.   This is noted in another context by Arrow and Fisher (1974).



6.   For a derivation of the Dirichiet's properties, the reader should
     consult DeGroot (1970) or Murphy (1965). For an application of
     this family in the theory of search, see Rothschild (1974).



7.   The interpretation of "investible resources" varies with the context.
     For a small firm, the resources are the available line of credit;
     for an industry (e.g., electric power), potential plant sites or
     markets; for a national economy, real resources like labor, land,
     and raw materials.

8.   In our example, in which agents are identical, the existence of a
     used capital market is irrelevant; prices in that market would always
     be such as to make agents indifferent between selling and holding
     their capital. In the more general case, the existence of second-
     hand markets makes the problem look different to the individual agent
     but does not materially affect general equilibrium results obtained by
     assuming irreversibility. The economy as a whole must still hold all
     irreversible investment, a fact that is reflected in second—hand
     prices. Second—hand markets are important only if beliefs or pre-
     ferences are so heterogeneous that there is no agreement on what
     constitutes good or bad news for a particular investment.
fi)




        a

      Figure 1




        0

      Figure 2
            4,
        /
/
                       \


            Figure 3




    /
/


                 a
            Figure 4
                           IIi    .1


                                       I    1    11]


     K5




                                       ff
AS+ AKe   I I11 [I L                            (I I L
                                       tz


          .1 11111
                       Figure 5
