                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TAXES, SAVING, AND WELFARE:
                     THEORY AND EVIDENCE


                    Charles E. McLure, Jr.



                    Working Paper No. 504




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           July 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research in
Taxation and Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper 11-5@4
                                                                     July, 1980




           Taxes, Saving, and Welfare: Theory and Evidence




                               ABSTRACT


         This paper reVlews theoretical analysis and results of empirical

research on the effects of taxation on private saving.        The theoretical

section describes income and substitution effects, distinguishes between

compensated and uncompensated elasticities, notes that saving is

expenditure on future consumption, and discusses how the optimal

taxation of capital depends on the response of labor supply to taxation,

as well as that of saving.   The review of. empirical literature is

devoted primarily to an examination of recent papers by Michael Boskin

and by Philip Howrey and Saul Hymans.     Determining the effect interest

rates have on saving involves considerable conceptual and econometric

difficulties and has not been accomplished satisfactorily.




                                            Charles E. McLure, Jr.
                                            National Bureau of Economic
                                              Research
                                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                            Cambridge, MA 02138

                                             (617) 868-3906
                  Taxes, Saving, and Welfare:   Theory and Evidence

                               Charles E. McLure, Jr.*

                        National Bureau of Economic Research


I. Introduction

         Several current debates on tax policy center on how taxation affects

saving and capital accumulation and on how national welfare is reduced

by the use of taxes that distort the choice between current and future

consumption.     For example, taxation and inflation interact to produce effective

tax rates on corporate-source income that greatly exceed statutory rates. l       In

part to offset the adverse effects these high rates may have on incentives to

invest, proposals such as "10-5-3" and "first year capital recovery" have been

offered. 2    Somewhat more radical is the proposal to convert the present income

tax into a personal tax on consumption expenditures by exempting all saving from

tax. 3    A value added tax (VAT) levied on the basis of consumption would also

exempt saving. 4

         The case for a personal expenditure tax, a VAT, or other tax that exempts

saving is often founded, at least in part, on neutrality toward the choice bet-

ween saving and consumption.     Whereas a tax levied at the same rate on consump-

tion in all periods is neutral, the argument goes, the income tax, because it

applies to interest income, penalizes saving and results in a loss of welfare. 5

This argument --which itself is easily stated incorrectly -- is somewhat dif-

ferent from the seemingly similar view that reducing the taxation of capital

income would increase saving.     Even if a change in tax policy would increase

welfare by reducing discrimination against capital accumulation, it does not

follow that its adoption would result in loore saving.

The research reported here is part of the NBERs research in Taxation and
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        -2-

        The purpose of this paper is to review theoretical analysis and results of

empirical research on the effects of taxation on private saving and economic

welfare. 6 One basic conclusion of section II is that long-established results of

theoretical analysis are often ignored or misunderstood by economists, as well

as by policy-makers, and the lessons of more recent theoretical analyses of

optimal taxation have been only dimly perceived.       This generally   inade~uate   con-

ceptual state of affairs is mirrored in empirical analysis, the subject of sec-

tion III,    where it apears that the few serious scholars working at trying to

untangle the effects of taxation on saving and welfare have not always been

asking -- or even recognizing -- the "right" ~uestions.7 But the problems of

empirical analysis go beyond those that result from failure to frame the

research question carefully.    Limitations posed by    inade~uate   data and econo-

metric difficulties make it difficult even to arrive at a satisfactory answer to

the wrong   ~uestion.




II. Theoretical Analysis

        The traditional theoretical analysis of the effects of taxation on saving

and welfare can be presented heuristically, if not rigorously, with the help of

a simple arithmetic example.    Consider the options of someone who has an

endowment of $100 to split between saving and current consumption in a two-

period model in which future consumption is the only rationale for saving.

(That is, there are no be~uests.)    If the real rate of interest is 10 percent,

the person can spend the entire $100 now, can save it and consume $110 in the

future, or can achieve any intermediate position by saving a fraction of the

$100.   Whatever the fraction of saving chosen, the cost of future consumption,
                                          -3-

in terms of forgone present consumption, is 1/(1.10).         More generally, if r is

the rate of interest, the opportunity cost of future consumption is simply

l/(l+r).   If the usual conditions for welfare maximization are met, the equality

of the opportunity cost of present consumption to the real rate of interest,

which must be assumed to represent the marginal productivity of capital, indica-

tes that social welfare is maximized. 8

      Suppose now that an income tax of 50 percent is imposed on capital income.         If

the before-tax real rate of interest remains constant at 10 percent, the net real

return to saving is reduced to 5 percent and the private opportunity cost of future
                                                1
consumption rises to 1/1.05 ( or to 1 + r (l-t) in the more general case, where

t is the marginal tax rate).9   This increase in the private opportunity cost of

future consumption will generate a tendency for our consumer to prefer present

consumption relative to future consumption.         But note that the tax-induced drop

in the net real rate of return is tantamount to a reduction in income of the

individual whose choices are under consideration.        There may be a tendency to

cushion the reduction in future-period consumption resulting from the tax by

shifting some consumption from the present to the future. 10       The first effect

identified above (the shift of consumption from the future to the present

induced by the change in the reward to saving) is the so-called substitution

effect of capital income taxation on future consumption and the second effect

(the cushioning of the fall ~n second-period consumption) is the income effect.

As is so often the case when these two effects occur together, they produce ten-

dencies that run in opposite directions, and their net effect on present con-

sumption cannot be known, a priori.   Rather, empirical analysis is required to

determine the net effect, as well as the two separate effects.
                                       -4-


A. Will You Repeat the Questions?

      Two things should be noted about the theoretical result just reported.

First, any tax that caused the same reduction in income would have the same

income effect as the tax on interest income discussed.     It is thus useful to

isolate the substitution effect by comparing the capital income tax with a tax

that has no distortionary effect on economic decisions.     Though such a tax is

hardly a candidate for serious consideration for adoption, a lump sum tax is the

benchmark usually employed for such comparisons.   Under such a tax the private

opportunity cost of future consumption would remain unchanged at 1/(1.10), or

more generally, at l/(l+r), and there is no substitution effect.     Compared to

this, the substitution effect described above would guarantee that the tax on

capital income would unambiguously shift consumption from the future to the

present.

      If one is interested in the net effect of income and substitution effects

combined, it is appropriate to inquire about "uncompensated" price elasticities

of demand.   Interest might focus on uncompensated effects if, for example, the

question at issue were how higher taxes would affect saving.     But even then if

the focus of attention were on the comparison of several alternative tax poli-

cies that would have similar income effects, it might be most useful to con-

centrate on differences in substitution effects.

      If one is interested in the welfare losses resulting from the distor-

tionary effects of taxation, the situation is quite different.     Since results of

welfare economics are all given in terms of compensated elasticities, only

substitution effects derived from structural equations based on theoretical

models that describe consumer behavior are relevant.     It is thus necessary to
                                           -5-

attempt to estimate the parameters in the structural equations, abstract from

income effects, and thereby calculate "compensated" price elasticities.

Unfortunately this distinction between purposes of analysis and the implied

empirical questions has not always been observed, even in principle.

         Second, since welfare analysis yields results in terms of effects on

future consumption, the discussion to this point has been deliberately couched

in terms of effects on future consumption -- not effects on saving.      As

Feldstein (1978a and 1978c) has argued, saving is expenditure on future

consumption, not the quantity of future consumption.      The ordinary relationship

between price elasticities,      quantities, and expenditures makes it clear that if

the elasticity of saving with respect to the price of future consumption is

zero, the elasticity of future consumption with respect to its price must be

unity.     (More generally, the two price elasticities (those of saving and future

consumption) with respect to the price of future consumption differ by one.)ll

This   r~ans   that a finding that saving does not respond to an income-compensated

change in the interest rate would not indicate that a capital income tax would

have no welfare effect.     Quite the contrary, for a given level of saving and

change in the price of future consumption, the welfare loss would be that

usually associated with a unitary price elasticity of demand for the quantity of

consumption (future consumption, in this case).12

         The importance of these issues can be seen from a review of the discussion

of a recent paper by Phillip Howrey and Saul Hymans on the interest elasticity

of saving.     Both Feldstein (1978b, p.   686-87; 688-89) and Shoven (1978, p. 690)

criticized Howrey and Hymans (1978a) for overlooking the two points made in this
section. 13   First, they reminded Howrey and Hymans that saving rises in response

to a compensated fall in its price only if the compensated elasticity of demand

for future consumption exceeds unity.     Implicit in this criticism is the as sump-

tion that Howrey and Hymans are (or should be) concerned with the welfare impli-

cations of capital taxation.    These are, as indicated above, questions of tax

effects on future consumption, and not effects on saving.     Further, Feldstein

and Shoven suggest that whereas compensated elasticities are relevant for

welfare analysis, Howrey and Hymans estimated uncompensated elasticities.

      Howrey and Hymans' response to these criticisms is worth noting.     They

seem to deny (1978, pp. 656-57) that they were estimating uncompensated elasti-

cities.   (See also Brittain, 1980, p. 42.)    But the fact that this absolutely

crucial point was initially made only in a footnote to their paper, does not

figure in their published response to Feldstein's and Shoven's cormnents, and

received no further elaboration when presented at a conference that occurred

subsequent to these comments suggests that Howrey and Hyrnans may have failed to

understand the importance of the issue.    Nor is their retort totally satisfac-

tory when they write (1978, p. 703):

         Finally, Feldstein    like Shoven    misses an
      important point by discussing a problem in which he is
      interested, rather than the problem that we addressed. We
      stated that a policYmaker interested in increasing the
      funds available for capital formation would be unlikely to
      n~nipulate the tax rate on interest income unless the
      after-tax rate of return could be shown to have a substan-
      tial and reliably measured effect on saving. Our analysis
      casts serious doubt on the proposition that loanable-funds
      saving responds to the rate of return to saving ••• If
      Feldstein wishes to argue that other goals (such as increased
      welfare or economic efficiency) justify tax substitution,
      he is certainly free to do so. What we claim is that the
      argument for tax substitution cannot be justified by the
      proposition that it will change the supply of funds available
      for capital formation.
                                       -7-
Their rejection of economic efficiency, the analysis of which requires compen-

sated elasticities, as a goal does not necessarily indicate inconsistency bet-

ween their objective and their estimating procedure; other goals could justify

compensated elasticities.   But their concentration (1978, p. 655) on "saving as

the supply side in the process of capital accumulation" could be interpreted as

being more consistent with estimation of an uncompensated elasticity.

Admittedly they explain in a footnote (1978, pp. 656-57) why they concentrate on

the compensated elasticity.14   But the discussion of the tendencies of income

and substitution effects to be offsetting that immediately follows that foot-

note -- which would be an irrelevant aside if one accepted the argument of the

footnote -- suggests that the. footnote and its justification of estimating a

compensated elasticity may have been an afterthought.     All things considered,

one is not confident that Howrey and Hymans had decided before beginning work

that the question at hand required estimation of a compensated elasticity.


B. Optimal Tax Theory

      Implicit in the analysis to this point is the assumption that it makes

sense to appraise a capital income tax by cornparing it with a lump sum tax and

calculating the welfare loss caused by the intertemporal misallocation of con-

sumption induced by the tax on income from capital.     But lump sum taxes are not

realistic alternatives and any real-world tax, such as a tax on labor income,

also involves welfare losses.   Taxes on labor income can generally distort

choices between labor and leisure, between market and non-market activities,

between working and retirement, between investing optimally in human capital and

under-investing, etc.   A more relevant analysis is therefore one that attempts
                                        -8-


to choose the combination of taxes on labor and capital income that minimizes

the combined welfare loss induced by the two taxes, for a given revenue yield.

Such an analysis of "optimal taxation" indicates both    (a) just how special are

the conditions under which the traditional analysis outlined above is appropriate

and (b) further lacunae in the empirical knowledge necessary for informed tax

policy.

      Models employed to examine optimal taxation of labor and capital commonly

supplement the simple two period model described above by specifying that the

income available to finance consumption in the two periods is derived from labor

supplied in the first period (the stylized working life).    Whereas the indivi-

dual must decide how much to work during that period, based on the net wage

rate, retirement is complete during the second period.    In this analysis there

are three "gOOds:" leisure, present consumption, and future consumption.     The

difficulty for tax policy results from the impossibility of taxing leisure.

Absent that constraint, an optimal tax would be one levied at the same ad

valorem rate on leisure and on consumption in the two periods.

      Results in this more complex world are more complicated than in the model

in which tax-induced distortions of labor supply could be ignored, and they

therefore do not lend themselves as readily to numerical examples and intuitive

interpretation as do those in the simple world of fixed endowments and inelastic

labor supply.   But the comrnoil result is that the optimal tax structure depends

crucially on the (income-compensated) cross-elasticities between leisure and

consumption in the two periods, as well as on the (income-compensated) own

elasticities of demand for leisure and consumption with respect to their

prices. 15
                                          -9-
        This result indicates that a tax on capital income may have (positive or

negative) welfare effects, even if the demand for future consumption has a zero

compensated elasticity of demand and that a tax on labor income -- which is

e~uivalent    to a tax on consumption -- is optimal only under      ~uite   special cir-

cumstances.      In general, the expenditure tax is optimal only if it results in

e~ual   percentage reductions in leisure and consumption in the two periods.           This

"Ramsey" result occurs if the (compensated) elasticities of demand for the three

goods with respect to the wage rate are e~ual; see King (1980).16            More

generally it is optimal to levy the higher rate of tax on the consumption that

is the weaker substitute for leisure, since the latter is untaxed. 17           Optimal

tax theory clearly has important implications for empirical research, for it

implies that the optimal taxation of capital and labor income cannot be settled

merely by evidence on the interest elasticity of saving (or, more accurately;

future consumption).      Rather, evidence is also   re~uired   on the elasticity of

supply of labor and on the cross-elasticities mentioned earlier. Having made

this point, I will not dwell on it, except to note that there is, as yet, little

satisfactory literature on the cross elasticities of demand between leisure and

consumption in various periods.      Empirical evidence on the elasticity of supply

of labor is reviewed in Hausman (1979) and Rosen (1979).


C. A Further Complication

        To this point we have considered only the problem of distortions in the

individual allocation of consumption between present and future periods,

assuming that the private and social rates of time preference are           e~ual.   But

if these rates diverge, for example, because of considerations of intergenera-

tion   e~uity,   pUblic policy may also be concerned with the    e~uilibrium    level of

capital per manhour.     Thus King (1980) distinguishes between (a) policies that
                                           -10-


avoid distortions in the intertemporal allocation of consurnption, on the assumption

that other public policies are available to place the economy on the "golden

rule" growth path on which the marginal product of capital eCluals the growth

rate and (b) the policies that are necessary to achieve the "golden rule" path.

He notes:

          If the government has no policy instruments other than
      the two tax rates then in general it will be unable to
      achieve the golden rule condition, and the optimal tax
      rates will reflect the trade-off between not only the con-
      ventional efficiency losses but also between these and the
      losses resulting from the failure to achieve the dynamic
      optimality condition ••• [T]he optimal tax rate on capital
      income is very sensitive to this second factor. This is
      rather disturbing because it alerts us to the possibility
      that our conclusions are sensitive to the assumptions we
      Inake about policy instruments which are excluded from the
      model. For example, if the government could use debt
      policy to determine the rate of interest in the economy, it
      could attain the golden rule and the optimal tax rates
      would be independent of dynamic considerations. Clearly,
      the welfare implications of particular tax changes (such as
      the replacement of the income tax by a consumption tax)
      depend upon the constraints which are, or are not, assumed
      to restrict the use of other policy instruments. Although
      this is a standard "second-best" argument, it is very
      important to note that one of the principal sources of
      disagreement over the potential welfare gains from tax
      reform is not differing assumptions about the behavioural
      responses to taxes, but the assumptions (often implicit)
      made about other policy instruments.

In what follows no further reference is made to this distinction.   But in prin-

ciple it should be kept in mind in appraising the policy implications of the

empirical results reported below.


III. The Evidence

      Perhaps the two Inost widely discussed recent attempts to determine the

effects of taxation on saving are those by Baskin (1918a) and by Howrey and

Hymans (1918a and 1980).18   Boskin has found an interest elasticity of saving of
                                              -11-


about 0.2 to 0.4; he seems to prefer estimates on the high side of that range.

Howrey and Hymans, on the other hand, have found no strong relationship between

the interest rate and the rate of saving and have seriously questioned the tech-

niques employed by Boskin in obtaining his estimates.      Moreover, whereas Baskin

(1978a, p.   519) describes his estimates as uncompensated elasticities, Howrey

and Hyman (1978, pp. 656-57) assert that theirs are compensated.      Given the

inherent differences in compensated and uncompensated elasticities resulting from the

exclusion and inclusion of income effects, these two sets of results diverge even more

than first appearances suggest.    Both analyses, but especially that of Howrey and Hymans

have been subjected to examination at two conferences at· the Brookings Institution.    Thi

section reviews the two sets of estimates and the problems raised by various discussants


A. The Boskin Estimates

      Boskin (1978a) presents estimates of consumption functions based on time-

series data from 1929 to 1969 in which real per capita private consumption is

regressed on current and lagged disposable private incolne, wealth, the

unemployment rate, and the real after-tax return on capital. 19     In his '~asic"

equation the implied interest elasticity of saving is reported to be approxima-

tely one-fourth. 20   In additional estimates Boskin sequentially adds an

expected rate of inflation, employs only the postwar period, enters the real

net rate of return in   logari~hmic   form, and employs an instrumental variable

approach in an attempt to avoid single equation bias.      In all cases the point

estimates of the interest elasticity of saving lie between 0.2 and 0.4, leading

Boskin to conclude that his estimates are robust.     Based on an estimate for this

elasticity of 0.4 Boskin calculates an estimated annual welfare loss resulting
                                         -12-

from capital taxation of close to $60 billion.      He qualifies this estimate,

however, by noting a) that it is a lower bound, since his estimate of the uncom-

pensated saving elasticity understates the pure substitution elasticity, but b)

that the estimates of welfare loss must be adjusted downward once account is

taken of the distortions involved in labor taxation and the cross elasticities

mentioned in section lIB.

      Before presenting the results of their own analysis Howrey and Hymans

(1978a) subject that of Boskin (1978a) to extensive criticism.      They experiment

by dropping 1934, by lagging the unemployment rate two years, and by employing

alternative interest rates in Boskin's regressions.      Because of the sensitivity

of Boskin's results to those tests they express doubt about the reliability of

his estimates.   In addition, Howrey and Hyrnans, being dissatisfied with Boskin's

specification of his model and his definition of saving, translate Boskin's con-

sumption equation (and implicit saving equation) into an explicit saving

equation and employ several alternative definitions of saving (to be described

below).   None of these works really well and Howrey and Hymans conclude (1978a,

p. 674) that "it seems that no personal saving rate -- whether cash or some

other form --responds to variations in the real after-tax rate of return."

      In his reply to Howrey and Hymans' comments on his own work Boskin (1978b

and 1980) makes several points:      that because of single equation bias it is

necessary to use an   instrume~tal   variable technique; that the lack of statisti-

cal significance of the rate of return coefficient derived from the reestimation

of his equations does little to cast doubt on his estimates, since it is always

possible to reduce statistical significance by dropping or lagging observations,

changing the sample period, etc., especially if the number of observations or

variability in right-hand variables is thereby reduced.
                                        -13-

        Boskin's viewpoint has been seconded by Brittain, who concludes (1980, p.

45) that "the evidence against Boskin's concept of positive elasticity is only
moderately persuasive."     Testing regressions by adding variables and dropping

observations does sacrifice degrees of freedom and make it difficult to obtain

statistical significance.    And it does appear that Howrey and Hymans' decision

to lag the unemployment rate two years may have been based more on its effect in

reducing t values, than on economic reasoning.     Even so, Brittain admits (1980,

p.   46) that "despite these reservations, it is fair to say that in the total of
their work Howrey and Hymans have cast doubt on Boskin's elasticity estimate."


B. The Howrey-Hymans Estimate

       In their own attempts to determine the interest elasticity of saving,

Howrey and Hymans consider three alternative measures of aggregate saving:

saving in the national income and product accounts (NIPA), saving in the flow of

funds accounts (FF), and what they call personal cash saving.    They argue that

neither of the first two of these is germane to the issue at hand, which they

take to be   "loanable funds" saving available to finance business capital for-

mation.   Both concepts include imputation of investment in owner-occupied

buildings (net of capital consumption allowances).    The first also includes

changes in reserves of private pension and insurance plans, the latter net

investment in consumer durables.    By deducting those items from the two defini-

tions of saving, Howrey and Hymans arrive at an estimate of personal cash

saving, upon which their analysis concentrates.
                                       -14-

      Howrey and Hymans regress annual saving (defined in various ways) on

lagged saving, changes in various components of income, the change in a real

rate of return, the change in the rate of inflation, the change in the standard

deviation of the rate of inflation, the change in business cash saving, and

changes in government cash saving.    The last two right hand variables are

included to test the "ultrarationality" proposition that households view busi-

ness and government saving as a component of their income and as a substitute

for personal saving. 2l   The Baa corporate bond rate, net of their estimate of

the marginal federal tax rate applicable to capital income, was reduced by a

rate of expected inflation obtained from survey data to produce an estimate of

the expected net real rate of return. 22   Howrey and Hymans conclude that it is

unlikely that the interest rate has any effect on saving.     In addition, they

find support for the ultrarationality hypothesis, especially so far as business

saving is concerned.

      Howrey and Hymans' work has been strongly criticized.    First, as Feldstein

(1978b) has noted, the expected real net rate of return is not observable.        It

can only be surmised and approximated empirically by subtracting estimates of

the expected inflation rate from the appropriate net of tax interest rate.

There are thus at least three places where analysis can go astray:     in choosing

the appropriate interest rate (or rates), in estimating the expected inflation

rate, and in determining the relevant marginal tax rate.    Success would be dif-

ficult enough for a nation of identical households all living in the same state,

receiving the same income, .and paying the same state and federal income taxes.

But when aggregate data are employed it is necessary to choose some central
                                        -15-


estimate of the relevant tax rate, interest rate, and expected inflation rate.

Feldstein (1978b) and Boskin (1978b, p. 698) note, for example, that the survey

data employed by Howrey and Hymans contain information on short-run expectations

of inflation, but contend that long-run expectations may be more relevant for

the purpose at hand.     (See also King, 1980.)    On the other hand, Shoven (1978,

p. 692) argues that the choice between actual and expected interest rates

depends on the time-horizon of savers.     Feldstein has emphasized that the

substantial measurement error resulting from these problems biases the estimate

of the coefficient on the expected net real rate of return (toward zero, if the

error happened to be random).     The small sample size, minimal variation in the

expected real net rate of return, and measurelnent problems mean that there is a

high ratio of noise to information and that it may be difficult to obtain

meaningful parameter estimates, especially if techniques that require large

sample size are necessary.     As several observers have noted, it may be necessary

to utilize micro-data collected from households to isolate the interest elasti-

city of saving.     (See Lawrence, 1980, p. 33.)   This might allow adequate treat-

ment of demographic and life cycle considerations, a potentially important fac-

tor in explaining changes in saving over time "Ghat Shoven (1978, p. 692) notes

are sorely missing from the Howrey-Hymans analysis. 23

      Not all would agree that "loanable funds" saving is the proper focus of

attention, arguing that saving of business firms is also relevant for the issue

at hand.     After all,personal cash saving is less than 15 percent of NIPA gross

saving. 24   Feldstein (1978b, p. 688) has characterized the specification of

saving behavior employed by Howrey and Hymans as "basically a mistake."        In

direct contradiction to Howrey and Hymans' view that "loanable funds" saving is

the appropriate dependent variable, Feldstein argues that a broader concept,
                                      -16-


such. as net worth, should be the focus of analysis.     Even if one grants the

hypothesis that personal cash saving is conditioned by other forms of saving,

Feldstein faults the proxies employed for those other forms of wealth:      gross

business saving, rather than net; contributions to social security, rather than

social security wealth; the government surplus (an endogenous variable), rather

than the change in the real government debt.     Brittain (1980, p. 44) and King

(1980) have also questioned the exclusion of the reserves of pension companies

from the definition of personal cash saving.     The exclusion appears to be based

on the view that these reserves should be treated as part of the net cash flow

of the business sector, and therefore not part of the personal saving of indivi-

duals that is the object of attention.     (Howrey and Hymans, 1978a, p. 658)     But

this argument is not totally persuasive.

      In related comments Shoven (1978, p. 691, 693) and King (1980), as well as

Boskin (1978b, p. 644) have faulted the use of a single equation technique to

estimate rate of return effects on personal cash saving.     Even if the

forms of saving that are excluded from   persona~   cash saving are not what people

concerned with capital formation have in mind, a complete model of consumer

behavior would include stocks and accumulations of these items.     Beyond that,

implicit in the Howrey-Hymans single equation test of the ultrarationality

hypothesis is the view that business saving can be treated as predetermined in
                            .
the equation for personal cash saving.     More appropriate tests may indicate that

this view does not do great violence to reality.     But strictly speaking business

saving and personal saving are determined simultaneously.     More generally, by

using a single equation model Howrey and Hymans cannot hope to distinguish bet-

ween effects of interest rates on saving and effects on investment.
                                           -17-


C. Conclusion

         For those who are interested in the "bottom line" this discussion of the

empirical estimates and problems of Boskin and of Howrey and Hymans has probably

been overly long.     For them a simple cliche such as "more smoke than fire" or

"the jury is still out" might have sufficed quite well.        But following that

approach might do a disservice, for it would tend to obscure one of the central

propositions of this paper:        determining the effect interest rates have on

saving is no mean trick.     It involves considerable conceptual and econometric

difficulties tllat still defy the best efforts of bright and dedicated econo-

mists.


IV. Concluding Remarks

         In reviewing the program for this symposimfi I see the following

description:

            The papers in this session will address the poten-
         tial of these   alternative tax and fiscal strategies
         for increasing the rate of saving and private capital
         formation, and for enhancing productivity. The
         approach in each paper will be to examine the theory
         and the evidence regarding the responsiveness of
         saving and capital formation to the price and income
         effects of alternative tax and fiscal structures.

Based on the brief review of theoretical analysis and empirical results pre-

sented here one must be a    b~t   pessimistic.   First, economists have not always

been clear whether it is tax effects on future consumption or on saving that

interest them.     And far from achieving success in isolating income and substi-

tution effects, they seem not to have always been clear whether they want to

isolate them,by calculating compensated elasticities of demand, rather than com-
                                      -18-


bining them in estimates of uncompensated elasticities.   Beyond that, to for-

mulate optimal tax policy one must know own and cross-elasticities of demand

for leisure, as well as for future consumption.   Finally, even if these for-

midable problems are not present, econometric difficulties plague estimates of

the "saving" response to interest rates.

      Having said all this, it is, however, well to keep it in perspective.

After all, the empirical debate between Boskin and Howrey and Hymans is. over the

interest elasticity of saving.   As Feldstein (1978a) and King (1980) have empha-

sized, even if Howrey and Hymans were correct, the elasticity of demand for

future consumption would be unity and the welfare loss from capital taxation

could be large.   Beyond that, it is easy to overemphasize neutrality toward

saving as an argmnent for a VAT or a personal expenditure tax.   Equity and

neutrality toward different types of investment are also important.   The per-

sonal expenditure tax, in particular, has such advantages, especially in an

inflationary environment, that are unrelated to intertemporal neutrality.      (See

Kay and King, 1978; the Meade Committee, 1978; Bradford, 1980b; and King, 1980).
                                       -19-


                                     Footnotes


*   The author is vice president of the National Bureau of Economic Research.   The

opinions reported here are solely his own, and not those of the National Bureau

of Economic Research.


lSee Feldstein and Summers (1979).    That effective rates exceed statutory rates

is not inevitable; it depends upon the particular set of tax rules that govern

the definition of taxable income.


2A bill introduced by Barber Conable and James Jones would provide depre-

ciation of structures in ten years, equipment in five years, and autos and light

trucks in three years.    For an analysis of "10-5-3," see Feldstein (1979).

Auerbach and Jorgenson (1980) contains the imaginative proposal for allowing

firms deductions in the year investruent occurs for the present value of all

future depreciation allowances.


3See Andrews (1974), Mieszkowski (1977), U.S. Treasury Department (1977),

Bradford (1980a ,b), and other papers in Pechman (1980).


4For an analysis of the value added tax contained in the "Tax Restructuring Act

of 1979," see McLure (1980).


5At this point no distinction is made between a) neutrality between saving and

consumption and b) neutrality between present and future consumption.    This

figures crucially in the discussion of section II.


6Compared to the mandate of the symposium program (reproduced in the concluding

section), the discussion presented here is limited in at least two important
                                        -20-


ways.   First, effects on net private saving are considered.    No attempt is made

to determine whether or not technological progress is embodied in new capital

goods, how taxes affect gross saving, etc.     Second, the focus is upon attempts

to untangle aggregate income and substitution effects of tax changes on saving.

But more important may be the differential income effects on saving that result

when tax burdens are shifted between income groups, depending on marginal pro-

pensities to save at different income levels.    Moreover, effects of tax policy

that work through the budgetary balance and differences in public and private

propensities to save are not treated.


7It is always dangerous to make an assertion such as this, for it opens one to

criticisms such as that by Howrey and Hymans (1978b, p. 703) that "Feldstein

like Shoven -- misses an important point by discussing a problem in which he is

interested, rather than the problem that we addressed."    Nonetheless, it does

seem as though many persons who have been involved in the debate on the effects

of taxation on saving have not always stated clearly and explicitly why they are

interested in the problem.   One primary contention of this paper is that failure

to answer this question carefully can result in improper or irrelevant

analysis.


8This ignores the social choice of the optimal equilibrium level of the

capital-labor ratio based on' considerations of intergenerational equity; see

King (1980) and part B of this section.    Moreover, this entire discussion

ignores complications that result once analysis covers more than two periods.


9Thus the social opportunity cost of future consumption is 1/(1.10) while the

private value of future consumption is 1/(1.05).    Throughout this discussion it
                                             -21-


    will be convenient to assume that the marginal technological possibilities of

    transforming present consumption into future consumption remain constant so that

    the marginal social opportunity cost of future consumption in terms of present

    consumption (the inverse of 1 + r) is constant.      In general, however, it is the

    discrepancy between the gross and net real rates of return, rather than the

    constancy of the latter, that is important for determining whether or not a

    welfare loss occurs.    For more rigorous discussions of the theoretical proposi-

    tions presented here, see, for example, Musgrave (1959), Musgrave and Musgrave

    (1976), or almost any textbook on microeconomic theory.      For an empirical argu-

    ment along these lines that the national rate of saving is too low, see

    Feldstein (1977).   Feldstein explicitly rejects the following spurious arguments

    for increasing the rate of saving:      that there is a "capital gap" (in the sense

    that the demand for investment funds exceeds the supply), that full employment

    cannot be maintained because the capital stock is too small, that a greater rate

    of capital formation would facilitate achievement of price stability, and that a

    larger capital stock would make American labor more productive and improve the

    balance of payments.


    lONote that there is no assumption that second period consumption is an inferior

    good.   Rather this shifting of consumption from the first period to the second

    occurs because as the   proble~   is structured all the drop in income initially

    occurs in the second period.


    llThese two elasticities differ by exactly one only in the special case in which

    there is no non-capital income in the second period of a two period model.




f
                                        -22-



12For further discussion of the quantification of welfare losses induced by taxa-

tion, see Harberger (1964).     For the application of the analysis to the problem

at hand, see Feldstein (1978a).


13The paper by Howrey and Hymans appears in both (1978a and 1980).     Similarly,

Boskin's comments on that analysis (1978b and 1980) is reproduced in both pla-

ces.   Subsequent references to Howrey and Hymans' work and to Baskin's critique

are to the earlier versions.


140ne hardly knows what to make of the remark (Howrey and Hymans, 1978a, p. 657)

that "This procedure is not the same as the one implied in the usual conceptual

experiment of isolating the income and substitution effects of a change in the

after-tax interest rate."     One person at the Washington symposium suggested to

the author that inclusion of income among the right-hand variables would imply

isolation of the substitution effect.    But consideration of the two period

theoretical model suggests that it is future income or wealth that must be

included if the analyst is to abstract from income effects of changes in

interest rates.   More generally, one must know the present value of the income

stream and how it is distributed through time.


15see Feldstein (1978a) and Bradford (1980c).    For an excellent discussion of

this proposition and additional references to the literature, see King (1980).

Sandmo (1976) provides an excellent introduction to the literature; it does not,

however, explicitly cover the analytical issue at hand.


16King notes (1980) that Feldstein (1978a) inadvertently chose parameter values

for his illustrative example of the welfare loss of capital inCOlne taxation that
                                          -23-



would imply that an expenditure tax is optimal.       For other parameter values the

expenditure tax would not be optimal and, indeed, a capital subsidy might even

be required.


llThis result is, of course, a close cousin to the result of Corlett and Hague

(1953) that if leisure cannot be taxed the second-best approach is to tax goods

that are complementary to leisure.


l8Earl ier work in this field is reviewed by Boskin (1978a) and by Howrey and

Hymans (1978a). It seems sufficiently deficient to justify concentration on the

subsequent work by Boskin and by Howrey and Hymans.


19The dependent variable and the first three right-hand variables appear in

logarithmic form.       Though Boskin does not say so, the income and wealth

variables are also apparently in per capita terms.


20Since Boskin subsequently (1978b, p.694) contends that "one of the major

points of   U\Y   JPE paper was that it was not reasonable to estimate consumption

functions by single-equation methods," it is not clear in what sense he con-

siders this equation "basic."


21See David and Scadding (1974) for a widely noted reference to this proposi-

tion, which Boskin (1978a) aiso discusses at some length.


22Shoven notes (1978, p. 693) that Howrey and Hymans use the actual Baa bond

rate, rather than the expected rate.       Interestingly this rate seems to have been

chosen because it performed best in the Boskin equations that Howrey and Hymans

reject (1978a, p. 673).
                                      -24-



23Boskin and Lau (1979) have attempted, on the other hand, to integrate economic

and demographic effects in the estimation of labor supply and saving responses

simultaneously from aggregate time series data.


24Brittain has argued, however (1980, p. 44), that this fact actually reinforces

Howrey and Hymans' conclusion:   personal cash saving may simply be so small that

it serves no purpose to aim tax policy at it.
                                       -25-


                                    References


Andrews, William, "A Consumption-Type or Cash Flow Personal Income Tax," Harvard

     Law Review, Vol.87 (April 1974), pp. 1113-88.


Auerbach, Alan J., and Jorgenson, Dale W., "The First Year Capital Recovery

     System," Tax Notes, Vol. X, No. 15 (April 14,1980), pp. 515-523.


Boskin, Michael J., "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of

     Political Economy, Vol.86 No.2 (April 1978 Part 2), pp.S3-S27.


Boskin, Michael J., "Comments" on Howrey and Hymans, "The Measurement and

     Determination of Loanable-Funds Saving," Brookings Papers on Economic

     Activity, 3:1978, pp. 694-700.


Boskin, Michael J., "Comments" on Howrey and Hymans, "The Measurement and

     Determination of Loanable-Funds Saving," in Joseph A. Pechman, ed., What

     Should Be Taxed:    Income or Expenditure? (Washington: Brookings

     Institution, 1980), pp. 34-41.


Boskin, t4ichae1 J., and Lau, Lawrence J., "Integrating Economic and Demographic

     Effects in a Model of Household Behavior:    Preliminary Results from Postwar

     U.S. Aggregate Time Series Data" presented at an NBER conference on the

     "Economics of Taxation,)' Cambridge, November 21-22, 1979.


Bradford, David F., Testimony on the Tax Restructuring Act of 1979 before the

     Committee on Ways and Means of the U.S. House of Representatives,

    Novernber 14, 1979    (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1980),

    pp. 79-84.   (a)
                                        -26-


Bradford, David F., "The Case for a Personal Consumption Tax," in Joseph A.

     Pechman, editor,    What Should Be Taxed:   Incolne or Expenditure?

     (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1980), pp. 75-113(b).


Bradford, David F., "The Economics of Tax Policy toward Saving," in George M.

     von Furstenberg, The Government and Capital Formation      (Cambridge,

     Massachusetts:     Ballinger, 1980), pp. 11-71.(c)


Brittain, John A., "Comments" on Howrey and Hymans, "The Measurement and

     Determination of Loanable-Funds Saving," in Joseph A. Pechman, editor, What

     Should Be Taxed: Income or Expenditure?     (Washington:   Brookings

     Institution, 1980), pp. 41-48.


Corlett, W.J., and Hague, D.C., "Complementarity and the Excess Burden of

     Taxation," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 21, (1953-54), pp. 21-30.


David, Paul and Scadding, John L., "Private Saving: Ultra-rationality,

    Aggregation, and 'Denison's Law' ," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 82, No.

     2 (March/April 1974, Part 1), pp. 225-49.


Feldstein, Martin, "Does the United States Save Too Little?" American Economic

     Review, Vol. 67, No.1 (February 1977), pp. 116-121.


Feldstein, Martin, "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," Journal of

     Political Economy, Vol. 86, No.2 (April 1978, Part 2), pp. S29-S51.(a)


Feldstein, Martin, "Comments" on Howrey and Hymans, "The Measurement and

    Determination of Loanable-Funds Saving," Brookings Papers on Economic

    Activity, 3:1978, pp. 686-690.(b)
                                       -21-


Feldstein, Hartin, "The Rate of Return, Taxation and Personal Savings,"

     Economic Journal, Vol 88. (September 1918), pp. 482-81.(c)


Feldstein, Martin, "Adjusting Depreciation in an Inflationary Economy:    Indexing

     vs Acceleration," NBER Working Paper No. 395, 1919.


Feldstein, Martin and Summers, Lawrence, "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital

     Income in the Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal, Vol. 32, No.4

     (December 1919), pp. 445-410.


Harberger, Arnold C., "Taxation, Resource Allocation and Welfare," in John F.

     Due, editor, The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes in the Federal Revenue

     System   (Princeton, N.J.:   Princeton University Press, 1964), pp. 25-10.


Hausman, J. A., "The Effects of Taxes on Labor Supply," xeroxed, 1919.



Howrey, E. Phillip and Hymans, Saul H., "The Measurement and Determination of

     Loanable-Funds Saving," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3:1918, pp.

     655-685.(a)


Howrey, E. Phillip and Hymans, Saul H., "Reply" to Comments by Feldstein,

     Shoven, and Boskin on "The Measurement and Determination of Loanable-Funds

     Saving," Broookings Pape.rs on Economic Activity, 3:1918, pp. 100-103.(b)


Howrey, E. Phillip and Hymans, Saul H., "The Measurement and Determination of

    Loanable-Funds Saving," in Joseph A. Pechman, What Should Be Taxed:

     Income or Expenditure?   (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1980), pp. 1-31.
                                         -28-


Kay, J. A., and King, M.A., The British Tax System       (Oxford:   Oxford University

     Press, 1978).


King, Mervyn, "Savings and Taxation," NBER Working Paper No. 428, 1980.


Lawrence, Robert Z"      "Comments" on Howrey-Hymans Paper, "The Measurement and

     Determination of Loanab1e- Funds Saving," in Joseph A. Pechman, editor,

     What Should Be Taxed:      Income or Expenditure?   (Washington:   Brookings

     Institution, 1980), pp. 31-34.


McLure, Charles E. "The Tax Restructuring Act of 1979:      Time for an American

     VAT?" Publ ic Pol icy Vol. 28, No. 3 (Summer 1980).


Meade Committee, The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation (London:       Allen and

     Unwin, 1978).


Mieszkowski, Peter, "The Cash Flow Version of an Expenditure Tax," OTA Paper No.

     26 (U.S. Treasury Department, 1977).


Musgrave,   Rict~rd   A., The Theory of Public Finance (New York:   McGraw-Hill,

     1959) •

Musgrave, Richard A. and Musgrave, Peggy B., Public Finance in Theory and

     Practice    (New York:    McGraw-Hill, 1976).


Rosen, Harvey, "What Is Labor Supply and Do Taxes Affect It," NBER Working

     Paper No. 411, 1979, forthcoming in the Araerican Economic Review.
                                      -29-


Shoven, John B., "Comments" on Howrey and Hymans, "The Measurement and

     Determination of Loanable-Funds Saving," Brookings Papers on Economic

     Activity, 3:1978, pp. 690-694.


U.S.Department of the Treasury, Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform, (Washington:

    U.S. Government Printing Office, 1977).
