NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SENSITIVITY OF CONSUMPTION
TO TRANSITORY INCOME: ESTIMATES
FROM PANEL DATA ON HOUSEHOLDS

Robert E. Hall
Frederic S. Mishkin

Working Paper No. 505

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

July

1980

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation
through a grant to the NBER. We are grateful to numerous
colleagues, especially Ariel Pakes, for helpful comments. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #505
July, 1980

The Sensitivity of Consumption to Transitory Income:
Estimates iroin Panel Data on Households
ABSTRACT

We investigate the stochastic relation between income and consumption
(specifically, consumption of food) within a panel of about 2,000 households.
Our major findings are:

1. Consumption responds much more strongly to permanent than to
transitory movements of income.
2. The response to transitory income is nonetheless clearly positive.

3. A simple test, independent of our model of consumption, rejects
a central implication of the pure life cycle—permanent income
hypothesis.

4. The observed covariation of income and consumption is compatible
with pure life cycle—permanent income behavior on the part of
80 percent of families and simple proportionality of consumption
and income among the remaining 20 percent.

As a general matter, our findings support the view that families

respond differently to different sources of income variations. In particular,
temporary income tax policies have smaller effects on consumption than do
other, more permanent changes in income of the same magnitude.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Memorial Building
Stanford University
'Stanford, California 94305

Frederic Mishkin
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637

(415) 497—2215
(312) 753—4518

1. Introduction

The stochastic relationship of consumption to income has long been

recognized as a critical issue to macro policy analysis. One traditional
view of consumers sees them as largely passive agents in the determination

of aggregate demand. Changes in real incomes are translated reasonably
quickly and fully into changes in consumption. In this view, income tax
changes are a powerful tool for countercyclical stabilization policy, as

Okun (1971) and Tobin and Dolde (1971) have argued. In contrast, the life
cycle—permanent income hypothesis of consumption embodies the opposite view

that consumers maximize utility over a long—term horizon. Rather than
responding passively to every change in income, consumers will alter their
consumption by smaller amounts if they perceive the income change as

temporary rather than permanent. Eisner (1969) has argued along this line.
With the refinement of rational expectations, the life cycle—permanent
income theory (as in Muth (1960), Lucas (1976) and Hall (1978)) casts
serious doubt on the usefulness of income tax policy as a stabilization

tool. Consumers cannot be relied on to react vigorously when an income tax
change goes into effect. Predicting the impact of an income tax change on
consumption requires knowledge of consumers' perceptions of its permanence.

This paper tries to shed some light on the stochastic relation between
income and consumption (specifically, consumption of food) within a panel
of about 2000 households who reported both variables over a seven—year

span. Our major findings are:
1. Consumption responds much more strongly to permanent than to
transitory movements of income.

2

2. The response to transitory income is nonetheless vigorous; it is
compatible with interest rates of 10 to 20 percent per year but
not lower.

3. A simple test, independent of our model of consumption, rejects
the pure life cycle—permanent income hypothesis.

4. The observed covariation of income and consumption is compatible
with pure life cycle—permanent income behavior on the part of
80 percent of families and simple proportionality of consumption
and income among the remaining 20 percent.
These conclusions are derived from evidence about the joint movements

of income and consumption. Needless to say, consumption and income
frequently rise or fall together in the same year for a particular family.

Our model ecplains the bulk of this correlation as the immediate response

of consumption to changes in permanent income. Most of the rest is
attributed to departures from life cycle—permanent income behavior by a

minority of the sample. We hypothesize that this minority (about a fifth
of all families) set consumption to a fraction of current income instead
of following the more complicated optimal rule.

3

II. Stochastic Theory of Consumer Behavior

An important paper by John Muth (1960) on the permanent income
hypothesis showed that the marginal propensities to consume out of current

and lagged income depend on the stochastic properties of income. An
income process with a large transitory component implies a small propensity

to consume out of current income. At the other extreme, when most changes
in income are permanent——that is, when income is almost a random walk——the
propensity to consume out of current income should differ only slightly

from the propensity to consume out of permanent income. This point was
overlooked in empirical work on consumption long after the publication of
Muth's article; Mayer's (1972b) survey does not mention any studies that

consider the issue, for example. In recent work using data on individual
consumers (Mayer, 1972a), estimates of large propensities to consume out
of current income are interpreted as evidence against the permanent income

hypothesis without any discussion of the stochastic process of income. The
evidence is actually ambiguous because the permanent income hypothesis
together with plausible income processes could well imply exactly the
degree of sensitivity found.

Recent work by Hall (1978) deals with some of these problems by
deriving a theory of the stochastic process of consumption from the life

cycle—permanent income hypothesis. Empirical tests then find that one of
the important implications of the hypothesis is largely supported by

aggregate time—series data.' A recent paper by Flavin (1979) examines

'These tests are similar to the ones used in testing the efficient markets
hypothesis for financial assets. See Appendix 3 for a discussion of the
relation of that body of research to our work on consumption.

4

aggregate data in a framework similar to the one used here, again with

generally favorable results. Howevr, aggregate evidence is not really
powerful enough to settle the important questions about the behavior of
consumers.

These considerations have led to the research reported here based on

data for individual households. We bring a rather specific question to
this research: Are consumers more sensitive to current fluctuations in
income than they would be if they followed the dictates of the life cycle—

permanent income model? We approach the question in the following way:
First, we propose a stochastic model of household income. Then, we
hypothesize that households choose current consumption so as to maximize
expected intertemporal utility, as suggested by the life cycle—permanent

income view of consumption. In so doing, they arrive at an estimate of
permanent income, based on the information available about the various

stodhastic components of actual income. Note that permanent income is
not one of the components we hypothesize for actual income. Rather,
permanent income is an intermediate step in the process by which families

determine consumption. In this respect, we expand on earlier microeconomic
research on the permanent income hypothesis. The final step makes observed
consumption equal to a fraction of permanent income plus a transitory
component which can be interpreted as measurement error, inventory
accumulation, and the like.

The empirical analysis in this paper focuses on the theoretical
implication that consumers should increase consumption by the annuity
value of the increase in wealth brought about by a transitory increase

in income. We test this implication by estimating the model using panel
data on the income and consumption levels of individuals over several

5

years. However, the response of consumption to the transitory component
of income is estimated as a free parameter rather than constraining it to

equal the expression for the annuity value. We then can evaluate whether
consumption is excessively responsive to current income.

The starting point for our work is the life cycle—permanent income

theory of consumption. According to the theory, consumers form estimates
of lifetime resources and then adopt plans for spreading those resources

over the remaining years of their lives. With explicit considerations of
uncertainty (Yaari, 1976; Bewley, 1976; and Hall, 1978), this principle

becomes: Consumers form estimates of the probability distributions of
lifetime resources and adopt sequential policies for spreading the

resources. We will consider the hypothesis of rational expectations
which asserts that consumers use all available information in estimating

the probability distributions of future resources. This hypothesis is
more of a sharpening and clarification of assumptions already implicit
in the life cycle—permanent income theory rather than a logically
independent assumption.

Here we consider the case of a consumer whose real income is the sum
of three components:

1. A deterministic component, y1, which rises with age until just
before retirement, and then falls rapidly.

2. A stochastic component, y, which fluctuates as lifetime prospects
change. Because this lifetime component embodies information
about essentially permanent family characteristics, a natural
specification is a random walk.

6

3. A stochastic component, y, which fluctuates according to
transitory influences, and obeys a first—order autoregressive
process with parameter p.

A key feature of our model is the hypothesis that families observe the two
stochastic components separately.

In year t, the consumer will have accumulated assets At. Then all
information available in year t relevant for this year's consumption

is contained in y, y, and

decision,

(as well as the information

"' ' +r •.. denoted by y, which has always been known).

about '

The consumption decision emerging from the consumer's optimal plan can be
described by

c

=

—

L

S A)

y,

(1)

Note that we do not yet assume that consumers make use of certainty
equivalence or even that their preferences over uncertain outcomes can be
described by expected utility.

For our present purposes, it will be convenient to assume that the
consumption function, f, is linear in its arguments:

=

where

and

+

+ tY + Ytt —

(2)

are the deterministic paths of consumption and assets in

the absence of surprises in

and S and ,

propensities to consume out of y', y, and

' and

are the marginal

at time t. This will hold

exactly for consumers with quadratic utility functions who maximize
expected utility, and will serve as a useful approximation in other cases.

7

Defining c and At as the deviations from the deterministic paths of
consumption and assets, i.e.,

(3)

we rewrite (2) as

c=c*y+8y+YA
Now, under the assumption about the two components of earnings
introduced earlier,

L

L

(5)

+ C

and

S

S

yt =

where

+

nt

are random innovations in the two components that are

and

completely unpredictable. Further, the evolution of assets around their
deterministic path is governed by

=

(1+r)(A

+ yl + y1 —

ci)

We will take the real return to savings, r, as a known, predetermined
constant.

(7)

8

With these assumptions and notations, we are prepared to derive an

explicit stochastic model for consumption. We could begin with the
maximization of the expected value of an intertemporal utility function,
but it is simpler to make use of a proposition derived by Hall (1978):

Consumers who make consumption plans by maximizing the expected value of
an intertemporally separable utility function satisfy the following basic

condition: The expected marginal utility of consumption next year depends
only on the actual level of consumption this yea,r and on the parameters of

the utility function. Again, rational expectations simply sharpens this
proposition: No information available to the consumer in year t has any
value in predicting next year's marginal utility, beyond the predictive

value of this year's consumption. This hypothesis provides constraints
on the coefficients of the consumption model. Again, as an approximation,
the hypothesis is interpreted as applying to consumption itself, which is
exactly true for a quadratic utility function and a reasonable approximation
for other cases.

Appendix 1 uses this irrelevance of past data apart from immediate
lagged consumption to derive the parameters describing the response of
current consumption to the stock of savings and to current values of the

two components of income. The conclusions are

=

1

for all years t. Changes in the lifetime component of income

bring about immediate equal changes in consumption.

=

T —

(1+r)[1 -[]

wealth,

=

t+1

the annuity value of one unit of

I

that is, the stream of equal payments over the remainder

9

of the lifetime that can be financed by a unit of wealth. For
infinite horizons,

—
=
t

is the real interest rate.

t+1

1 {JT

y t = the annuity value of the stream of current

i_I_2__

1+r

and future income predicted on the basis of the current value of
transitory income.

Some illustrative values at a real interest rate of 5 percent per year and
a serial correlation coefficient of transitory income of 0.3 are as follows:

remaining
life time

propensity
to consume
savings

propensity
to consume
transitory
income

20 years

.078

.109

40 years

.057

.080

Because we lack data on total savings for households, we need an
expression describing consumption which eliminates the need for information

on household savings. In Appendix 1 we derive the following:1

=

+

r)t

'Note that this formulation assumes that the consumer's rate of time
discount equals the interest rate. Empirical evidence in Hall (1978)
does not reject this assumption.

(8)

10

Note that

depends only on information available in year t, namely, the

change in the lifetime component of income, c, and the innovation in
transitory income,

Hence, (8) is simply a restatement of the basic

hypothesis that all information available in year t—1 is incorporated into

c1. Assets

do not appear in (8) because they are just the residual of

income after consumption and observations on At would not add information

about c not already in

and

Rational consumption behavior is compatible with any degree of
sensitivity to the surprise in income (up to

=

1),

provided a sufficiently

high interest rate faces the consumer. No matter how much they discount the
future, consumers should not simply make consumption proportional to current
income; rather, the optimal strategy is to make the change in consumption
respond only to the surprise in income and not to predictable movements of

income. At very high interest rates, it is true that the information about
future changes in income contained in today's surprise in income has

negligible influence on wealth. However, it is still possible to take
steps today that will insulate consumption from any foreseeable future

changes in income. Exactly because the return to assets is high, a tiny
amount saved from today's temporary increase in income can finance a

complete offset of the subsequent decline in income later. In an economy
with very high interest rates, consumers make small but lucrative and
important asset transactions to achieve the optimal consumption path.

Later in the paper, we will consider the behavior of consumers who are

constrained against making any transactions in assets. They are prevented
from achieving the optimal consumption path, and their actual consumption

behaves in a way that is readily detectable in the data. There is a very

1].

substantial difference between optimal consumption in the face of very high
interest rates and consumption constrained to equal current income.

As a final note on the interpretation of the theory, we emphasize that
the lifetime component of income, yL, is not the same thing as permanent
income, although the propensity to consume out of

is the same as the

propensity to consume out of permanent Income. Permanent income includes
the annuity values of transitory income and assets, as well as the lifetime

component of income. Our research tries to make a clear distinction
between the statistical decomposition of income into lifetime and
transitory components, on the one hand, and the consumer's inference about
permanent income, on the other hand.

12

III. Statistical Model and Estimation

The data for our investigation are obtained from the University of

Michigan's Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) which contains histories
of earnings and spending for a large number of families over a span of

several years. The PSID reports total annual family income net of estimated
federal income taxes, which we then adjusted to take account of estimated
FICA (social security) tax payments and changes in the overall cost of

living (measured by the Consumer Price Index). The most comprehensive
and reliable consumption measure which can be obtained from the PSID is the
sum of the annual expenditures on food used at home and the amount spent

eating at restaurants. We deflated food expenditures with the food price
component of the CPI. Data from the PSID for food consumption are available
for the years 1969—1971 and 1973—1975 and for income for all years, 1969—

1975. We included all families who reported income and food consumption in
all years and whose responses to the food and income questions were deemed

accurate by the interviewer.1 We used data on six first differences of
income and five first differences of consumption for 2309 families. One
of the first differences of consumption spans two years; Appendix 4
describes how we accommodated this feature of the data.

In the PSID survey, information about food consumption is elicited by

the following question: "How much to you spend on food in an average week?"
The question is asked sometime in the first half of the year; the average

'The survey interviewers were instructed to estimate income and food
consumption when an interviewee was unsure of the answers to the questions
concerning these items. We excluded all of the cases where this imputation
was done.

13

interview takes place at the end of March. We date the response in the
previous year, as does the PSID. For a typical family interviewed in
March 1971, for example, data on last year's income and usual food

consumption are dated 1970 in our work. Because of the peculiar timing
of the question about average food consumption, we found it necessary to

extend the model described earlier in the paper in the following way. We
assume that the new information about income which the family uses to decide
on consumption dated in year t includes a fraction

of the new information

that will not be recorded by the survey until the following year. For the
simple reason that the consumption question is asked partway into the

following year, we might expect a value of near a quarter. However, a
family might have access to additional information about income for the full
year at the time that consumption is measured early in the year (Appendix 3

mentions the same issue as it arises in securities markets). For example,
in some jobs annual compensation is known with near certainty at the

beginning of the year. If this kind of advance information about income is
commonplace, our estimate of

should be correspondingly higher. We do not

consider the possibility that consumers have information about income in
years after t+1, beyond what can be predicted from the history of income

itself. Out low estimated value of 4 tends to confirm our assumption on
this point. Further details about the role of future information in the
model and the estimation of

appear in Appendix 2.

In addition to the ambiguity about the timing of the question about
food consumption, there is a further ambiguity about the length of the

period over which consumption is measured. Instead of asking about
average consumption over an unstated period, it would be better for our
purposes if it were about last year specifically or even about last week.

14

We investigated the possibility that families averaged food consumption
over a period even longer than the entire previous year, but did not find
any confirming evidence.

The use of food consumption in place of total consumption obligates us
to consider the form of the demand function for food, which differs in two

respects from the demand function for total consumption. First, the price
of food relative to the overall cost of living influences food consumption.

Because all the families in the sample faced roughly the same change in
relative prices, and our study relies primarily on the variability of
individual family income, the relative price change presents few problems

for our work. We posit equal relative price effects among families with
similar characteristics, and remove these effects before estimating the

model. Details of this adjustment appear later in the paper.
The second consideration is the likelihood that the proportion of
income spent on food declines as income rises——the usual view about the

Engel curve for food. In the current research, we approximate the Engel
curve by a straight line with a positive intercept. Though this does imply
a declining expenditure fraction on food, it can be defended only as an

approximation. The slope of the line will be called

it is the marginal

propensity to spend permanent income on food. The parameter

introduced

in the previous section will be defined as the ratio of the marginal
propensity to spend transitory income on food to the marginal propensity

to spend lifetime income on food. Thus the units and the expected
numerical values for

presented earlier will continue to apply.

Another extension of the basic model is necessary because food

consumption is measured imperfectly. Any study of consumption at the
level of individual households needs to include a stochastic element of

15

measurement error and transitory consumption. We assume that measured
consumption includes a transitory component, c, which obeys a second—
order moving average process with parameters X1 and A2:

=

v+

(9)

A1v_1 + A2v_2

We hypothesize that transitory consumption is uncorrelated with both
components of income:

Corr(v,c) =

Corr(v,n)

= 0

(10)

With these various extensions, our model for the first difference of
consumption becomes'

=

+

The terms involving V

+

— (1_Ai)v

represent

—
i

(Ai2)v_2

—

(11)

the first difference of a moving average

process.

A detailed preliminary examination of the serial correlation properties
of Income revealed that a second—order moving average model was more
appropriate than the first—order autoregressive one considered in the theory

section. It does not seem useful to present the details of the consumption
model with a moving average process for income, as they are a good deal

1Here, we are neglecting the issue of advance information about income;
the appropriate modifications appear in Appendix 2.

16

more complex and no more illuminating than for the autoregressive case.1
It remains true that consumption responds to the innovation in income.

With moving—average parameters p1 and p2. the stochastic model for the
first difference of income is

=

Again, the terms

+

—

involving

—i

—

—

21t—3

(12)

n are the first difference of a moving average

process. This model embodies the strong assumption that income is measured
without error. A model augmented with an income measurement error would
not be econometrically identified.

Although in the full life cycle model, the propensity to consume out
of transitory income depends on age, in the results presented here, we
approximate the full model by treating

as constant across the sample.

We tried estimating the model separately for families with younger and

older heads, but failed to find significant differences. Constancy of
across families has the substantial statistical advantage of making the
simple moment matrix over families a sufficient statistic for all of the
parameters of the model.

We estimate the parameters of the model by maximum likelihood, under
the assumption that c, n, and v obey normal distributions. Maximum

likelihood achieves the best fit of the variances and covariances

predicted by the model to those found in the data; the likelihood function

'An earlier set of empirical results based on the autoregressive model of
income gave almost exactly the same estimates of the structural parameters
as those reported later in the paper.

17

is a scalar measure of the fit. A formal discussion of the estimation
procedure appears in Appendix 4. We confine ourselves here to a heuristic
treatment.

The key idea of our approach is to write out the formulas for the
variances and covariances of the data implied by our theoretical model, and
then solve the resulting system of equations for the parameter estimates.

To keep the exposition simple, we will first work out the case where
transitory income and transitory consumption are not serially correlated

p1, p2, X, and A2 are all taken as zero) and no consumers have advance
information about income (q

= 0).

First, the variance of the first

difference of income is

V(y t)

02 + 2c2

(13)

and the covariance of the first difference of income with its own lagged
value is

Cov(yt, Ayi) =

(14)

These two formulas give us estimates of the variance of the innovation in
transitory income, a2, and of the variance of the increment in lifetime

income, a. Next, the covariance of the first difference of consumption
with its own lagged value is

Cov(c, ci) = o2

(15)

18

This gives us the last of the three variances, that of the innovation in
transitory consumption, a2.
Information about the structural parameters a. and

comes from the

covariances of consumption and income. The contemporaneous covariance is

C =

= a.a2

Cov(c,

+

(16)

and the covariance with future income is

C1 =

Cov(c, y1) =

Solving for a. and

—ct3a

(17)

gives

C0 +C 1

(18)

a2

C
1

o

+c 1

(19)
n

It is not surprising that the contemporaneous covariance, C, has a
central role in estimating the two propensities to consume, a. and .

It

is

perhaps a little surprising that the covariance of the current change in

consumption with the future change in income is equally important. The
basic finding of the paper is that this covariance is small, so it is not
plausible that consumers are excessively sensitive to transitory income.
Why would we expect excessive sensitivity to show up as a strong negative
correlation between the change in consumption and the future change in

income? Because those upward movements in consumption that are associated

19

with the response to transitory income should be followed by a movement of

income back toward normal in the following year. The first differences of
income are negatively serially correlated (both in the theory and in the

data), so the correlation of the change in consumption and the subsequent
change in income should reflect this negative serial correlation.

It might appear that the covariance of current consumption and lagged

income could provide similar information. That covariance is also free of
the effects of changes in the lifetime component of income. However, the
optimal use of information hypothesized for consumers in the model implies
that the covariance should be exactly zero; no information available in

year t—1 should help predict the change in consumption in year t. This is
essentially the proposition formulated and tested in Hall (1978). The test
will be carried out with the micro panel data of this study in a later
section of the paper.

The considerations leading to the introduction of the parameter, ,

which indexes the amount of information currently available about future
income complicate estimation a little. The parameters ,

, and

estimated jointly from C, C1, and C2 =

The relations

Cov(c,

are

to be solved for the parameters are

C =
C1 =
c

If

2

(1_)(c2 + ca)
+ ca2) — (1—t)cz$a2

= —cta2

(20)
(21)
(22)

is zero, this reduces to the case just worked out, while if it is one,

C1 takes the place of C and C2 the place of C1. In general, to solve for
all three parameters, we start with

20

C +C +C

(23)

2
1
o
_________

The equations for

and

are quadratic and it does not seem worth writing

them out explicitly. Provided C2 is negative (as it is in our data), the

equations have a solution with between zero and one and a positive value

of .
The data whose variances and covariances are the starting point

for

the estimation process are the deviations of the changes in food
consumption and income from deterministic paths.

To form the deviations,

we need estimates of the deterministic changes in income and consumption
for each family in each year based on the family's

characteristics in that

year. We do this by assuming that the deterministic changes are functions
of the family characteristics, then use ordinary least—squares regressions

as follows: In the case of income, we regress the change in actual income
on an intercept, the age of the household head, the age of the household

head squared, the change in the number-of adults in the household, the
change in the number of children in the household and a linear time trend.
Since food is a commodity whose relative price changed substantially over
the period of our sample, we need to take account of the downward slope of

families' demand functions. Thus the change in food consumption is regressed
on the percentage change in the relative price of food (as measured by CPI
components) as well as on the variables used in the income regressions.
Results for the income and food consumption regressions are given in

Appendix 5. The residuals from these regressions are then taken to be the
deviations from the deterministic paths of changes in food consumption and
income.

21

The specification of the food and income regressions make little
difference to the results obtained for the stochastic model outlined

above. For example, if the effect of family characteristics on the
deterministic paths of income and food consumption are ignored——i.e., the

change in the deterministic components is just assumed to be a constant——
we find only very small differences in the estimates of the parameters of
the stochastic model.

The residuals from the preliminary regressions showed mild
heteroskedasticity, especially in the first difference of consumption.
Rather than complicate the model by introducing separate variances for
each year, we simply transformed the covariance matrix of the residuals
by dividing its rows and columns by suitable constants so that the
variances of the first differences of consumption were the same in all
years (equal to the average of the original data over the same years).

We applied the same transformation to the income data. The spirit of this
preliminary treatment of the data is the same as conversion to a correlation

matrix, but it preserves the units of the structural parameters. Experiments
with the alternative of estimating variances gave essentially the same
estimates of the structural parameters.

22

IV. Results

Estimation by maximum likelihood yielded the results shown in Table 1.
In summary, they show:

1. The marginal propensity to consume lifetime income on food, c, is
about 0.11, well under the average propensity in the raw data of
0.19.

2. The propensity to consume out of transitory income relative to
the propensity to consume out of lifetime income, $, is estimated
as 0.29, somewhat above its theoretical value at reasonable

discount rates. The hypothesis of equal response to both
components,

=

1, is unambiguously rejected.

3. The fraction of information about next year's income, , is 0.25,
in line with prior expectations.

Table 2 presents a reasonably complete accounting of the success of

the model in fitting the pattern of covariation found in the data. For
estimation of the key parameters c, , and c, the covariances of this year's
change in consumption with this year's change in income, next year's change,

and the subsequent year's change are the most important. All three
parameters control the fitted value of the contemporaneous covariance——
and

make it larger, by making the change in consumption more sensitive

to surprises in income, while c makes it smaller, by making part of this

year's change in consumption depend on next year's surprise in income.
For the covariance with next year's income,

makes the fitted value more

negative, for the reason explained earlier——if this year's consumption is
sensitive to this year's transitory income, it will be negatively related
to the change in next year's income when the transitory movement will

23

Table 1

Results for Basic Model

Value
Parameter

(standard error)

Interpretation

cz

• 107

Fraction of permanent income spent on food

(.008)

4,

Relative effect of innovation in transitory
income compared to effect of innovation in
lifetime income

.253
(.058)

Fraction of information available in year t
about income in year t+1

.220
(.0 14)

First moving average parameter for transitory
consumption

A2

.104
(.018)

Second moving average parameter for transitory
consumption

p1

.294
(.021)

First moving average parameter for transitory
income

p2

.114
(.018)

Second moving average parameter for transitory
income

a2

1.49
(.11)

Variance of innovation in lifetime income
(thousands of dollars squared)

a2

.154
(.003)

Variance of innovation in transitory
consumption

a2

3.41

Variance of innovation in transitory income

Al

C

:

.292
(.080)

(.13)

24

Table 2

Actual and Fitted Covariances

Actual

Fitted

Var(Ac)

.285

.285

Var(Ay)

6.772

6.757

.234

.200

—.004

.003

Cov(Ac, +2

—.021

—.038

Cov(Ac,

—.077

.000

Cov(Ac, Ac1)

—.110

—. 106

Cov(Ay, Ay1)

—1.948

—1.904

Cov(Ay, Ay2)

—.319

— .339

—.383

—.389

Cov(Ac, Ay)

Cov(Ac, Ay+i)

Cov(Ay, Ay3)

Notes: Var(Ac) includes Var(Ac3 +
Cov(Ac3 + Ac4, Ay3) and Cov(Ac3 +

Ac4);

Cov(Ac, Ay) includes

Ac4, Ay4); Cov(Ac, Ay+i)

includes Cov(Ac3 + Ac4, Ay5); Cov(Ac, Ay+2) includes
Cov(Ac3 + Ac4, Ay6); Cov(Ac,Ay1) includes Cov(Ac3 + Ac4, Ay2),

and Cov(Ac, Ac1) includes Cov(Ac3 + Ac4, Ac2) and
Cov(Ac5, Ac3 +

Ac4).

25

probably be reversed. On the other hand, the fitted covariance is
positively related to c. If consumption is partly based on information
about next year's surprise in income, this year's change will be positively

correlated with next year's change in income. The fitted covariance of
almost exactly zero represents cancellation of the two effects, since both

are quite positive. The estimation process separates the effects

and
of

and

through the use of the covariance of this year's change in

consumption with the change in income two, three, four, and five years

from now (of these, the closer ones are relatively more important). Under
the hypothesis implicit in our model that consumers have no information
about surprises in income more than one year in advance, the only
explanation of the negative covariation of current consumption and future
income operates through the sensitivity of consumption to transitory

income, controlled by 8. The estimation process chooses a substantially
positive value of 8 in order to try to match the covariance of —.021; the
overstatement in the fitted value of — .038 corresponds to understatements
of some of the more distant covariances not shown in Table 2.
The only serious failure of the model revealed in Table 2 is its

inability to explain the observed negative correlation of the current

change in consumption and the lagged change in income. As we will show,
the actual correlation is statistically significantly negative, yet the

model holds that it should be exactly zero. The theoretical justification
for the fitted correlation of zero is simple: Apart from its transitory
component, consumption should respond only to new information, and lagged

income cannot contain any new information. The next section of the paper
examines the apparent failure of this principle.

26

V. The Relation Between Consumption and Lagged Income

The model has the straightforward implication that the simple
regression of

on

should yield a coefficient on —i of zero.

Instead we find

= —4.95 — 0.010

(6.16) (.002)
6926 observations; standard error = $512; R2 = .0028

Though the coefficient is quite small, it is statistically unambiguously

negative. It would be uninteresting to conclude that the measurement error
in

was negatively correlated with

so we restrict our attention

to explanations of a negative relation between the true change in
consumption and the lagged change in income.
In this section we investigate the possibility that consumers ar'e

actually more sensitive to transitory income than is predicted by theory,

but in a way not revealed in our examination of the joint behavior of
and

The results in the previous section did not draw on the observed

correlation between ct and

1——maximum likelihood is blind to

covariances whose theoretical values are zero for all values of the

parameters. An extended model proposed in Hall (1978) for a similar
purpose can be used to examine the lagged relation. Suppose that a
fraction i— of families follow the life cycle—permanent income theory
and the rest, a fraction p, simply let consumption track current total
income passively and so have an excessive sensitivity to transitory income.

A stochastic model expressing the passive behavior of consumers is

27

+

=

+

=

+

'

(24)

ctr

—

c(l—pi)flt

(l—Xi)vi

—

—

2"—2

—

2t—3

(25)

lx2t2 —

The covariance of the change in consumption with last year's change in income
implied by this model is

Cov(c,

= —a(1—p1)(l—p1+p2)2

(26)

which is negative. The logic of the negative covariance is straightforward:
If consumption tracks income, then a transitory rise in income this year
will typically be followed next year by a decline in income and so also in
consumption.

We estimated an extended model in which the fitted covariance matrix
gives a weight of 1—p to the earlier model of optimal information
processing and a weight p to the passive model.1
The results of estimating the augmented model are2

1Appendix 4 explains in detail how the model treats the interaction of
future information about income and passive consumption behavior.
2These are not strictly maximum likelihood estimates for the model as
described. Rather, they are the result of fitting the covariance matrix
of the model to the covariance matrix of the data and using the multivariate
normal distribution as the metric of fit. They are not precisely maximum
likelihood because the distribution implied by the model is a mixture of
two multivariate normals, which is not itself exactly multivariate normal.
There is no reason to expect any bias on this account.

28

a

Propensity to consume food out of lifetime income

.097

(.009)

.223
(.103)

Propensity to consume out of transitory income
relative to propensity out of lifetime income

.226
(.054)

Fraction of information available in year t
income in year t+1

.207
(.068)

Fraction of consumption directly proportional to
current income

about

The other parameter estimates are similar to their previous values. The
new specification is about halfway successful in matching the covariance
of this year's change in consumption with last year's change in income——

the predicted value is —.032 against the sample value of —.077. Not
surprisingly, the sensitivity of consumption to the innovation in
transitory income is found to be smaller in the extended model, as the
positive estimate of i has taken over part of the job of explaining the

positive contemporaneous covariation of consumption and income. Further,
because u and

are partly estimated from the same features of the data,

joint estimation very substantially raises the sampling variation of the

estimate of ,
for

relative

to the earlier results. The confidence interval

now includes the theoretically expected value of about 0.10.

29

VI. Concluding Remarks

According to our extended model, about 80 percent of the households

in the sample obey the life cycle—permanent income hypothesis. They do
not adjust consumption in the same mechanical way to every change in income.
Instead, they think about the source of a change in income and react

vigorously only to those changes that signal a major shift in economic

well—being. But the data reject the strong hypothesis that all consumption
is governed by the life cycle—permanent income principle. This conclusion
is independent of the model developed in this paper; it rests solely on the
rather general principle that changes in consumption should not be

predictable on the basis of information available to the household. The
negative relation between the lagged change in income and the current
change in consumption is consistent with constrained consumption behavior

on the part of about 20 percent of the families in the sample. We are able
to distinguish this symptom of inability (or unwillingness) to borrow and
lend from the type of behavior characteristic of consumers who simply face

high effective interest rates. The data show signs of both influences.
Consumption is somewhat more sensitive to current income than it would be
in an economy where every consumer borrowed and lent freely at the

Treasury bill rate. Still, it is much less sensitive than in an economy
where no consumer ever borrowed or lent at all.
The overwhelming bulk of the movements in income that give rise to
our inference from the data are unrelated to the behavior of the national

economy; most are probably highly personal. It is purely an inference,
though a reasonable one in our opinion, that households respond to income

fluctuations attributable to the business cycle or to countercyclical tax

30

policy in the same way they respond to purely personal income fluctuations.
Our results cast doubt on the wisdom of tax policies to manipulate

aggregate demand by changing disposable income. If, as the results
indicate, most consumers react only to the new information about their
permanent incomes conveyed by the announcement of a tax change, then
policy—makers face the complicated task of inferring consumers'

interpretation of the announcement. Lucas (1976) has pointed out the
obstacles to policy evaluation in these circumstances.

Our evidence and conclusions refer specifically to food consumption

and more generally to the consumption of nondurables. Nothing in our
work describes the response of consumer purchases of durable goods to

changes in income. Our findings that relatively few consumers behave as
if constraints on borrowing were important for food consumption do not

rule out important constraints for the acquisition of durables. The
sensitivity of durables purchases to transitory income is very definitely

a topic for further research, where some of the techniques developed in
this paper may be helpful.

31

Appendix 1
Derivation of the Propensities to Consume Out of
Lifetime and Transitory Income

The model is contained in four equations:

=

cty +

(Al)

(i+r) (At_i + y1 + y1 — ct_i)

At =

L

L =

S

tt + iA

+

S

=

(A2)

(A3)

c

+

(A4)

Together these imply the following equation for the first difference of
consumption as a function of contemporaneous innovations and lagged
variables:

+ (l+r)y — (1 + (1+r)Yt)t 1]yL

=

+

1

+

+ (i+r) - (1 + (1+r)y) 1y1 +

+ [(1+r)t — (1 + (1+r)Yt)Yi]Ati

Our conclusions are derived from the theoretical proposition that the
coefficients of the lagged variables are all zeros:

(A5)

32

1. Set coefficient of y1 to zero:

(A6)

+ (l+r)' = (1 + (l+r)y)cti

or

÷

t-1

=

÷

1

(i+r)i

(A7)

(i+r)y

Because all income and wealth is consumed in the last year of life

(year T), T = 1.

But then by recursion,

=

1

for all t.

2. Set coefficient of At_i to zero:

(1+r)y

=

t

(A8)

1 +

t—1

To explain this, define

as the annual income from a $1 investment

paying equal amounts in years t, t+1, ••, T:

r

=

T (1+r)[1

]

This is the annuity value of $1 and it obeys the

t1 =

(l+r)t
1

+ (i+r)

(A9)

t+1

recursion,

(Alo)

33

=

Now

1

= 1.

for the reason given above, and

The coefficients

and 4 obey the same recursion with the same initial values, so
is the annuity value of $1 in

they are equal. We conclude that
year t.

to zero:

3. Set coefficient of

+ (1+r)y

=
t—1

Let

(All)

1 + (l+r)Y

be the present value of a stream paying 1 in t, p in t+l,

p2 in t+2, •.., pT_t in T. Then

+

t—l =

=

1

and

1

(A12)

that

Suppose it were true that

is, the propensity to

consume out of transitory income is the annuity value of the
increment to wealth implied by an innovation in transitory income.
Then

8

+ (l+r)4

=
t—J.

.

r

—
—

=

(A13)

1 + (l+r)c

l+r

t

+

't—lt—l

11

J

1

(1+r)c t
+ (l+r)4

34

=

Because

= 1,

the recursion establishes

=

for

all t.

With all lagged variables excluded, the change in consumption depends
solely on new information,

=

t

+

(A14)

35

Appendix 2
Characterization of Information About Future Income

We assume that the annual income innovations
N micron innovations c

and ii

t,t

t,t

= 1,

T

,

•••,

N.

are the sums of

and

Consumption decisions

recorded in year t are based on knowledge of the first M innovations for

is

the following year. Our parameter c

M/N.

Then, in the absence of any discounting within a year, our model is

+

=

=

+ nt+t —
t= 1

—

We assume V(
and

+

+

+

1it—i,r —

(A15)

12t—2,t
(A16)

A2nt...3t)

)

t,T

= a2/N and V(

t,t

= a2/N and independence of each c

)

t,T

from the others.

and

The univariate time—series properties of

are unchanged in

this more elaborate specification, so we examine only the cross—covariances:

=0

Cov(tc,

Cov(c,

,

all

I >

0,

as before

= (N—M)cza2/N + (N—M)ca2/N
=

(1—)( +

(A17)

(A18)

36

cov(Lc,

= Mc&a2/N
— (N—M)

=

+ Mc/N

(A19)

(1—X1)ca2/N

+ a$a2) —

(1—)(1—A1)ca2

Cov(1c, 't+2 = — M(1—A1)cta2/N

(A20)

12 )ca2/N
r

— (N—M)(X —x
=

(— q,(1—x1)

—

The vector of c and y observations for a family is thus multivariate normal
with these covariances, and maximum likelihood estimation is appropriate.

In our model, we assume that families are homogeneous with respect to
information about income——they all know a fraction

of next year's income

in making this year's consumption decisions. The covariances of this model
are exactly the same as those for a model of hetergeneous families, where a
fraction

are fully aware of next year's income and the rest know nothing

about it. The models are not completely the same, however. In the
heterogeneous case, the distribution of

and

is not multivariate

normal, but is a mixture of multivariate normals. Our estimates cannot be
said to be maximum likelihood for the heterogeneous model.

37

Appendix 3
Relation to Research on Efficient Financial Markets

Our work is closely related to the large body of research on the

behavior of financial markets under rational expectations. Consumption
is the analogue of a stock price, for example, and income is the analogue

of the earnings per share of the corporation issuing the stock. Our test
of the predictive power of lagged income is the analogue of similar tests
for market efficiency in the stock market, in the sense of the
unpredictability of changes in stock prices from publicly available

information (Fama (1970) and Mishkin (1978)). In contrast to our findings
for consumption, the hypothesis of unpredictability is generally supported
by the data for security markets.

The issue of advance information which might be available to market
participants but not to the econometrician has also been considered in

research on financial markets. The problem of the timing of the collection
of data which obligates us to consider the issue here is not generally
present in data on securities markets, but it may still be true that market
participants have information in period t about what the econometrician

labels an innovation in period t+1. One supporting piece of evidence is
the predictive power of stock prices for future movements of the money
stock, found by Rozeff (1974) and Rogalski and Vinso (1977).

The technique developed in our paper could be transplanted directly

to securities markets to answer the questions: Do stock prices overreact
to current movements of earnings? Do market participants have advance
information about earnings?

38

Appendix 4

Estimation

Our four models for consumption are:1

(i)

Optimizing, no future information

=

(ii)

cyc

+

+

(A21)

Optimizing, full future information

=

ctc + cLfl+l +

(A22)

(iii) Rule of thumb, no future information

=

(iv)

cy +

(A23)

Rule of thumb, future information

=

+

(A24)

In all cases,

=

- (1-A1)v

-

l2t2

2t3

(A25)

'Here, it is convenient to adopt the heterogeneous interpretation of the
model of advance information, because it provides a simple way to compute
the covariance matrix.

39

and

=

— 1'°1t—1

Ct +

—

— 2nt—3

(A26)

Let x be the column vector of unobserved random variables,

x =

[c1,

C7,

V_2,

(A27)

V7, —2'

We assume that x is multivariate normal, with a diagonal covariance matrix,
E, and variances

= a2

v(v) =

(A29)

=

(A30)

v(n)
Let

(A28)

z be the

vector

column

containing the 5 differences of consumption and

6 first differences of income for family i:

=

[c1,

tc2, c3 + LC4, L\C5, LC6,

1XT2,

y4,

(A31)

y5,

Let j = 1, •••, 4 index the four consumption models. Then each model can

be

stated in the form
z.1

=

A.x.

31

(A32)

40

(note that the third row of A. has a special form) and z is multivariate
1

J

normal with covariance matrix A.EA. The covariance matrix for a family
j

:i

drawn at random from the four types is

=

(1_)(1_)A1A

+ 1—i.i)A2EA

(A33)

+ (1_)uAEA + uA4EA

Here 0 is the vector of parameters,

0

=

[a,

X• A2

cY,

02, a2, q, ]

(A34)

Under an interpretation where z itself is multivariate normal (homogeneous
versions of advance information and rule—of—thumb consumption), the log—
likelihood of the sample is

L(0) =

—

log det(0) —

z.l'(0)z.

(A35)

plus an inessential constant. We estimate 0 by full numerical maximization
of the likelihood. Its estimated covariance matrix is computed as the

inverse of the information matrix, 2L/00'. All computations were
carried out by a program written by Bronwyn Hall, which uses analytical
derivatives and the method of scoring.

41

Appendix 5
Regressions to Eliminate the Deterministic Components
of Income and Food Consumption

EINC0ME = —433.96 + 33.23 AGE — .35 AGE2 + 504.07 tCHILD
(30.55)
(.082)
(182.08) (7.89)

+ 1535.06 ADULT

53.44 TIME

—

(13.04)

(40.99)

R2 = .1383

13854 observations

Standard Error = $2606.4

1F00D =

-96.67 + 3.89 AGE — .045 AGE2 + 166.56 tCHILD
+ 242.46 IIADULT
(8.72)

(6.39)

(.014)

(32.38) (1.32)

2.00 TIME — 440.62 tL0G PRICE

+

(244.85)

(2.65)

R2 = .1438

11545 observations

Standard Error = $542.02

where

-

tINC0ME

change in family income which is adjusted for income and

FICA taxes and the cost of living,

F0OD = change in family spending for food at home and in restaurants
deflated into real terms,

AGE = age of household head,
AGE2 = AGE squared,

CHILD = change in the number of children in the household,

ADULT = change in the number of adults in the household,
TIME = time trend =

19701

• 19755,

42

ELOG PRICE = change in the log of the relative price of food (measured
by the food component of the CPI deflated by the overall CPI),

and standard errors of the coefficients are in parentheses.

43

References

Bewley, T., "The Permanent Income Hypothesis: A Theoretical Formulation,"
Department of Economics, Harvard University, September 1976.
Eisner, R., "Fiscal and Monetary Policy Reconsidered," American Economic
Review 59 (December 1969): 897—905.

Fama, E. F., "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical
Work," Journal of Finance 25 (May 1970): 383—417.
Flavin, M., "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations About
Future Income," Department of Economics, University of Virginia, 1979.

Hall, R. E., "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income

Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political Economy 86
(December 1978): 971—987.

Lucas, R. E., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in K. Brunner
and A. H. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1 (Amsterdam:
North Holland, 1976): 19—46.

Mayer, T., "Tests of the Permanent Income Theory with Continuous Budgets,"
Journal of Money Credit and Banking 6 (November 1972): 757—778 (a).
Permanent Income, Wealth and Consumption (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1972) (b).

Mishkin, F. S., "Efficient—Markets Theory: Implications for Monetary
Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1978:2): 707—752.

Muth, J. F., "Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts,"
Journal of the American Statistical Association 55 (1960): 299—306.

Okun, A., "The Personal Tax Surcharge and Consumer Demand," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (1971:1): 167—204.

44

Rogalski, R. J. and Vinso, J. D., "Stock Returns, Money Supply and the
Direction of Causality," Journal of Finance 32 (September 1977):
1017—1Ô30.

Rozeff, N. S., "Money and Stock Prices: Market Efficiency and the Lag in
the Effect of Monetary Policy," Journal of Financial Economics 1
(1974): 245—302.

Tobin, J. and Dolde, W., "Wealth, Liquidity and Consumption," in Consumer

Spending and Monetary Policy: The Linkages (Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston, 1971): 99—146.

Yaari, N., "A Law of Large Numbers in the Theory of Consumer's Choice under
Uncertainty," Journal of Economic Theory 12 (1976): 202—217.

