                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 PENSION FUNDING, SHARE PRICES
                      AND NATIONAL SAVING


                       Martin Feldstein

                      Stephanie   Seligman

                     Working Paper No.    509




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           July   1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and proj ects in
Pensions and the changing role of Debt and Equity Finance in U.S.
Capital Formation in the United States, which is being financed by
a grant from the American Council of Life Insurance. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     Working Paper 509
                                                        September 1980




              Pension Funding, Share Prices and National Saving


                                  ABSTRACT



         This paper examines empirically the effect of unfunded pension
obligations on corporate share prices and discusses the implications of these
estimates for national saving, the decline of the stock market in recent years,
and the rationality of corporate financial behavior. The analysis uses the
information on inflation—adjusted income and assets that large firms were
required to provide for 1976 and subsequent years.

         The evidence for a sample of nearly 200 manufacturing firms is
consistent with the conclusion that share prices fully reflect the value of
unfunded pension obligations. Since the conventional accounting measure of
the unfunded pension liability has a number of problems (which we examine in
the paper), it would be more accurate to say that the data are consistent with
the conclusion that shareholders accept the conventional measure as the best
available information and reduce share prices by a corresponding amount.

         The most important implication of the share price response is that
the existence of unfunded private pension liabilities does not necessarily
entail a reduction in total private saving. Because the pension liability
reduces the equity value of the firm, shareholders are given notice of its
existence and an incentive to save more themselves. For this reason, unfunded
private pensions differ fundamentally from the unfunded Social Security pension
and the other unfunded federal government civilian and military pensions.



                                             Martin Feldstein
                                             Stephanie Seligman
                                             National Bureau of Economic Research
                                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             617/868—3905
                Pension Funding, Share Prices, and National Savin&


                               Martin Feldstein*
                              Stephanie Seliglnan*



         Pensions have become a major factor in the process of capital formation.

Pension assets at the end of 1919 exceeded $5140 billion.1 The increase in pri-

vate pension coverage and the funding requirements imposed by the l9T4 Employee

Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) imply that pension assets are likely to

continue to represent a growing share of national wealth. There is, however,

substantial uncertainty and debate about the future role of private pensions and

their relation to the Social Security program.2      An understanding of the impact

of private pensions on aggregate saving is therefore potentially very

important.3




*   Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper
    is part of the NBER Study of the Changing Role of Debt and Equity and of' the
    Bureau's research on private and public pensions. We are grateful for com-
    ments on earlier versions presented at the 1918 NBER Summer Institute and at
    subsequent program meetings. We also want to thank Fisher Black, Jeremy Bulow,
    Benjamin Friedman, Stewart Myers and Irwin Tepper for helpful discussions and
    James Poterba for assistance with the research. The NBER and the National
    Science Foundation provided financial support. The views expressed here are
    our own and should not be attributed to the NBER or Harvard University.

1 This includes private pension funds, pension reserves of life insurance
  companies, and state and local government employee retirement funds. The
  data are presented in Federal Reserve Board (1980).

2 See, for example, the Preliminary Report of' the President's Commission on
   Pension Policy (1980), Greenough and King (1976), and Ehrbar (1917).

 3 For a general discussion of the relation between private pensions and
    aggregate saving, see Feldstein (1978).
                                          —2—


            The present paper examines one aspect of the relation between

 private pensions and aggregate saving: the significance of unfunded corporate

 pensions. As we explain below, the impact of private pensions on aggregate

 saving        depend on the extent to which   pension promises remain unfunded and
 unambiguously    does depend on the extent to which share prices reflect this form
 of corporate liability.1 The share price response also has implications for
 corporate financial policy   and for understanding the poor performance of the
 stock   market in recent years.
           The typical pension plan is a corporate promise to
                                                              pay retirement
benefits based on the retiree's number of
                                                years of employment and his level

of earnings during his immediate preretirement years.2
                                                             Although an employee

generally forfeits any claim to benefits if he leaves the company after only

a few years of employment, the benefits of an employee who stays with the

firm for some minimum number of
                                   years become "vested", i.e., the employee is
entitled to benefits even if he subsequently leaves the company before retire-

ment age.3 Firms can set aside tax—deductible funds to meet these vested



1 The relation between unfunded pension liabilities and
                                                        aggregate savings
   is discussed in Feldstein (1978) but no empirical investigation of this
   particular issue is presented there.

2 This type of pension is called a "defined benefit plan". In
                                                              contrast, a
   "defined    contribution plan" is a
                                   corporate promise to contribute some amount
   each yearon behalf of current employees; retirees then receive an annuity
  based on the accumulated value of these contributions. McGill (1975) is a
  standard reference on private pensions. Trowbridge and Farr (1976) and
  Treynor (1977) focus on pension funding.

3 Since 197k, the ERISA rules mandate that all private pensions
                                                                provide
  vesting of any employee who nets certain conditions of age and/or years of
  service.
                                          —3—

future benefit obligations and the income on these assets is not taxed to

either the corporation or the pension plan itself.

             Some firms fund all of their vested pension obligation, but many-

do not.1 The unfunded pension benefits are similar in many- ways to outstanding

corporate bonds. But unlike corporate bonds, the unfunded pension benefits

are not recorded in the corporate balance sheets.2 Official accounting rules

only require firms to indicate the extent of their unfunded vested pensions

in   the notes   that accompany the balance sheet; although this information must

be   provided in the annual 10—K report to the Securities and     Exchange

Commission, there is no requirement to include it in the firmts annual report to
shareholders.
             The economic effects of unfunded pension obligations depend critically
on the ability of the stock market to pierce this accounting veil. To see why
the   share price response is particularly important as a determinant of the
effect of pensions or aggregate saving, it      is   useful to consider first the
simple quesion of what would happen if a fully-funded private pension plan

replaced an equal     amount of saving that employees would otherwise have done for

their own retirement. Such a pension would obviously have no effect on aggre-

gate saving; the additional corporate saving in the pension plan would just off-

set the reduced saving by employees. More generally, a fully—funded private



1 The ERISA rules require that firms follow a policy of funding      newall
   pension obligations within 30 years and all previous pension obligations
   within 4O years. The reasons that firms do not fund are discussed briefly
      in   Section 6 of this paper.

2 There are also important tax differences between bonds and unfunded pensions
   which will be described below.
                                            —Ii—



pension would increase national saving if pension benefits exceed the amount

that individuals would otherwise provide for their own retirement. Conversely,

if benefits merely replace individual saving, a less than fully funded pension

could actually depress total saving.

           To see how an unfunded pension could reduce national saving, consider

the    following case: Employees accept a promise of future pension benefits in
exchange for a current wage reduction (or smaller wage increase than they would
otherwise obtain). The employees recognize that this is Just a change in the
timing of their lifetime income with no change in its present value; they there-

fore do not change their     current or   future consumption but reduce their current

saving by the reduction in their current wage. If this substitution of promised

benefits for current wages is not funded, accounting profits rise. If share-

holders do not recognize the future obligation, they will incorrectly interpret

the  rise in current income as an increase in permanent income and will raise
their own consumption. The combined consumption of shareholders and employees
thus   rises and national   saving falls.
           This   example makes it clear that the extent of funding matters only if

shareholders do not change their own saving to offset any underfunding by the

firms. An unfunded private pension will not differ from a funded one if the

firm's shareholders recognize that the extra accounting profits that result from

substituting an unfunded pension for higher wages are just balanced by the pen-

sion benefits that must be paid in the future.1 If the share price is reduced


  This assumes that employees correctly substitute between wages and pension
  promises; see Feldstein (1978) for a more precise statement of the
  conditions.
                                        —5—




by the extent of the unfunded pension obligation, the shareholders will have
both the correct information and the correct incentive to increase their saving

by the increase in the unfunded pension liability.1

          This paper examines empirically the effect of unfunded pension

obligations on corporate share prices and discusses the implication of these

estimates for national saving, the relative decline of the stock market in

recent years, and the rationality of corporate financial behavior. The analysis

uses   the information on inflation—adjusted income and assets that large firms
were required to provide for 19T6 and subsequent years. Although there are
still many problems with these data, they represent a significant improvement
over previous conventional accounts.
          The evidence for a   sample of nearly 200   firms is consistent with the
conclusion that share prices fully reflect the value of unfunded pension
obligations. Since the conventional accounting measure of the unfunded pension
liability has a number of problems, it would be more accurate to say that the
data   are consistent with the conclusion that shareholders accept the

conventional measure as the best available information and reduce share prices

by a corresponding amount. Although the standard errors are large enough to

admit a more powerful effect on share prices, the hypothesis that unfunded

liabilities do not reduce the corporation's market value can be unambiguously

rejected by conventional criteria.



   Some of the unfunded "shareholder" saving may      take   the form of corporate
   retained earnings.
                                         —6—

            Section 1 discusses the theory of pension liability evaluation from

the point of view of the shareholder, i.e., the expected impact of unfunded

vested pensions on share prices. The second section develops the specification

of market value equations while section three describes the data and sample.

The fourth and fifth section present the results of the statistical analysis.

There is a brief concluding section that comments on the implications of this

research.


1. The Theory of Pension Liability Valuation

            Consider a firm that incurs a new obligation to pay   ftture   pension

benefits. What effect should that have now on the equity value of the firm?

Calculating the correct answer depends on dealing appropriately with five issues:

Cl) the tax deductibility of pension expenses; (2) the discount rate used for

combining benefits at different dates; (3) the distinction between vested and

unvested benefits; (14) the impact of inflation; and (5) the uncertainty of

benefits and asset yields. This section discusses the correct treatment of

each of these issues and the type of bias that is introduced by the conventional

measure.

            The tax deductibility of pension payments by the firm implies that

every dollar of contribution reduces the equity value of the firm by only

$ (1—ta) where tc is the marginal tax rate on corporate profits.1 Since t


1 This implicitly assumes that, an extra dollar of retained earnings raises the
  the firm's value by one dollar. Auerbach (1919), Bradford (1979) and King
  (1971) discuss conditions under which the tax on dividend income implies that
  the share value should rise less than one dollar per dollar of retained
  earnings. Feldstein and Green (1979) generalize their argument and show that
  the value could be more or less than dollar for dollar. All of the calcula-
  tions in the present paper can therefore be regarded as indicating the change
  in equity value up to a multiple equal to the marginal valuation of equity.
                                        —7—

is   the combined federal and state marginal tax rate, a one dollar benefit that
is paid out of current corporate income reduces the firm's equity by about 50
cents. A one dollar contribution to the pension fund to meet future benefit
obligations also reduces the firm's tax by about 50 cents and therefore only

reduces equity earnings by about 50 cents. It is wrong therefore to regard

pension liabilities as exactly equivalent to bonds or loan balances; indeed,

it may be more accurate to treat each dollar of ordinary debt obligation as

equivalent to two dollars of pension obligation.

           The tax deductibility of pension contributions is logically different

from the nontaxability of the earnings of pension fund assets. The fact that

these earnings are not taxed has important implications for calculating the

present value of future benefit obligations. In general, the present value

of future benefit obligations cannot be calculated by discounting benefits

at either the pretax or aftertax rate of return but depends on the extent

(or speed) these benefit obligations are funded. Let i be the nominal

rate   of interest that the firm earns on assets in its pension fund and that
the firm pays on its outstanding debt.1 The net cost of funds to the firm is
(ltc)i and this is the rate that it should use to calculate the present value
of its future net pension contributions. But once a dollar has been contributed,

it accumulates at rate i inside the pension fund. A benefit in year T

of BENT can be financed by a contribution in year t of CONt =          C].   +   1)t_T   BENT.
The present value of that contribution is V      [1 +    (i_t)iJt CONt.          Thus the

present value of the benefit obligation is V =    [1 +   (l_tc)iJ_t   (1+)t_T BENT and

1 The argument here assumes that the firm's marginal source of finance is debt
     and that the pension fund also invests only in debt. A more general rule
     with debt and equity is stated below.
                                                  —8—


the impact on the equity- value of this benefit obligation and funding schedule
is   (i—ta) V =    (i—ta)    (1—t)i] —t (i+i)t—T BENT. More generally, if equity
                               [1 +

as   well as debt is used in both corporate finance and pension fund investment,
the impact on the equity value is (1_tc)V= (ltc) [(1 +                 r)t (l+r) t—T BENT)]
where r is the gross pretax return that the pension fund earns and rn is the
firm's net cost of marginal funds.

          The     two special         cases of complete funding   and no funding (pay—as—you—

go finance) can help to clarify the application of this principle. If the firm
chooses to fund its new obligation immediately, a contribution of BENT (i+i)T
is   sufficient. Since the fund earns a return of i and pays no tax on its

income, this contribution will grow to exactly BEN at the end of T years. At

the moment before the contribution is made, the unfunded liability is thus

BEN (i÷i)T. Because the contribution is tax deductible, the net impact

of this obligation on the equity value of the firm is (l—tc) BEN (l+i)T. In

contrast, if the firm does no funding, it must pay BEN dollars at time T for

a net cost to the shareholders of (l_tc)BEN• Like other certain costs, this

must be discounted at the firm's net interest rate to give a present value

of (l—tc) BEN      1   1   +   (1_tc)il_T.l
           Since the calculation shows that             the   cost of the pay—as—you—go

method has   a    higher present value than the cost of the immediate funding method,


     It is useful to consider the analogy between pension costs and future bond
     interest. Assume that the firm has a current debt of D which it plans
     never to repay but continually to rollover at interest rate i. The annual
     interest payments are iD and their net of tax costs are (1_tc)iD• The present
     value of these costs, discounting at the net—of—tax interest rate (1tc)i is
     then just (l_tc)iD/(ltc)i D, as it should be. Similarly, if the firm plans
     to repay the debt at the end of one year, the net cost will be D + (1_tc)iD
     and the present value is [D+(l_tc)iD1/[l+(l_tc)]D The key difference be-
     tween the debt and the pension obligation is that the principal repayment of
     debt is not tax deductible.
                                         —9—


it is optimal for the firm to fund its pension as soon as possible. The fact
that firms do not fund their pension obligations fully may reflect constraints',

errors, or nonconstant borrowing costs. Whatever the reason, the effect of

future benefit obligations on the firm's equity value should reflect the timing

of the contributions and the difference between the untaxed yield earned on the

portfolio and the firm's net of tax cost of funds.2

         In practice, firms calculate the present value of their vested pensions

by discounting the future actuarially—expected vested benefit obligations by an

estimate of the yield that they will obtain on their pension portfolio.3 The

value of the unfunded vested pension obligation is then calculated by

subtracting the value of their pension assets from this measure of the pension

obligation. For the funded portion of the benefits, this is an appropriate

comparison; the discount rate is conceptually correct, and there is no need to

adjust the funded benefits for their tax deductibility since no further tax

deduction will be allowed. But for the unfunded benefits, the usual method

of calculation     overstates the true value. To see this, note   that the   usual
method of     evaluation defines the firm's liablity as:



1   The tax law limits the speed with which unfunded benefit obligations can be
    funded.
2 If firms do not fund fully because additional funding raises the cost of
   borrowing, the net marginal cost of funds may equal the return on the
   pension portfolio; i.e., in the notation used above, r = r. In that special
   case, a marginal change in the timing of funding is irrelevant. The effect
    of borrowing on the cost of funds can be decisive only if the market does not
    regard unfunded liabilities as equivalent to ordinary debt, e.g., because of
    seniority differences or the ERISA rules.

 3 In many cases, this is not even a realistic estimate but only a conventional
    assumption designed to be conservative.
                                                   —10—

                          T
             (1) L1 =              BEN+
                        t=i        (i+i)t

If these benefits were funded immediately, the correct value of the liability

would be

                                    T
         (2)       L2 =   (1_tc)            BENt
                                   t=i      fl1)t

since the contribution would be tax deductible and the pension portfolio would

earn i.1- Since L2 is less than L1, the usual method overstates the true value

of the obligations that are about to be vested. However, if the benefits would

never be funded, the correct value of the liability would be2

                          T
                      =        (1—tc) BENt
                          t=i [l+(1_t)i]t

Comparing L3 and L1 shows that their relative value depends in general on the

interest rate and tax rate and on the time pattern of the benefits. Thus if

BENt is a constant perpetuity, L1 =                   If T is finite and BENT is constant,
                                                L3.
   >           But if benefits grow sufficiently fast, the higher rate of discount in
       L3.
L1 Outweighs the multiplicative (ltc) factor in                 and L1 < L3.   The usual

method of discounting may therefore understate or overstate the correct value of

the vested pension obligations.

             Moreover, in thinking about future benefit obligations it is important

to distinguish between vested benefits and actuarially expected benefits. The

narrow focus on vested benefits may understate the true value of the firm's


   Note that L2 is equivalent to the amount of debt that the firm would have to
   use in order to fund the entire future benefit obligation.

2 Note that L3 is equivalent to the amount of debt the servicing of which would
  be equivalent to the cost of meeting the pension obligation on a concurrent
  (pay—as—you—go) basis.
                                                 —11—


obligations. Accounting reports focus on the vested benefits because a future

pension benefit does not become a legal liability of a firm until it is vested,

i.e., until the worker is entitled to the benefit even if he quits the firm or

is fired. A typical plan might provide that an employee with 10 years or uxre

of employment has vested benefits of two percent of his final year's earnings

per year of service; e.g., a 20—year employee gets               percent of his final

year's earnings. In this case, the vested pension obligation completely ignores

the   employee with 9    years of service even though he is very likely to stay long

enough       to become vested.   Similarly, the vested benefits of the 61 year             old
employee with 20 years of service make no allowance for the fact that he is very
likely to wait       until   he is 65   before   retiring. The calculation of vested bene-
fits    is    intentionally myopic. Should it be?
               The purpose of evaluating pension liabilities is to assess the firm's
future expenses in excess of the value of the services that                it will     receive
for those payments. The vested benefits of a             retired worker is the clearest

case   to consider. Since the       worker is already retired, he will provide no

further services; the present actuarial value of his pension rights is a

net liability of the firm. Consider next the 614 year old worker with 20 years

of experience who will get 140 percent of his terminal wage if he retires at

age 614 and 142 percent if he waits another year. Bulow (19T9) has pointed out

that the employee's opportunity to obtain higher benefits by working an extra

year is irrelevant if the firm and the worker take this into account in setting

the    wage for work until age      65. More      specifically, if   the   wage   is   set so that
the    wage plus the increased value of pension benefits equals the marginal
value product of labor, there is no excess cost to the firm asociated with the
employee's       postponed retirement. The        same argument applies to the individual
                                           —12—

who   has had 9   years   of service with the firm and   is   just about to become
vested. If   his wage during his tenth year of employment is set so that

the sum of the wage and the initial value of the vested pension are equal to the

marginal value product of his labor, there is no excess compensation in the

prospective benefits.

          Although Bulow's analysis is logically sound, it is not clear how

relevant it is in practice. I know of no empirical evidence that wages are

adjusted to offset unusually large accruals of vested benefits in particular

years or during the years just before retirement. Union contracts make no

provisions for such changes and "age discrimination" laws probably may make

doing so illegal. Since the required adjustment amounts are quite large, such

changes would be easily detected if they actually existed. Consider, for

example, a 39 year old worker with 9 years of experience. If he stays with the

firm for exactly one extra year, he will have a vested right to a pension at age

65 equal to O.20E where E is his earnings during his tenth year of

employment. With a discount rate of 6 percent, a life annuity of $1 per year

beginning at age 65 has an actuarial present value of $9.67.l An annuity of

O.20E therefore has an actuarial present value of 1.9E. Discounting this back

from age 65 to age LLO implies that the value in the tenth year of employment

of the newly vested rights is (1.06)25 (l.9E)            O.1451E. Thus the marginal

value product of the worker must be 15 percent higher than the wage in the tenth




1 This value is based on the latest 1971 Individual Annuity Table with
   Projection Scale B. The projection scale B refers to an adjustment made
   to basic data to reflect future mortality differences. The annuity tables
   appear in Transactions of the Society of Actuaries, 1972, Vol. 23, p. 527.
                                           —13—


year even though the two are equal in the ninth year. It is obviously not true

that     wages (or   wage growth) falls by so much or that worker productivity rises

by so much.1

            A similar calculation for the worker at age 6h with 20 years of

experience also indicates an implausible compensating wage      adjustment.    If

     is the earnings on which benefits would be based if the individual

retired at age 6!, the value of the pension is (1.06)—i [9.67 (.h0)E6j41 =

3.65 E6.2 At age 65, this pension is worth 1.o6(3.65)E6 = 3.87E6j.            Waiting

an additional year to retire raises the value of the pension to 9.67(.h2)E65 =

1.o6 E65. Even if E5 =        E6,   this would imply a 5 percent increase in produc-

tivity between ages 614 and 65. Alternatively, with productivity constant, the

wage must fall by about 5 percent. In practice, wages of older workers do not

fall in this way while supervisor's evaluations indicate that their productivity

is actually declining.3




1 By comparison, between the tenth and eleventh rear, the value of the vested
   benefit increases from .1451(1.06)E to (1.06)—2 [9.67(.22) E (i + g)1 =
   0.525E (i + g) where g is the growth of earnings between the two years.
   If g is 0.05, the value of the vested benefits rises by about 16 percent
    of   the wage. Thus, the wage should rebound between the tenth and
    eleventh   year by about 16 percent plus the growth of productivity.
2 Recall that 20 years of service implies an annuity of 0.140 E and that
   each dollar of annuity has a present value of $9.76 as of its starting date.
    This nominal amount is then discounted for one year at 6 percent.
3   On this see Medoff and Abrams (1978). More generally, see Hall (1980) for
    a discussion of the view that wage payments over the worker's lifetime are
    not related to annual productivity. This view implies that the value of
    corporate equity depends on the age structure of the labor force, retirement
    practices, age—earnings profiles, etc.
                                    l14 —




          If the Bulow compensating—wage conditions are not satisfied, the
legally vested benefits will understate the actuarial value of future benefits

in excess of the value of labor services. The potential benefits of the worker

with 9 years of experience should not be ignored and at least some fraction of

the expected increased benefit of the older worker should be taken into account.

A complete and accurate examination of future pension benefits should in

principle be based on estimates of compensating wage changes as well as the

accrual of vested benefit rights.

         Extending the analysis from vested pensions to include a portion of

actuarially expected benefits makes the value of the firm's pension obligations

depend on the future level of prices. Because pension benefits are based on

earnings, particularly earnings during the immediate preretirement years, the

nominal value of the pension tends to vary in proportion to the price level

at the time of retirement, i.e., the real value of an individual's pension

is independent of the price level when he retires. Moreover, since

postretirenient pension benefits are generally not indexed,- the real value of

the pension varies inversely with the rate of inflation during the retirement

period. All of this can be reflected in the pension valuation by correctly

forecasting nominal benefits and using the corresponding nominal rates of

return or by forecasting real benefits and using the real rates of return.




   Some firms make voluntary increases in the pension benefits of retirees
   but these increases are significantly less than full indexing.
                                     —15—


         But even a correct treatment of future inflation does not eliminate

the uncertainty involved in the calculation of future pension obligations. The

real pension benefits in future years are uncertain because real postretirement

benefits depend on inflation. The size of the currently unvested pension

benefits depends also on uncertain turnover rates and rates of relative wage

growth. Moreover, the real yield on the pension fund is uncertain and 'would

be so even if the price level were stable. The common procedure of using the

expected (mean) return to discount future benefits would not be appropriate

even if the firm were risk—neutral because the mean of the accumulated asset

values at different rates of return is not the same as the accumulated value

at the mean return.1 The correct procedure (for a risk—neutral firm) is to

calculate for each future date the expected value of the net contributions

that would be required at different rates of return and then discount these

amounts at a risk—free borrowing rate for bonds of that maturity.2

         A quite different aspect of pension uncertainty is the possibility

of the failure of the pension plan or bankruptcy of the company. Under such

circumstances, the benefit obligations become the responsibility of the

federally—financed Pension Benefits Guarantee Corporation (PBGC) which has

recourse to the firm only to the extent of 30 percent of its equity. The



1 One dollar invested at 10 percent for 10 years becomes $2.59. The expected
   accumulated value if there is an even chance of a zero return and a 10
   percent return is therefore (1.00 + 2.59)12 = 1.80. In contrast, the
   accumulated value at the expected yield of 5 percent is $1.63.
2 This assumes that the future contributions will be made with certainty.
                                       —16—




conventional   measure of the unfunded pension obligation ignores this re—

insurance feature and, to that   extent,   overstates the expected liability

of the equity owners of the firm.1

          On balance, it is not possible to say whether the conventional measure

of pension fund liability underestimates or overestimates the corresponding

true value. In considering the effect of unfunded pension obligations on

share prices and on shareholder saving, it is therefore important to recognize

that shareholders do not have either an accurate published estimate or the

detailed   information with which to make the calculation for themselves.
Moreover, since the unfunded vested pension liability that firms publish 2
is   the difference between the total liability and the total assets, relatively

small differences in the estimate of the total liability imply much larger

proportional estimates of the net unfunded liability. Nevertheless, the

published estimate of the unfunded vested pension liability is the only

information on which shareholders could base their estimate and it is therefore

of interest to examine the effect on the share price of the obligation measured

in this way.3


     This aspect of pension valuation is stressed by Treynor et. al. (1976) and
     Gersovitz (1980).

2 Firms are currently required to publish only the unfunded obligation. Some
   firms also provide information on their pension assets and therefore on
   their total liability.

3 The estimates presented in this paper refer to share prices in 1976 and
   1977. More recently, investors have had access to more detailed information
   about pension calculations that are filed with the Department of Labor
   pursuant to ERISA requirements. It would be of interest to repeat the
   present analysis for a later year in order to investigate whether these
   data influenced shareholder evaluation of the pension liabilities.
                                             —17-.



    2. Specification of Market Value Equations

                We have estimated the impact of unfunded
                                                             vested pension liabilities
    on the market value of companies by
                                            analyzing data for a large sample of

    manufacturing firms for 1976 and 1977, the first years for which inflation—

    adjusted income statements and balance sheets are available. Our basic data

    include information on: the replacement
                                                 cost of plant, equipment and
    inventories; the market value of corporate
                                                     equity and debt;1 accounting
    earnings with depreciation and inventory gains adjusted for inflation; and

    the reported values of pension liabilities and assets. The data are derived

    primarily from the Standard and Poors Compustat file and augmented with other
    information described below.
 2.1   Total Market Value

            The general specification of the market valuation       equation   combines
the capital valuation and earnings
                                          valuation approaches. We thus build on
earlier work by Gordon (1962), Modigliani and Miller (1958), Oldfield (1977),

Tobin and Brainard (1977), and others.2
                                                The starting point of the specification
is the view that the total market value
                                               of the corporation (including the
value of both debt and equity) is
                                         proportional to the replacement value of
the underlying assets: V=qA.3



1 The method       of   estimating the market value of the corporation's debt is
      described   below.
2
      Of these, only Oldfield specifically examines the effect of private
      pensions. His model is based on a net earnings evaluation model of the
      equity value of the firm. His estimates were for
                                                        1971, before data on
      inflation—adjusted accounts became available.

3     Precise definitions of the variables are
                                               presented in the next section.
                                           —18—




              Although   the marginal value of q would be equal to one in equilibrium

under certain conditions,1 the average value of q will depend also on the firmts

ability   to provide above—average earnings. This stream of future earnings
reflects such things as       market position, patents and other know—how, etc. The

equations     in this paper represent future earnings by   three variables: (1) the

current   ratio of earnings to physical assets, E/A, where E includes interest

payments as well as equity profits; (2) the growth of profits over the past

decade, GRO1; and (3)       the relative expenditure on research and development as

a proportion of the firm's asset value, RD/A. Thus the preliminary

specification is:


(14)      .=aO+cz1+c2 GROW+a3 P_+c
                              A
          A       A


Where E   represents     a random error.

            The value of q may depend also on the perceived riskiness of the

firm. Since all of the firms in the present study are relatively large manu-

facturing firms, the variation in risk is more limited than it would be in a

fully representative sample of firms. Two measures of risk are added to the

specification of equation 24:       a beta coefficient and a measure of corporate

leverage. A variety of different beta coefficients are conceptually possible,

differing     in the portfolio of assets with respect to which the beta is
calculated and in the time interval used to define the regression (daily,
monthly,      etc.). The current study uses a widely available equity market beta


1 If retained earnings are part of the marginal source of finance, the tax
   system may make even the marginal value of q not equal to one; see
   footnote 1 page 6.
                                                  —19—

based on monthly values that is calculated by Merrill, Lynch, Pierce, Fenner

and Smith.1 Although corporate leverage would have no effect on the firm's

market value under the strict conditions specified by Modigliani and Miller

a higher ratio of debt to total capital could increase the market value of the

firm because of tax advantages or reduce it by increasing the risk of

bankruptcy or by limiting the investment activities of the firm.2 The expanded

specification is thus

(5)   !. = cto +
      A
                     al      .
                             A
                                 +   ct2   GROW + (j3 RD
                                                       A
                                                              +     BETA +          DEBT
                                                                                        A
                                                                                                +


where DEBT is the market value of the firm's net debt.

           We come finally to the value of pension obligations. If the unfunded

vested pension liabilities were accurately measured, they would be equivalent

to an equal value of debt or a corresponding reduction in the firm's net equity

value. In this case, the unfunded vested pension liability (UVPL) could be

added to the other components of the firm's market value or, equivalently,

it would appear on the right hand side of equation 5 with a coefficient of

minus one. Thus 5 would become

(6)   V    - cc +   al   + c2 GROW + a3       .2. +      BETA + a5 DEBT   +   ci6           +
      A                                       A                     A               A

with c6   equal   to minus   one. More generally, as we emphasized in Section 1,

there are errors in the measurement of unfunded pension liabilities that make


1 The beta values used in the current study are reported in Merrill, Lynch
  Pierce, Fenner and Smith (1976).

2 On the substantial costs of bankruptcy, see the useful and extensive
  discussion in Gordon and Flkiel (1979). Meyers (      ) discusses the way
  in which debt may limit the firms activities. There is of course the possibil-
  ity firms differ in their optimal debt—equity ratios and that firms have cho-
  sen their ratios to maximize V, thus making the least squares estimates of
  equation 6 an inadequate way of estimating the effect of exogeneous changes in
 debt.
                                      —20—

it inappropriate to specify a priori how the market is likely to respond to this

variable.

            For many firms, it is also possible to estimate the value of the

assets held by the pension fund. The unfunded vested pension liabilities

can therefore be decomposed into the difference between total vested pension

liabilities (vPL) and pension assets (PA), i.e., UVPL = VPL — PA.   The market

might consider the vested pension liabilities to be mismeasured and might

therefore value VPL at a more or less than dollar—for—dollar rate. But if the

market value of pension assets were known with certainty, the market might

value these assets dollar—for—dollar. This suggests including VPL and PA as

separate regressors and testing whether the coefficient of PA is one.

            There are, however, two problems with this procedure. First, the

information on pension assets is available only with a substantial lag and is

subject to serious ambiguities and measurement problems.1 Second, investors may

regard information about pension assets as an indication of the likely magnitude

of vested liabilities or of some other unobserved attribute of the firm (e.g.

the ease with which it can raise funds or the management's expectations about

future growth).2 The PA variable is included separately in some of the

regression equations reported below to eliminate the restrictions that VPL and


1 These data are published in annual volumes of the Money Market Directory.

2 In the extreme, investors might regard the official estimates of vested
   liabilities to contain no information about true liabilities while
   believing that the firm's pension assets were some fraction of true
   liabilities. In this case the coefficient of the PA variable would be
   negative and the coefficient of the VPL variable would not be significantly
   different from zero. By a similar argument, investors may regard the
   reported level of UVPIJ as an indication of some other unobserved charac-
   teristic of the firm and, to that extent, the effect on share—prices of
   reported differences in UVPL cannot be regarded as an indication of the
   effect of a general change in funding policy or of the current existence of
   unfunded liabilities as such.
                                        —21—

 PA have equal and opposite coefficients but
                                             a theory of rational market
 valuation cannot be tested with these coefficients.

           For some firms, it is also possible to obtain information on what

 are known as unfunded past and prior service pension liabilities (UPPsL).1

 Unlike the regular vested benefit liabilities, the past and prior service

 liabilities represent a projection rather than a current legal liability.

 More specifically, the past and prior service liability at any time is the

present value of all projected benefits minus the present value of the future

contributions   that would be made under a normal schedule of funding. This
difference reflects the funds that would already have accumulated if the future
projected benefits were being funded Continuously on a normal schedule of fund-.
ing.2   The difference between this past and prior service liability and total

pension assets represents the unfunded past and prior service liability.

          Although firms are required to provide information about their

unfunded vested pension liabilities,
                                       providing information about past and prior
service liabilities is optional. For the large manufacturing firms that did

provide this information, the value of unfunded past and prior liabilities

substantially exceeds the value of unfunded vested pension liabilities. We have

therefore limited the sample to the firms that provided this additional infor-

mation. Unfortunately, there are wide discrepancies in the way that these

liabilities are defined and market
                                     participants might rightly give much less
weight to these estimates than to the measure of vested liabilities. Separate

equations are therefore estimated with and without this variable.


  This is also sometimes called the unfunded
                                               accrued pension liability.
2 The past and prior service liability thus includes vested
                                                            as well as
  unvested benefits.
                                         —22—




2.2 Equity Value
           Our discussion until now has been about the total market value of the

firm, including both the equity and debt components.       It is interesting also to

          the market value of the firm' s   common stock equity and the way in   which
examine

it   is influenced by   pension liabilities. The distinction   between the total

market value approach and the equity value approach could be important if,

primarily because of tax or risk factors, it is inappropriate to assume the

same q value for debt and equity.

             An alternative   to the total market valuation model relates the
value   of common stock equity (yE) to the net equity assets, i.e., the replacement

value of the firm's physical assets minus the market value of the debt and

the market value of the preferred stock (PS): i.e., VE = qe (A—DEBT—PS).

Proceeding as before, the asset valuation ratio qe will depend on the firm's

future equity earnings. We define the firm's current equity earnings (EE) as

total after—tax earnings (E) minus interest payments and preferred dividends

                                            at the expense of their creditors because
 plus the gain that equity owners make
                                                         subtracting real interest
 of inflation; i.e., equity earnings are defined by

 payments and preferred dividends from the total after—tax earnings that were

 used for the total market value equation. The ten—year growth of equity

 earnings (GROWE) and the expenditure on research and development are also

 included to represent the relation between current and future earnings. The

 specification
                  also includes the market beta coefficient and a measure of
 leverage.
                                             —23—


            A correctly measured value of unfunded pension liabilities should

 reduce the net equity value dollar—for_dollar.
                                                          Again, the measurement problems
 imply that a coefficent of unity on the actual UVPL variable is not a

 requirement for rational share valuation.

            The complete specification of the equity value equation is thus:


 (i)   ! = 80
       AE
                + 81   .
                       AE
                            + 82   GROWE +   3   RP ÷
                                                 AE
                                                           BETA +   85 DEBT + 86 UVPL +   C
                                                                        AE        AE

when AE = A — DEBT — PS, the net asset value of the corporation's
                                                                  equity.
Other specifications with pension assets and past and prior service liabilities

are also estimated.

            These specifications make no explicit allowance for the role of the

Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation (PBGC),
                                                        a government agency that reinsures
pension obligations.1 Gersovitz (1980) has emphasized the role of the PBGC and

suggested that a marginal dollar of unfunded pension liability should not

depress the firm's equity value to the same extent (if at all) when the total

liability exceeds 30 percent of the firm's current equity value. However, the

relevant effect of the PBGC does not depend on the current ratio of benefits to

market value but on the possiblity that the firm
                                                          might at any time be in a posi-
tion where the 30 percent reinsurance limit would come into effect. All things

equal, a higher ratio of UVPL to equity capital would involve a smaller marginal

effect of UVPL on the firm's equity value.
                                                    Although this could in principle be



1 Under current law, a corporation is responsible for its unfunded
                                                                   pension
  liabilities only to the extent of 30
                                       percent of its equity value; any ftrther
  obligation is met by the BGC.
approximated by extending the specification of equation 1 to include a

quadratic term in the ratio of UVPL to net equity capital, the inadequacies

of the data suggest that such an estimate might be attempting to learn too

much from the data. Some estimates of this effect are presented in Section 5.

3. The Data

           This section reviews the operational definitions of the variables

that are required to estimate equations 6 and 7 and then presents the means

and standard deviations of the variables for 1976 and 1971.

          The construction of most of the variables uses the income statement,

balance sheet, and other data that are provided in the Standard and Poors

Compustat file. The market value of each firm's common stock (yE) is calculated

as the product of the number of shares outstanding and the market price per

share   on the last day of the year. Since price information is not provided

for the firm's preferred stock, the market value of the preferred stock (PS)

is estimated by dividing the annual preferred stock dividends by the Standard

and Poor preferred dividend yield for the current year.1 The market value of

the firm's debt (DEBT) is calculated by subtracting the firm's short—term

financial assets from the sum of short—term liabilities and an estimated value

of   long—term debt. The data provide information on the book value of long—term
debt and the amount of the annual interest payment. We assume that all



1 This ignores the role of convertible preferred stock. The assumed yields
     for 1916   and   1977 were 7.66   percent and 7.87 percent.
                                       —25—

long—term   debt has ten years until maturity and then calculate the present
value of   the interest stream and final redemption, using the Baa interest rate.

            Each firm's balance sheet provides information on the replacement

value of the firm's plant and   equipment and the book value      of land. To tnis

we add the market value of the firm's inventories.1 The sum is the real value

of the firm's capital stock, A.2

            Total earnings (E) are the sum of :   (1)     the net profits available

for common stockholders as reported in the firm's accounts, (2) the value of

preferred dividends, (3) the interest payments,    (ii)   the   difference between

accounting depreciation arid depreciation at replacement cost, and (5) the

difference between LIFO inventory gains and FIFO inventory gains for those

firms that report on a FIFO basis. Total earnings are thus equivalent to the

real return to debt and equity capital.

            Although the growth of earnings variable (GROW) should measure the

 increase in real earnings, neither we nor the market participants bad accurate

 information about inflation—adjusted earnings for years before 1976. The earn-

 ings growth variable therefore must be constructed in      terms   of conventional

 earnings.3 More specifically, we define GROW as the difference between the

 average accounting earnings (including interest) in the most recent five years

 and the average earnings in the previous five years, divided by the current capi-

 tal stock (A).


 1 For LIFO firms, the accounting formulas are meaningless and inventory value
    is estimated by using data on the replacement cost of inventories.

 2 The value of A thus excludes intangible assets like patents, brand—loyalty,
    etc. If this measurement error is correlated with the other variables it
    will bias the coefficients.

 3 Investors might, of course, have made their own approximate corrections
    for the difference between real and nominal earnings.
                                          —26—

            The remaining variables in the total market value equation have

  already been described.1 The
                                  corresponding variables for the equity value
  equation are similar except that
                                     they are divided by the value of
                                                                   property,
 plant and equipment minus the market value of the firm's net debt
                                                                   and preferred
 shares (AE). The equity
                           earnings variable (EE) has already been defined as the
 difference between total earnings and the real interest
                                                         payments on the firm's
 debt. The growth of equity earnings (GROwE) is the ten—year difference
                                                                        in
 accounting after—tax equity earnings (the sum of dividends and retained
                                                                         earnings
 as conventionally defined) divided by the value of equity assets (AE).

           The sample of firms for each of
                                              the two years (1976 and 1977) consists
 of all those manufacturing firms
                                     in the Compustat file for which the required
 information was provided about
                                  inflation_ad.justed accounts and about pension
liabilities and assets. The
                             inflation_adjusted accounts were required by
the Securities Exchange Commission only for firms above a certain size.
                                                                          Since
Standard and Poors only included
                                 this information in the Colnpustat file if it
was reported by a certain date,
                                  reporting delays further limited the number
of firms for which such information
                                       is available. Although the value of un-
funded vested pension obligations
                                     must be reported on each firms 10—K form,
the information about past service
                                   liabilities and about the value of pension
assets is provided at the firm's discretion.
                                              Restricting our sample to firms
that provided all of this information
                                         significantly limited the size of the
sample. The resulting samples contained 117 firms for 1976 and 193 firms for

1977.




  These are research and development
                                     (RD/A), the Merrill—Lynch beta
  (BETA), the market value of net debt (DEBT), and the three pensioncoefficent
  (UVPL/A, IJPPSL/A, and PA/A).                                      variables
                                    —27—


          Table 1 presents the mean values and standard deviations for the key
                                                     comment. Note first that
variables in 1976 and 1977. A few features deserve

the mean values of q and qe (i.e, V/A and VE/AE) are both approximately one and

that for both years q exceeds qel The gross earnings after tax (EtA)

averaged 6 percent of the real capital while the corresponding net earnings

(EE/AE) averaged about 3 percent of equity capital in 1976 and 1 percent in

1977.2

          Unfunded vested pension liabilities (UVPL/A) averaged about 5 percent

of assets. The gross pension assets of the firms were about 13 percent of the

corresponding physical assets, implying that (for this sample of firms) the

unfunded vested pensions averaged less than one—third of total vested pensions.

The unfunded past and prior service liabilities average about 10 percent of

assets and are therefore about twice as large as the unfunded vested

 liabilities. The ratio of total gross pension liabilities to corporate assets

 is therefore about 25 percent.3



 1 This inequality is consistent with the view that taxes cause the market
    value of equity to be less than unity. See above, footnote 1 page 6.

 2 These figures are consistent with the aggregate estimates for all non-
    financial corporations reported in Feldstein and Suxnmers (1979) and
    Feldstein and Poterba (1980).

 3 This is the sum of pension assets (PA/A = 0.135) and unfunded past and
    prior service liabilities (UPPL/A = o.iio).  Total pension liabilities
    are thus about 1.8 times pension assets.  If this ratio could be extrapolated
    to all private pensions, it would imply that the $519 billion of private
    pension assets reported in the flow of funds account for 1979 (excluding
    the $68 billion assets of state and local pension funds) correspond
    to a private pension "wealth" of employees of $988.2 billion. The
    corresponding figure for vested pension "wealth" is approximately half this
    amount.
                                                      Table 1

                                     Means and Standard Deviations of Basic
                                                                            Variables


                                                 Total Value
                                                                                          Equity Value
                                        1916                 1977
                                Mean                                                  1976                 1977
                                            S.D.     Mean       S.D.               Mean    S.D.          Mean       S.D.

 Market Value         (V/A)     1.231     1.006     1.074      0.654    (VE/AE)    0.871     0.694       0.7118    0.506
 Earnings             (EtA)     0.059     0.079     0.0611     0.067    (EE/AE)    0.028     0.080       0.040    0.069
Growth                (GROW)    0.051     0.049     0.058      0.052    (GROWE)    0.049     0.044       0.062    0.064
Research and
  Development         (RD/A)   0.026      0.035      .029       .034    (RD/AE)   0.026      0.032       0.020    0.035
Debt Asset Ratio     (D/A)     0.011      0.2311     .034       .2117   (D/AE)    0.065      0.255       0.119    0.377
Beta Coefficient     (Beta)    1.090      0.284     1.171     0.330     (Beta)    1.090      0.284       1.171    0.330
Unfunded Vested Pension
  Liability                    0.047      0.056
                    (uvPL/A)                        0.049     0.058     UVPL      0.051     0.059     0.055       0.069

Pension Assets       (PA/A)    0.123      o.ii6    0.135      0.112     PA        0.129     0.129    0.144        0.110
Unfunded Past Service
  Liability         (UPSL/A)   0.108     0.093     0.110     0.095      UPSL      0.117     0.100    0.110        0.095

Sample Size           (N)      117         —       193                    N       119         —      193
                                         —29—




            The net debt to capital ratios for both years are quite low, reflecting

the offsetting effects of trade credit and other nominal assets. There is very

substantial variation in the ratio among firms.


i. Parameter Estimates for the Total Market Value Equation

            The   parameter estimates presented in this section indicate that unfunded
vested pension liabilities reduce the market value of firms. Although the
standard    errors of the coefficients   and   the   measurement problems   referred to

earlier are too large to draw precise conclusions, the estimates are compatible

with the conclusion that each      dollar of unfunded vested pension liability re-
duces the firm's market value by one dollar. The specific point estimates suggest
a greater than one—for—one effect and generally          differ in a statistically signif-
icant    way from zero.

            Table 2 presents estimates of three alternative specifications of

the total market value equation. Each specification is estimated for 1916 and

1917. The results are generally similar for the two years but differ in a

number of details. We begin by coxmnenting on the 1917 results since the

sample is much larger and likely to be more representative.

            Before discussing the coefficents of the pension variables, it is

useful to examine briefly the coefficients of the other variables. The

coefficient of the earnings variable in equation 2.1 implies that an extra

dollar of after—tax earnings raises the market value of the firm by $5.23. It

is   important to emphasize that    this coefficient should not be misinterpreted

as   a   low capitalization coefficient in an earnings valuation model: since the
                                                                  Table 2
                                 Determinants of     Total Market Value of Corporate Securities


       Year   Constant Earnings Earnings Research         Beta        Leverage Vested       Past      Pension    R2     SSR
                                 Growth                Coefficient              Liability Service Assets
                                                                                         Liability
                         CE/A)    (GROW)   (RD/A)         (BETA)       (DEBT/A) (uvPL/A)   (uPsL/A)   (PA/A)

2.1    1977    0.61      5.23     1.92      1.38           0.05       —0.149    —1.1414                         0.69   25.230
              (0.11)    (0.65)   (0.75)    (0.91)         (0.08)       (0.12)   (o.147)



2.2    1977    0.67      5.37     1.69      1.70          0.014       —0.53     —1.12                 —0.145    0.70   214.8714
              (0.12)    (0.65)   (0.76)    (0.92)        (0.08)       (0.13)    (0.51)                (0.28)

2.3    1977    0.67      5.35     i.714     1.71          0.03        —0.514    —1.62       0.38      —0.51     0.70   214.806
              (0.12)    (0.65)   (0.77)    (0.93)        (0.08)       (0.13)    (0.85)     (0.514)    (0.29)
2.14   1976   0.58       14.61    8.35      14.i14       —0.05        —0.148    —1.97                           0.80   23.297
              (0.19)    (0.85)   (1.31)    (1.51)        (o.i6)       (0.23)    (0.79)


2.5    1976   0.57      14.60     8.141     14.05        —0.05        —0.148    —2.02                  0.08     0.80
              (0.21)    (0.86)                                                                                         23.290
                                 (1.35)    (1.65)        (0.16)       (0.214)   (0.83)                (0.143)

2.6 1976      0.57      3.90      8.143    14.6i         —0.03        —0.50     —0.99      —0.86       0.30     0.80   23.095
              (0.21)   (1.66)    (1.35)    (0.86)        (0.16)       (0.214)   (1.36)     (0.90)     (0.149)


The dependent variable in each equation is the n.rket value of debt and
                                                                        equity per         dollar
                                                                                         of capital stock (i.e., property
plus plant, equipment and inventories at replacement cost). All of the other variables
                                                                                       except Beta are deflated by the
capital stock. The constant term is also divided by the net capital stock. Standard errors  are shown in parentheses.
                                     —31—


underlying specification is basically an asset valuation model,1 the coefficient

of the earnings variable indicates how the firm's q value is increased by a

higher current level of earnings.

         The positive growth variable also has the expected sign, indicating

that finns that have experienced basic growth during the past decade have a

high market value. The positive coefficient on the research and development

variable indicates that firms that do more research are expected to have

relatively higher future earnings. It would, of course, be wrong to infer that

any firm could raise its market value by increasing its spending on research.

The market is presumably able to judge (even if imperfectly) between potentially

productive research and wasted research spending. The coefficient therefore

reflects the relation between the market's valuation of different companies and

the amount of their research spending rather than the market's valuation of

incremental research spending as such.

         A higher ratio of debt to total capital reduces the market valuation

of the firm, presumably reflecting the increased risk of bankruptcy or the re-

strictions on the firm's activities that are implied by the debt service obliga-

tion. The beta coefficient does not have a statistically significant effect.

This may reflect the particular choice of beta coefficient variable1 or the

lack of a more complete specification of the firm's risk characteristics.

         The coefficient of the unfunded vested pension liability variable is

—l.4 with a standard error of O.T. The point estimate implies that each

dollar of unfunded liability reduces the firm's value by $l.I&. Such an effect



1 See above, page   18.
                                       —32—


would imply that the market regards the firms' reports as an understatement

of the true liability (for the types of reasons discussed in Section 1).

The standard error implies, however, that a two—thirds confidence interval

reaches from —1.03 to —1.91. The data are thus compatible with the possibility

of a one—for—one substitution as well as of a more substantial effect.

         Equation 2.2 adds the value of pension assets to the set of explanatory

variables. The coefficients of all of the variables except the unfunded pension

liability variable remain almost exactly as in equation 2.1. The coefficient of

the unfunded liability variable shrinks (in absolute value) to —1.12 with a

standard error of 0.51. The pension asset variable itself has a coefficient of

—0.45 with a standard error of 0.28. These point estimates imply that each

dollar of reported pension assets increases the market value of the firm by

6T cents (i.e., the difference between 1.12 an 0.15) while each dollar of

reported liability decreases the value by $1.12. The standard error of 0.28

implies that the difference between these two effects is barely statistically

significant at the 10 percent level.

        Equation 2.3 adds the value of the unfunded liabilities based on past

and prior service to the set of regressors. The estimated coefficient (0.38)

is smaller than its standard error (0.5k), implying that the market appears to

ignore unvested liabilities. Deleting the value of pension assets from this

equation only makes the coefficient of the past service liability smaller

(reducing it from 0.38 to 0.13).
                                        —33—



         The results for 1976   are   qualitatively similar but some differences

should be noted. Although the coefficient of the earnings variable is quite

similar in both years, the coefficients of the earnings growth variable and the

research—and—development variable are both substantially larger in 1976.

The coefficient of the unfunded liability variable is absolutely larger (—1.87)

but also has a larger standard error (0.79). The unfunded liability effect

therefore again differs in a statistically significant way from zero but is com-

patible with minus one as well as with values that are absolutely much larger.

          When the value of pension assets is added to the set of regressors

(in equation 2.5), the value of its coefficient is very much less than its

standard error and the coefficients of the other variables remain essentially

unchanged. The data thus imply that the market looks only at the net unfunded

liability and not at its components.

          Finally, the unfunded past and prior service liability variable in

equaton 2.6 is also smaller than its standard error, confirming the 1977

estimate that the market appears to ignore this variable and focuses exclusively

on the vested liabilities.


 5.   Parameter   Estimates for the Equity Value Equations

          The parameter estimates for the equity value equations support the

 conclusions of the total market value equations presented in the previous

 section. There are, however, some differences between the two sets of results

 as well as between 1976 and 1977 that deserve comment.

             All of the equations in Table 3 show that the market value of common
                                       ...3 !_




stock   per dollar of "equity capital"1 is positively related to current earnings,

the growth of earnings and the intensity of research effort. The growth and

research effects are stronger in the 1976 equations. The beta coefficient is

again insignificant in both years.

           The coefficient of the unfunded vested liability variable in

equation 3.1 equals —1.23 with a standard error of 0.iO. This is clearly

consistent with the view that the equity owners regard the stated value of

unfunded vested liabilities as the most likely value and reduce their demand

price (or offer price) for the stock by the stated value of the unfunded vested

liability.

           When the value of pension assets is added as an additional variable in

equation 3.2, the other coefficents remain essentially unchanged. The co-

efficient of the pension assets variable is _0.140 with a standard error of

0.27. The point estimates imply that a dollar of pension assets adds only 58

cents   to the equity value of the company, about half of the negative effect of

a dollar of pension liabilities. But the size of the standard error implies

that the difference between the pension asset effect and the pension liability

effect is only statistically significant at about the 15 percent level. Con-

ventional tests of statistical significance imply that equation 3.2 does not

dominate equation 3.1.

          The unfunded past and prior service liability has a small coefficent

(equation 3.3) that is only a small fraction of its standard error. Its intro-

duction raises the standard errors of the other coefficients, especially that of


  Recall that equity capital (A) is defined as the difference between the real
  value of tangible assets and the sum of debt and preferred stock liabilities.
                                                                   Table    3

                                     Determinants of    The Market Value of Corporate Equity


        Year   Constant Earnings Earnings Research          Beta           Leverage    Vested    Nonlinear     Past      Pension    H2       R
                                    Growth               Coefficient                  Liability Liability     Service    Assets
                                                                                                             Liability
                         (EE/AE)    (GR0WE)   (RD/AE)      (BrA)       (DEBT/AE)      (uvPL/AE) (UVPL/AE)2 (uPsL/AE)     (PA/A)

3.1    1977     0.50       2.514     2.02      3.00         0.02           -.0.114     —1.23                                       0.49    25.089
               (0.11)     (0.514)   (0.58)    (0.85)       (0.08)          (0.08)      (0.140)

3.2    1977     0.55       2.614     1.88      3.30        0.01            —0.13       —0.99                             —0.141    0.50    214.783
               (0.11)     (o.4)     (o.9)     (0.87)       (0.08)          (0.08)      (0.143)                           (0.27)

3.3    1977     0.514      2.65      1.88      3.32         0.01           -.0.12      —1.20                   0.20      —0.1414   0.50    214.762
               (0.12)     (0.514)   (0.59)    (0.87)       (0.08)          (0.08)      (0.69)                 (0.51)     (0.28)
3.14   1977     0.514     2.53       1.99      2.73        0.03             0.114      —2.63      5.01                             0.50    24.687
               (0.11)     (0.53)    (0.58)    (0.86)       (0.08)          (0.00)      (0.90)     (2.89)

3.5    1976     0.52      2.26       7.17      14.75      —o.o6        —0.29          —1.814                                       0.63    20.6149
               (0.18)    (0.61)     (1.05)    (1.38)       (0.15)          (0.11)      (0.69)

3.6    1976     0.145     2.29       7.35      14.29      —0.03        —0.30          —1.96                               0.28     0.614   20.51.0
               (0.20)    (0.62)     (1.08)    (1.51)       (0.15)      (0.11)          (0.71)                            (0.36)

3.7    1976     0.45      2.30       7.35      4.25       —0.02        —0.30          —1.614                 —0.25        0.33     0.64    20.520
               (0.20)    (0.62)     (1.09)    (1.52)      (0.16)       (0.11)         (1.23)                 (0.78)      (0.140)

3.8    1976    0.46       2.28      7.33      4.22        —0.03        -.0.30         —2.40       2.18                    0.29     0.64    20.528
               (0.20)    (0.62)     (1.09)    (i.14)      (0.15)           (0.17)     (1.87)     (8.51)                  (0.37)

The dependent variable in each equation is the irket value of corporate common stock
                                                                                       per dollar of net capital stock
(i.e., plant, equipment and inventories at replacement cost net of the market value of debt and
of the other viiriables (except the Beta coefficient) are also divided                           preferred stock). All
                                                                       by the net capital stock. Standard errors are
shown in parentheses.
                                         —36—


the unfunded vested pensions variable. But equation 3.3 is clearly not pre-

ferable to the specification of equation 3.1.

            Equation 3.J4 introduces a second order term in the unfunded vested

pension liability variable. Its positive coefficient implies that the depressing

effect on equity value of an extra dollar of unfunded liability decreases as

the relative size of the unfunded liability increases. This is consistent with

the role of the Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation in limiting the corporate

pension obligation to no more than 30 percent of the firm's equity value.1

The point estimates of the two pension coefficients (—2.63 for the linear

term and 5.01 for the quadratic term) imply very substantial effects of unfunded

liabilities on share prices at all relevant levels of the UVPL variable. At

its mean value (0.0l9), the effect of a further increase in UVPL is —2.63 +

2 (5.01) (0.019) = _2.111.     At one standard deviation above the mean value of tJVPL

(i.e. at UVPL =   0.107),   the effect of a further increase in UVPL is still

—1.53.   Although   the substantial standard error indicates that these point

estimates   are subject to a sizable margin of error, the results clearly
confirm the implication of equation 3.1 that     unfunded   vested pension liabilities
significantly   depress the equity value of the firm.2

            The results for 1976 are similar but not identical. The earnings

growth and research variables bad a more powerful effect on equity value in



1 Very few firms currently have unfunded vested liabilities in excess of 30
   percent of the firm's equity value (only 8 of the 193 sample firms in 1977
   and 5 of the 117 sample firms in 1976).

2 Adding the value of pension assets or the unfunded past and service liabili-
   ties does not alter the other coefficients in the equation. Neither of these
   coefficients is itself significantly different from zero.
                                     —37—

the 1976 equation. The leverae variable is again negative and its effect is

stronger for 1976 than for 1977. The unfunded vested liability variable in

equation 3.5 has a coefficent of _i.814 and a standard error of 0.69. The

coefficient is thus different from zero at any conventional significance level.

          The pension assets variable is included in the next three equations

where it has a coefficient of about 0.30 and smaller than its 0.75 standard

error.

         Equations 3.7 and 3.8 show that neither the unfunded past and prior

service liabilities nor the coefficients of the quadratic term in vested liabil-

ities is statistically significant. Including these variables has very little

effect on the other coefficients.


Some Implications

           Although the problems of statistical measurement imply that the para-

meter estimates must be treated with caution, the current finding that

unfunded vested pension liabilities cause an approximately equal reduction in

the market value of the firm, if supported by future research, has important

implications about the relation between private pensions and national saving,

about the poor performance of the stock market in recent years, and about

optimal corporate financial policy. This final section considers each of these.


6.1 Private Pensions and National Saving

         The most important implication of the share price response is that the

existence of unfunded private pension liabilities does not necessarily entail

a reduction in total private saving. Because the pension liability reduces

the equity value of the firm, shareholders are given notice of its existence

and an incentive to save more themselves. For this reason, unfunded private
                                      —38—

pensions differ fundamentally from the unfunded   Social   Security pension and

the other unfunded federal government civilian and military pensions.

           The net effect of private pensions on total private saving also

depends on a number of other factors. How well do the firms' vested pension

liabilities correspond to what the employees perceive as their accrued pension

wealth? How does this accrued pension wealth or other aspects of anticipated

pension   benefits influence direct saving by employees? And how does the time
pattern of increased shareholder (and corporate) saving compare to the time pat-
tern of reduction in employee saving?

          Although there has been some work on the second of these questions,

the analyses were forced to use quite inadequate data. On balance, the

evidence indicates that anticipated benefits reduce individual saving but the

link between vested pension liabilities and perceived benefits remains complete-

ly unexplored. The availability of improved data should make it possible to

pursue these questions more effectively in the coming years.


6.2 The Level of Share Prices

          The poor performance of the stock market has been one of the most

striking economic facts of the 1970's. The Standard and Poor composite index of

common stock prices fell 147 percent in real terms between 1969 and 1979. A

number of explanations of this dramatic decline have been offered and there may

well be some truth in all of them: Feldstein (1980a, 1980b) has emphasized the

interaction of inflation and tax rules; Malkiel (1977) has emphasized increasing

risk; and Modigliani and Cohn (1979) have emphasized the investors' failure to

distinguish correctly between nominal and real yields.
                                            —39—

           The growth of unfunded pension liabilities is another contributor to

the poor performance of share prices. The evidence for the current sample of

firms implies that the unfunded vested pension liabilities were seven percent

of the market value of the firms' equities in 1977. If the equity value of the

firm is reduced dollar—for—dollar by its unfunded liability, the recognition of

these liabilities has lowered the average share value by about seven percent.1

6.3 The Pension Funding Puzzle

           In    Section 1, we noted that   it should be optimal for firms to fund

their   vested   pension obligations as quickly as possible. A firm that borrows

and invests the proceeds in the pension fund has the      advantage of earning tax
exempt interest (on the assets in the pension fund) while paying tax deductible

interest on the borrowed money used to finance the pension fund. It is a

puzzle therefore that all firms do not fund their vested obligations fully

and that an average of about 25 percent of the vested liabilities in the sample

firms were unfunded.

          One potential explanation of such apparently irrational behavior by

firms is that they believe that the securities market is irrational: i.e., that

investors would recognize debt that appears on the balance sheet but not the


1 There are several reasons to believe that the corresponding effect of pensions
   on share prices at the end of the 1960's was either very small or non-
   existent. First, without the ERISA rules the future benefits were not as
   strong a binding obligation. Second, although the extent of the unfunded
   vested liability at that time cannot be estimated, it is noteworthy that the
   ratio of pension fund reserves to corporate equity has more then doubled in
   the 1970's. Finally, investors have undoubtedly become much more aware of
   private pension obligations because of the attention focused by ERISA and
   because of the growth of these liabilities. In addition to the reduced value
   of V/A caused by the UVPL, the substitution of pension promises for current
   wages causes earnings to be overstated; to the extent that the market
   recognizes this, the price—earnings ratio will be reduced. Note that this
   price—earnings effect would be present even for a firm that just begins to
   substitute pension promises for wages while the effect of UVPL would persist
   for a firm that stops using unfunded liabilities.
                                          .J40—



unfunded   pension liabilities. If that were true, it would be in the interest

of current shareholders to leave the pension liability unfunded. However, the

evidence in this paper indicates that securities investors do not make this

type of mistake.

           Why   then   do firms not fund their pension obligations more completely?

It is, of course, possible that some firms do not understand the advantage of

funding or that they believe (contrary to the evidence in this paper) that

the securities market is irrational in valuing unfunded pension obligations.

Alternatively,     some firms may   not be more completely funded because they are

already contributing the niaximuin annual tax deductible amount. Firms may also

be reluctant to fund more rapidly because the pension contribution would reduce

the year's reported earnings (even if financed by borrowing) which in turn would

reduce the firm's market value.1 Finally, the Pension Benefit Guarantee

Corporation may encourage firms to remain less than fully funded in order to

take potential advantage of the insurance protection that it gives. Because of

the substantial importance of pension assets and the potential interest in

changing the pension funding options available to firms, a more thorough

understanding of firms' current funding behavior would clearly be desirable.



1 It is not clear whether the market is irrational in this 'way. Investors can
   in principle correct annual earnings by the change in the vested pension
   obligations but we know of no evidence that this is done by securities ana-
   lysts. But even if investors now have too little information to distinguish
   between expenditures on pension contributions and accruals of pension
   liabilities, a firm should be able to provide such information to share-
   holders if it wanted to undertake an accelerated funding of pension liabili-
   ties.
                                    —la-


          The conclusions of this paper reflect the experience of manufacturing

firms in 1976 and 1977. The equations developed here should be reestimated with

data for more recent years and for a wider range of firms. The growing availa-

bility of a richer array of data on firms' pension rules, employee coverage, and

pension fund assets will not only make possible new analytic studies but will

also permit securities analysts to reflect the value of unfunded pension obliga-

tions more accurately. This in turn will strengthen the ability of unfunded as

well as funded pensions to contribute to national saving.




Cambridge, Massachusetts
September 1980
                                       —142—




                                   Bibliography

Auerbach, Alan (1979), "Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy," Journal of

        Public Economics, Vol. 11, pp. 291—305.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, (1980), Balance Sheets of the U.S.

        Economy.

Bradford, David (1979), "The Incidence and Allocative Effects of a Tax on

        Corporate Distributions," National Bureau of Economic Research Working

        Paper No. 3147.

Bulow, Jeremy (1979), "Analysis of Pension Funding Under ERISA," National Bureau

        of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1402.

Ehrebar, A. F. (1977), "Those Pension Plans are Even Weaker Than You Think,"

        Fortune, pp.   i014_ii1.

Feldstein, Martin (1980a), "Inflation, Tax     Rules   and the Stock Market," Journal

        of Monetary Economics, July.

_________ (1980b), "Inflation and the Stock Market," American Economic Review,
        1980.

_________ (1978), "Do Private Pensions Increase National Saving?" Journal of
        Public Economics, Vol. 10, No. 3.

Feldstein, Martin and Jerry Green (1979), "Why Do Companies Pay Dividends?"

        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1413.

Feldstein, Martin and James Poterba (1980), "State and Local Taxes and the Rate

        of Return on Nonfinancial Corporations," National Bureau of Economic

        Research Working Paper 508.
                                           —I3—



 Feldstein,    Martin and Lawrence Summers (1977) "Is the Rate of Profit Falling?"

        Brookings Papers on Economic Activity-, Vol. 1, pp. 211—27.

Gersovitz, Mark (1980), "Economic Consequences of Unfunded Vested Pension

        Benefits," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. b8o.

Gordon, Myron (1962), The Investment, Financing and Valuation of the

        Corporation. Homewood, Illinois: Irwin.

Gordon, Roger and Burton Malkiel (1979), "Corporate Financial Structure," paper

        presented      at Brookings Conference on Economic Effects of Federal Taxes,

        October.

Greenough, William and Francis King (1976), Pension Plans and Public Policy. New

        York: Columbia University Press.

Hall, Robert E. (1980), "Employment, Unemployment, and Wages," Brookings Papers

        on Economic Activity, Vol. 1.

King, Mervyn (1971), Public Policy and the Corporation. London: Chapman and

        Hall.

McGill, D. M. (1975), Fundamentals of Private Pensions. Homewood, Illinois:

        Irwin.

Medoff, J. L. and K. G. Abraham. (1978), "Experience, Performance, and

        Earnings," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 278.

Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner and Smith (1976), Security Risk Valuation. New York.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Cohn (1979), "Inflation and Rational Market

        Valuation," Financial Analysts Journal.
Modigliani, Franco and Merton Miller (1958), 'tThe       Cost of Capital, Corporation

        Finance,      and the Theory of Investment,"   American   Economic Review, No.
              pp.   261—97.
                                             —''4—




Myers, Stewart C. (1977), "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing," Journal of
        Financial Economics, November.

Oldfield, George S. (1977), 1tFinancial Aspects of the Private Pension System,"

        Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Vol. 9, pp. 18_514.

Presidents Commission on Private Pensions (1980), Preliminary Report.

Tobin, James and William Brainard (1977), "Asset Markets and the Cost of

        Capital," in Economic Progress, Private Values, and      Public   Policy:

        Essays in Honor of William Feilner, eds. R. Nelson and B. Balassa,

        New    York: Elsevier—North Holland.
Treynor, J. L. (1977), "Principles of Corporate Pension Finance," Journal of
        Finance, Vol. 32, pp. 627—38.
Treynor,   J.L., Patrick J. Regan     and William W. Priest, Jr. (1976), The
           Financial   Reality of Pension Funding Under ERISA. Hoinewood, Illinois:

           Dow Jones—Irwin.

Trowbridge, C. L. and C. E. Farr (1976), The Theory and Practice of Pension

           Funding,.   Homewood, Illinois:   Irwin.
