                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ANALYZING THE RELATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT
                     INSURANCE TO UNEMPLOYMENT




                            Alan L. Gustrnan


                         Working Paper No. 512




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge MA 02138

                               July 1980




The   research reported herein is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies and was supported by the Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Policy, Evaluation and Research, U.S. Department of
Labor, under purchase order No. B—9—M—9—1i78T. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Since contractors conducting research
and development projects under government sponsorship are
encouraged to express their own judgment freely, this paper does
not   necessarily represent the official opinion or policy of the
Department   of Labor.

Ronald Ehrenberg, Gary Fields, Daniel Hamermesh, Joseph Hight,
Robert Hutchens, niy colleagues at Dartmouth, Cohn Campbell, Meir
Kobn, Robert Plotnick, Martin Segal, and Thomas Steinnieier and par-
ticipants in a seminar presented at Columbia University all pro-
vided helpful comments. I am responsible for all remaining errors.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #512
                                                                 July, 1980




               Analyzing the Relation of Unemployment
                      Insurance to Unemployment




                               Abstract



      This paper presents a framework for analyzing the relation of

unemployment insurance to unemployment and applies the framework to

evaluate recent developments in the UI literature and future research

needs. Unemployment is decomposed into more basic elements related

to the labor market flows which determine unemployment incidence and

duration. It is also disaggregated by reason for unemployment —-

e.g.,   entry into the labor force or quit last job. A matrix

containing those definitional elements of unemployment which are

potentially affected by the UI system forms the basis for organizing

the discussion. Each component of unemployment which may be affected

by variations in characteristics of the UI system is considered in

turn. The discussion of each of these elements focuses on recent

theoretical arid empirical studies which analyze how they are influenced

by features of the UI system. By proceeding systematically through the

elements which comprise unemployment and considering the major behavioral

explanations   linking the unemployment insurance system to unemployment,
it   is possible to determine where the analysis has proceeded satisfactorily

and where major gaps remain.

                                    Alan L. Gustman
                                    Department of Economics
                                    Dartmouth College
                                    Hanover, New Hampshire 03755
                                    603/646—2641
     The literature exploring the effects of unemployment insurance (UI) on

unemployment has grown rapidly in recent years. The scope of its coverage

has widened and the sophistication of analyses has increased. Such diverse

topics as the effects of parameters of the payroll tax schedule on labor

force turover (Frank Brechling, 1979), the implications of the benefit

schedule for labor force participation (Daniel S. Hamermesh, 1979a), the impact

of limitations on the duration of UI benefits for the duration of

unemployment (Robert Moffit and Walter Nicholson, 1979), and the effects of UI

eligibility rules on quit unemployment (Stephen T. Marston, 1979), were covered

in papers from 1979 alone. This literature has been surveyed thoroughly

and insightfully by Gary Fields (1977) Daniel Hamermesh (1977) (1978b),

Finis Welch (1977) and Robert Topel and Finis Welch (1979).

     Despite this recent progress, those designing policy and planning the

research agenda within the Labor Department and other interested researchers

do not have available a clear framework to guide them in fitting together

the results of these diverse studies, and to help them determine in a

systematic way what information is required if a complete picture of the

relation of unemployment insurance to unemployment is to emerge. The purpose

of this paper is to fill that gap by presenting a framework for analysis,

illustrating its relation to recent developments in the literature and

applying it to provide an indication of research needs)



     1Although a large number of articles are discussed, this paper is not
meant to provide a complete survey of the literature. An effort has been
made, however, to include the most important of the recent contributions.
                                        2




     In focusing on the relation of the UI system to unemployment, and in

further restricting the discussion to implications of UI on the microeconomic

level, a number of potentially important benefits of the UI system are not

discussed. Subjects which are not           analyzed here include:

     a) the role of UI as an automatic stabalizer (see Hamermesh, 1977,

and George M. Von.Furstenberg, 1976);

     b) the impact of UI on consumption patterns (see Haniermesh, 197gb);

        c)   the value of any redistribution of income which is brought about

by the UI system (see, however, Martin S. Feldstein, 1974, and Ronald G.

Ehrenberg, Robert Hutchens and Robert Smith, 1978 and Hamermesh, 1977, 1980);

     d) UI's impact on the quality of job matches (except as improved

matches affect later unemployment);

     e) the value of reduced uncertainty created by the availability of

insurance and any resulting changes in behavior, such as increased occupational

specialization. (See the discussion of UI as insurance in Topel and Welch, 1979)



     1One must be very careful in attributing either benefits or costs to our
public UI system to recognize that in the absence of a federal program, the
demand for insurance would have led to the emergence of private programs, at
least in the case of larger firms which could take advantage of economies of
scale. Indeed, there were some union—based UI programs in existence before
the law establishing the UI system was passed. If the development of
unemployment insurance as a fringe benefit followed the course taken by
pension programs during the post—war period, for example, private UI would
have become available in union markets and perhaps also in the nonunion sector.
Thus, while the provision through the public sector of unemployment insurance
to workers may affect the likelihood of unemployment in comparison with a
counter-factual situation where no UI program is available, in evaluatiny
the effects of a public UI program, it would seem most appropriate to assume
that in the absence of a public program private insurance would have been
available to many covered workers. To the extent that such problems as
moral hazard would have to be faced by privately run UI programs, the public
system of unemployment insurance is not completely responsible for desirable or
adverse impacts associated with the existence of unemployment insurance, per se.
                                        3




       Since the discussion does not focus on some of the important, intended

effects of the UI system, it would be inappropriate to derive from it any

broad   conclusions about the relative costs and benefits of the UI system.

        In principle, the study of how a public policy affects some economic

outcome should be relatively straightforward. First a model explaining

how the dependent variable——the economic outcome——is determined in the

absence of the program would either be developed for the problem at hand,

or if already available, simply be applied. Second, the public policy

would   be introduced into the model as a constraint. The new outcome would
be seen to be determined   by the parameters of the public policy program and

the   basic relationships which determined the outcome in the absence of the
program. To test the effects of the policy on the outcome, major determ-
inants of the dependent variable exclusive of the policy would be standard-
ized for, appropriate econometric adjustments made if       required,   and the
effects   of policy parameters on   the outcome measured.
      There   is, however, an important complication which, although not unique

to the analysis of the UI system, is more pronounced for studies of the

relation of UI to unemployment than it is for analyses of many other public

policies in the labor market. Specifically, neither the dependent variable

nor the policy has only a single dimension. Nor is there only a single

behavioral relation linking the policy to the outcome. In the case of the

dependent variable, there are different subgroups of the unemployed--job

leavers, those on temporary or permanent layoff, other job losers, entrants.

Moreover, as the literature on unemployment has     taught us, unemployment is
                                      4



a dynamic, not   a static phenomenon.1 The unemployed is an everchanging

group of individuals, some just entering the pool of unemployed, others

leaving. The various labor market flows which determine an individual's

unemployment experience are reflected in such measures as the probability

of losing the last job through an indefinite layoff, the probability of

becoming unemployed after such a job loss, and eventually the probability

of exiting unemployment, either as a result of securing a new job or of

leaving the labor force.

     The UI system includes sets of rules and schedules which are charac-

terized by complex relations among earnings, benefits, taxes, and unem-

ployment experience. The large set of behavioral considerations linking

the various flows comprising unemployment with the UI system reflects the

existence of many kinds of decisions required of both demanders and suppliers

of labor   in the alternative circumstances which they face. Thus instead
of a simple dependent and independent variable, we have a large set of
possible   outcomes and a complex set of policy parameters.

     The first part of this paper develops the framework for viewing studies

of the relation of the UI system to unemployment. The framework is then

used as an outline for a discussion of the theoretical and empirical

developments in the literature. A final section takes note of the questions

for future research that emerge from the discussion.



     'For recent discussions of unemployment and the labor market flows
which determine it, see papers by Feldstein, (1973), George Perry, (1972),
Stephen T. Marston, (1976) , Kim B. Clark and Lawrence H. Summers, (1979),
and Ronald G. Ehrenberg, (1979).
                           I. Analytical Framework


     This section sets out the analytical framework. Three steps are in-

volved. First, the number unemployed, the dependent variable, is decomposed

into more basic elements. Second, the dimensions of UI policy are

specified.       Third, the theories linking the UI system to the elements

comprising unemployment are explored.
A.   Decomposing Unemployment
Reasons   for Becoming Unemployed

     To begin, classify the unemployed according to the previous state they

were in before becoming unemployed, and       according   to the nature of the

separation from that previous state. The number who are newly unemployed

in the current period may be viewed as falling into five groups. 1



                                         5
                                    =                                     (1)
                                              '-Ii
                                        i=l



where p      =   number of newly unemployed.
             =   number of newly unemployed on temporary layoff.

       p2 = number      of newly unemployed on permanent layoff.

       113 =     number of newly unemployed separated for other reasons (with

                 no expectation of recall).



        study by Linda Leighton and Jacob Mincer (1979) analyzing the reasons
for youth unemployment provided the basis for the procedure followed here in
disaggregating unemployment by category and into more basic flows. Martin S.
Feldstein (1975) and Robert E. Hall (1978) discuss disaggregating the unem-
ployed into the groups such as those specified in Equation 1. In this
framework, new entrants and reentrants have been combined in a single
category. It should be noted, however, that some reentrants may be eligible
for UI benefits, while new entrants are not. Therefore, it may at times
be important to distinguish among these two types of entrants.
                                            6



              =   number   of   newly unemployed who are job leavers.

              =   number   of newly unemployed who are entrants.
         p5


Incidence
     A   further decomposition of each of the 5 subgroups comprising the

newly unemployed can be accomplished by recognizing that p is equal to

the product of a transition probability (p.) and the relevant stock of

individuals (S.) from which the flow into unemployment originated.



                                           =    pS.                           (2)




The relevant stock for i=l to 4 is the number employed.          For i=5, it is the

number not in the labor force. p. may itself be broken up into the product

of two probabilities. For example, the transition probability from em-

ployment into unemployment due to a quit is the product of the probability

of an employed person quitting and the probability of unemployment cond-

itional on having quit.



                                            =   y.z.                          (3)




 The marginal probability of a separation from the previous state is y. and

 the associated conditional probability of being unemployed given a separation
 is z..
     1
 Duration
         The basic elements in Equations 1 through 3 refer to the incidence of

 (flow into) unemployment. In describing the other major component of
                                                    7




unemployment, one speaks either of the flow out of unemployment, the
continuation rate which is one minus that flow, or the duration of unem-
ployment. The relation between the duration of unemployment associated
with group i of the unemployed (d.) and the continuation rates for those
in group i (rk) is

                                 00

                 d.     =
                              k=O
                                      [k-r. r. r. .
                                        1,0 i,l i,2
                                                           . .r.i,k—l (1 — r.i,k H


where r.     =    1.     r.           is the probability that a person unemployed at the
                            1,

beginning   of period k for reason i will also be unemployed during period

k+l. The product of the rk's in the first set of parentheses represents

the probability of a person who becomes unemployed at the beginning of

period 1 remaining unemployed throughout the periods before period k.

(1 -   r.    is       the probability of leaving unemployment at the                 end of period
k,   given that the individual was unemployed during that period.

       Expanding the expression and collecting terms, we have



                                                   00     k
                                           d. =         ( IT r.                               (4)
                                                  k=l j1      i,k—j




This is the expression for the duration cf completed spells of unemployment.

It will not be equal to the average duration of spells of unemployment in

process such as one obtains from cross—section CPS data (assuming a steady
                                                8




state) unless r does not vary with unemployment duration (k)


Unemployment

     Assuming a steady state, the expression for the total number who are

unemployed in any period for reason i is given by2



                                                                k
                                      U.
                                       1
                                           =        1-1.       ( TI r. k       '


where   r.k. = 1     for k-j =   0.    The total number unemployed in subgroup i is

equal to the sum of the p. people who have just become unemployed, the

fraction r1 of the p. people who first became unemployed one period

before that, and so on. From Equation 4 it can be seen that the expression



        1Note   that ifcontinuation rates are constant over all k periods, the
average duration     of completed spells is simply        The relation between
                                                                           .




the duration of interrupted spells and the duration of completed spells
depends on the distribution of the r1 k-j   Specifically, Stephen Salant
(1977) demonstrates formally that the relationship depends on the variance
in the length of completed spells. He emphasizes that one cannot infer from
the fact that current measured unemployment spells are longer for one group
than for another that the completed spells will also be longer for the former
group. On this subject, see also the papers by Hyman W. Kaitz (1970),
Robert H. Frank (1978), Tony Lancaster (1979) and Stephen Nickell (1979).
     Using the notation developed above, but dropping the subscript i, it
can be shown that the expected length of an interrupted spell is given by

                                           Co              k
                                            (kTrr .)
                                      —    k=l j=1 k—j
                                             cc k
                                           k=l .lrk.

where rk. = 1 for k-j < 0.            This will be equal to                        if r is independent
of duration.

        2For our purposes the assumption of a steady (Continued on page 9)
                                         r)




to    the right of p. in Equation 5 is equal to the expected duration of a

completed spell of unemployment, d.. Thus we have the well known result

that in a steady state, the total number unemployed (for a particular

reason) is equal to the product of incidence and duration of completed

spells.



                                  U. =        ]4.d.
                                   1           11                          (6)




Overall unemployment can be obtained by summing across the i subgroups.


                                  U=      U.1                              (7)
                                          1


UI and Elements of Unemployment

       The effect of variations in unemployment insurance can be introduced in
a    general way by recognizing that the flow of newly unemployed in group i
      the associated stocks of employed or those not in the labor force (Si),
the transition probability (p.), the marginal and conditional probabilities
underlying p. (y. and z.), the duration of unemployment (d.) [or the
definitionally   related probabilities-—the continuation rates (r.k.)]

are all functions of parameters——yet to be specified——of the UI system, as

well as other variables. Accordingly, Equations 2 and 6 may be differen-

tiated to   represent the effects of a given change in the UI system. Since
the system of equations represents a steady state, differentiation corresponds

(Footnote 2 continued from page 8) state is adequate. If one were
concerned with UI and stabilization policy, this assumption would have
to be relaxed. It would    also have to be relaxed to analyze the impact
of   changes in the UI system in the short run.
                                        10



to   comparing steady states.. Specifically we have




                       1
                           =
                                 1J]
                               (pS.d.   +    p.S'd.
                                              111     +   p.S.d)
                                                           111               (8)




In   other words, the impact of a change in a particular feature of the UI

system on unemployment reflects its effect on the transition probability

of becoming unemployed, its effect on the number of those either employed

or not in the labor   force and its effect on     duration. But this impact

also   is determined by the basic level of the transition probability, the
number of those employed or not in the labor force, and the average
duration of unemployment.
       Although the result is not shown, by differentiating Equation 3 and
substituting for p. and p! in Equation 8, it is also possible to express
the effect of changes in UI on unemployment as functions of the level and
changes in the probabilities y. and z.. In sum, it has been shown that
the overall effect of a change in UI on       unemployment may be expressed as

functions   of subsets of ji., p., S., d., y. and z. and the partials of
these measures with respect to a change in the UI system, Ii!,         SI,
d,1 y' 1and z'.1 Since these    elements are not all independent of one another,

values    for all of them are not required to evaluate the effect of a given
change in the UI system on unemployment. Nevertheless, if we are to fully
understand the effects of the UI system on unemployment, we should under-
stand its effects on each of these unemployment related flows.
                                              11




B. Features of the UI System

         A second part of the analytical framework consists of a more detailed

    look at the policy parameters of the UI system. The two major categories

   into which the program features fall are benefits and taxes.

         (1) To be eligible for benefits, the individual must have demonstrated
              an attachment to the labor force by having met requirements as to
               minimum earnings and/or length of employment in a covered job.
         (2) The benefit structure is characterized by minimum and maximum
                levels.
         (3)   There is a schedule relating the level of benefits to past earnings.
               Potential duration of benefits may also vary with earnings history
               with the exact relation differing among states.
         (4)   There is a set of rules   for determining qualification. Criteria
               include having an acceptable reason for separation from the job——
               an individual who has voluntarily separated without good cause
               may be disqualified from receiving benefits or may face a pro-
               longed waiting period—-and a requirement that the individual
               engage in active job search and be ready and willing to accept
               an offer of suitable work.
         (5)   During times of high unemployment, job search requirements may
               be   relaxed and the period of potential benefits extended.

         The UI system is financed by a 3.4 percent federal payroll tax. Credit

   is given against the federal tax     for   employer UI taxes paid to the state,

   provided    that the state adopts an experience rated    system. With the credit

   thefederal tax is .7 percent of the taxable payroll.1 Distinguishing
   characteristics of the UI tax include the following:
         (1)   The UI tax is a payroll tax.
         (2)   There is a ceiling on taxable payroll, currently $6,000 per covered
               worker,  set by the federal government. However, states may raise
               the ceiling above this level.

         1
          .2 percentage points of this tax is a temporary surcharge until the
   UI trust fund loans are repaid. The current estimate is that the surcharge
   will remain in force until the late 1980's.
                                           12




        (3)    The tax paid on behalf of a worker who transfers from one
               employer to another during the taxable year is not transferable.

        (4) According to the predominant system of experience rating, a firm's
             tax rate is based on the ratio of taxes collected in a reserve
             fund after charged benefits to the taxable payroll--where the
               taxable payroll consists of earnings up to $6,000 for each covered
               employee.'
        (5)    The tax schedules are characterized by minimum or maximum rates.
               After some point, the tax rate does not decline as benefit pay-
               ments decrease so that for some firms, the tax contribution exceeds
               benefits drawn by their employees. Other firms never contribute
               as much as their employees draw.
         (6) For those firms whose      tax rates are experience rated,   the adjustment
               in    tax rates to benefits paid is made with a lag.


C. Theoretical Linkages

        The third part of the analytical framework consists of categories

    derived from theory which indicate how and why the behavior of individuals

    and firms may be influenced by the UI system and its features. These

    categories   provide "theoretical linkages" between the public policy and the
    outcome measure of interest. On the supply side of the market, we have
    the theory of labor leisure choice and the theory of occupational choice——

    including relevant considerations from the theory of human capital and

    compensating differentials. In addition, since there is uncertainty and

    perhaps also imperfect knowledge, both search theory and the theory of

    insurance are relevant. On the demand side of the market, there is the

    maximization     hypothesis underiying thetheory of derived demand, relevant

    aspects   of human capital theory as it affects the behavior of the firm and
    the theory of firm behavior in the face of uncertainty. Modifications of
    the theory to reflect the influence of labor market institutions such


        1The tax schedule for all employers in a state may be shifted in ac-
    cordance with the current surplus or deficit position of the reserve fund
    for the state as a whole.
                                                                                                    Figure   1


                                                 Unemployment Flaws and       Stocks                                     Theories Explaining Be-
                                                           2              3           4         5                6       havioral Linkages Between
                                           3.                                                                            UI and Unemployment Re-
                                        Temporary      Permanent        Other        Job                                                                        The UI System
                                                                       Job Loss    Leavers    EntrY     Aaareaate        lated Flows
                                         Layoff         Layoff
A.   Unemployment UI                                                                                                     Supp ly                          Benefits
                                           ,,
B.         Incidenceif                                                                 V                                   Labor—Leisure Choice            Benefit Schedules
                                                                                                                           Occupational Choice               Minimum       and   maximum
C.                                                                                                                           Theory   of Human capi-         benefit levels——re-
                            1                                                                                                tal—Specific Training           lation of benefit
D.                                          P'             I                           I        I                                                            levels to past
                                yl                                                                                           Theoryof Compensating            earnings
                                                                                                                            Differentials
E.                               z.1.                                                                                —                                        Relation of duration
                                                                                                                           Modifications in the               of benefits to past
F.                          SI
                             1                             I                                                               Face of Risk and Un-               earnings
                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                                           certainty
C.          Duration d'                                            V                                                         Theory of Search               Eligibility Rules        and
                                                                                                                                                            Work   Test
                                                                                                                             Theory of Insurance
     Remembering that each partial is taken with respect to a generalized change                                             Job Shopping                     Feature      of Tax Rate
     in the UI system:                                                                                                                                        Schedule
     UI1 = the partial of unemployment                                                                                     Demand                                  Minimum Tax
                                                                                                                                                               •MaximumTax
     P1     the partial of incidence of unemployment                                                                         The Theory   of the Firm--
                                                                                                                             Derived   Demand                      Range of Payments
            the partial of the transition probability from the previous state into                                                                                 or Reserves over
               unemployment                                                                                                  Modification for    Risk              which taxes are
                                                                                                                             and Uncertainty                       adjusted
     yl        the partial of the probability of separation from the previous employer
               or entering the labor force                                                                                                                         Lag in Adjustment
                                                                                                                             Modification for    Human
       1
               the partial of the conditional probability of becoming unemployed given                                       Capital Theory-—Specific         Maximum Taxable
               y.1. andy1                                                                                                                                     roll
           =   the partial of the relevant stock of employed                   or not in the labor force
      Si                                                                                                                                                      Rules    for Charging
           =                                                                                                                                                  Benefits
               the   partial of duration of           unemployment
                                       13




as unions will be relevant if they affect the way in which the UI program

influences unemployment.

     Figure 1 presents the basic features of the analytical framework.

The matrix on the left-hand side of the figure has as its elements the

partials of labor market flows with respect to variations in the parameters

of the UI system. Two   points   may be made about this matrix. First,

notice that the market flows relating UI to unemployment are listed

hierarchically in column 1. Thus, it can be seen in column 1 of the

matrix that to understand how UI affects unemployment, one need not have

full information on each of the flows. For example, y and z, the

differences in the probabilities of separating from the previous state

and of becoming unemployed given a previous separation, when weighted,

determine the value of p, the change in the transition rate from the

previous state to unemployment associated with variation in some feature of

the UI system. Second, the proceeding discussion implies that to aggregate

the partials of more basic flows and determine their influence on unemploy-

ment, the partials must be weighted appropriately, e.g., as called for in

equation 8.

     Each of the features of the UI system which may affect these flows is

listed in the right-hand column of Figure 1. The middle column of Figure 1

reports the major behavioral linkages explaining how and why varying features

of the UI system may change the unemployment related labor market flows.

Much of the rest of this paper is concerned with filling in the details

pertaining to the information in Figure 1.    If we could fill in the first

row of the matrix in Figure 1, it would mean that we knew what the overall
                                     14


effect of the unemployment insurance system on unemployment was. As things

stand, we have most of the required inforamtion only for U, the difference

in temporary layoff unemployment induced by the UI system. And even there,

much more work is called for.

     At this point, one might consider again the need to analyze the relation

of the UI system to all of the flows which determine the level of unemploy-

ment by reason for unemployment. Instead of decomposing unemployment by

reason into the more basic flows which comprise incidence, or duration, why

not proceed directly to analyze the relation between the UI system and the

level of unemployment by reason? The answer is that these basic labor market

flows are not all determined by the same set of market forces. (Although,

as will be noted, there are forces creating interdependence among a number

of the flows, leading to behavioral relations that are more similar than one

might, at first, think). Accordingly, the effect of estimating directly

the relation between the UI system and the level of unemployment by reason

(except, perhaps, the level of temporary layoff unemployment) is to

obscure more basic underlying behavioral relations. In addition, any change

in the relation among structural equations will have the effect of altering

the reduced form relation explaining U' for reasons that cannot be determined

unless each of the underlying structural relations and their relations to

one another are understood.

     It can be seen in Figure 1 that certain boxes corresponding to different

unemployment related flows, including that for U, have been checked. These

checks indicate that we have some reasonably reliable information ——     either
at the empirical or theoretical level --   concerning   the impact of some
                                          15



features of the UI system on the relevant flow. A check means that we know

at least a part of the relevant story -—       not'that   all or most of the story

is available.

      The discussion in the following section is organized according to the

elements of the matrix in Figure 1. It starts in row 1, column 1 and

proceeds element by element across the rows.



                  II. Recent Developments in the Literature

A.     Impact of UI on the Level   of   Unemployment: U

Temporary Layoff Unemployment: U

      To begin the   discussion,   focus on the impact of UI on temporary layoff

unemployment, which falls in the cell in row 1, column 1 of the matrix in

Figure 1.1 Relevant features of the UI system affecting temporary layoff

unemployment include both the benefit and tax schedules. Since temporary

layoff is usually of short duration, factors influencing the potential

duration of benefits are not relevant. Nor is the work test likely to

be important, at least for those with a firm date of recall. The important

feature is the level of benefits as determined by the workers past earnings

and   employment history, and in some cases, number of dependents.
       On the tax side, the amount of UI payroll taxes paid by a firm CT)
is   equal to the product of the tax rate (A) and the taxable payroll (TP)

                                   T=ATP

      1Temporary layoff may be defined in a number of ways. For example, the
 category may include only those with a firm date of recall, those who have a
firm date of recall or expect to be recalled, or it may be defined in ex post
terms as those who were recalled. The definition differs among studies.
                                    I (j




The taxable payroll is equal to the sum of the taxable wages paid to each

worker during each calendar year, with the ceiling on taxable wages per worker

currently equal to $6000. A temporary layoff will not affect directly the

taxable payroll unless the worker will earn less than $6000. However, if

the quit rate from temporary layoff is higher than it is for employed workers,

and if those who quit are replaced, higher temporary layoff rates will be

associated with higher taxable payroll.1 The firm loses credit for taxes

paid on behalf of the worker who quit and must pay the tax on earnings,

up to $6000, paid during that same year to the worker's replacement.

     The UI tax rate will vary when workers are temporarily laid off and

are paid benefits as long as the rate falls within the range where it is

experience rated.. To see how the tax rate is adjusted in light of the




     1Donald 0. Parsons (1977, p. 199) notes that attrition from the total
of those on layoff status is about 10 to 20 percent per month.
                                    17




firm's experience, consider the reserve ratio system which is in place in

32 states.1 The idea of the reserve ratio system of experience rating is to

have the tax rate vary with the amount of reserves in the firm's account

relative to the firm's taxable payroll. Reserves are accumulated from taxes

paid in excess of benefits, or may be negative if benefits paid exceed taxes

for a long enough period. The rate increases (decreases) whenever benefits

paid to the firm's employees exceed (fall below) tax receipts from the firm.

The tax rates are adjusted along a schedule until the flow of benefits and flow

of taxes are equalized, or until it hits a ceiling or floor.

     To help describe the relation of the tax rate to labor turnover, a

simplified version of a diagram from a study by Frank Brechling and

Christopher Jehn (1978) is presented in Figure 2. The tax schedule is

experience rates along segment de and at the point of the discontinuous

jump, bc.2
                                 Figure 2




 period




                                                                   in ti
                                                          taxable payroll


     1Systems in operation in the other states are analyzed by Eleanor Brown
(1979). Brown also considers the tax costs of changing the size of the firm's
labor force.
     2Actual tax schedules, as discussed by Brechling and Jehn and Topel and
Welch (1979), may be more complex. For example, the segment de is not smooth,
but consists of discontinuous jumps. In some cases, the tax rate may vary
with reserves even in the range of negative reserves. For a more complete
description, see the very thorough study by Joseph M. Becker (1972).
                                          18

It can   be seen that firms located on the segments ab , cd     , and ef have
tax    rates which are not experience rated, &Lthougn, as noted there may be some

variation in the tax rate due to the discontinuous jump, bc. Firms with tax rates

which are not experience rated have extreme turnover rates which are either

relatively very high or relatively very low. A firm whose employees con-

sistently collect benefits that exceed the amount of payroll taxes that are

generated when the maximum UI tax rate is charged against its taxable payroll

not only has negative reserves, but in the absence of a floor, would have ever

declining reserves. A firm whose workers infrequently receive UI benefits

may consistently generate more revenue than its workers receive in benefits.

Thus it would have positive reserves and unless the minimum tax rate were

zero, in the absence of a ceiling the firm could have ever growing reserves.1

The rate of adjustment in tax rates     brought about by the effects of changing
turnover   on reserves determines the speed with which the tax flow changes

in response to changes in benefits, and thus the speed of adjustment of the

system. The steeper is de ,      the   more rapid is the adjustment.

        It is worth restating how temporary layoffs affect payroll taxes. As

long as actual   earnings are well above the maximum earnings subject to the
tax,    except for quits from layoffs there is no effect of temporary layoffs

on taxable payroll. Moreover, if the firm's tax rate is at the ceiling or

the floor, the tax rate is not affected by temporary layoffs either. The

firms which pay higher taxes when temporarily laying off their work force

are those with a tax rate within the range where it is experience rated. For

those firms, their tax rate is adjusted, although with a lag, so that in the

steady state, the flow of taxes offsets the flow of benefits paid periodically

to those on temporary layoff.

     1For a description of how individual state systems adjust to large
accumulated surplusses or deficits in the firms' accounts, see Becker (1972).
                                       19




The Basic Theory of ru and Temporary Layoff Unemployment

       Martin Feldstein's (1976) theoretical analysis explores the implications

of imperfect experience rating and a subsidy to recipients of UI payments

which is due to the tax free status of UI benefits. (Current tax law

exempts UI payments from the   income tax for those earning less than $20,000.)
On the supply side, the linkage between the UI system and unemployment is

provided by the labor—leisure choice model in the context of an analysis of

compensating differentials. On the demand side, the analysis is grounded

in the theory of the firm--derived demand.

       To simulate the effects of fluctuations in output demand, it is

assumed in the model that market price is depressed for a specified fraction

of the year. The firm is able to sell all that it produces at whatever

the current price is, but does not store output for later sale. To focus

the analysis on temporary layoff unemployment, it is also assumed that

workers are permanently attached to the firm. Then, constraining the

money wages paid to be the same in the on and off season, Feldstein asks

what   combination of wage and employment policy would minimize labor costs,
and what difference unemployment insurance makes to the calculation. Without
addressing   directly the question of the shifting of the payroll tax, the

model allows UI tax payments to be a function of total UI benefits paid.

The value of UI benefits net of the income tax and the UI payroll tax enters

into the worker's calculations.

       Feldstein's analysis explains why firms which experience seasonal

fluctuations   in demand and face   UI tax schedules that areimperfectly

experience rated are encouraged to lay off more workers than they would
                                        20



if the firm paid the full cost of benefits received by their workers --

i.e.,   if there were complete experience rating. The income tax exemption

for UI benefits is also shows to encourage layoffs.

        It is interesting to take note of the very simple effect UI has in a

static model in which there is no uncertainty and a supply curve to the firm

that is perfectly elastic in terms of utility equivalents —-    i.e.,   in which

labor supply to the firm is perfectly elastic, but the wage (height of the

elastic labor supply curve) is adjusted to reflect the value of nonwage

elements of the compensation package. If UI benefits are taxable as ordinary

income, the effect of unemployment is to reduce wages, replacing a compensa-

ting differential which otherwise would arise to equate returns to those in

occupations with and without unemployment. A fully experience rated tax

raises the firm's costs by as much as the UI benefits reduce them, leaving

no net effect of a perfectly rated UI system.

        Feldstein's study provides a framework which is extremely useful for

understanding the impact of UI taxes in the context of a market structure

in which possibilities for substitution exist both on the supply and demand

sides of the labor market.1 A point stressed in the paper is that if a



     1Kenneth Burdett and Bryce Hool (1979) extend Feldstein's analysis to the
case where workers face an imperfect capital market, limiting their ability to
borrow and lend. In such a circumstance, the pattern of consumption over time
becomes tied to the pattern of the earnings stream,rather than simply to its
present value. UI may then substitute for the rolO played by the capital
market, allowing consumption to take on a more ideal pattern over time, even
in the face of unemployment. Daniel Hamermesh (l979b) finds that the true
situation lies between the extremes of perfect and imperfect capital markets.
Thus,while for some the funds provided by UI effectively relax a borrowing
constraint and allow increased current consumption, others treat the benefits as
additions to permanent income, increasing consumption in current and future
periods.
                                      21




long—run view is taken of choice on the supply side, much of temporary

layoff unemployment is voluntary. It results from the choice of an occupa-

tion with a known expected unemployment experience. This is so even though

any particular   incidence of unemployment may be involuntary.
    While the    theory is applied to analyze temporary layoffs, there is no

reason why this general approach may not be used to explain that portion

of permanent layoffs which are recurrent and expected——e.g., in the

construction industry. Some required mofidifications are discussed below.

     Martin Baily (1977i) has written a paper which differs in some detail

from, but is closely related to Feldstein's. It assumes a two—period model

in which workers formulate expectations as to the firm's behavior in response

to demand fluctuations. The supply price of labor is based on these expec-

tations and opportunities elsewhere. The firm in Baily's model is free

to adjust hiring and hours worked in both periods.' As in Feldstein's

paper, demand fluctuations are represented by variations in output price.

However, in this model, workers may search for a new job from layoff, but

at a cost. They will do so if the expected benefits warrant it.

     The Feldstein-Baily theoretical structure is elaborated on in a paper

by Frank Brechling (1979),in which he includes a complex specification

for the UI payroll tax structure and examines the effect of the UI system on

the firm's incentives to engage in temporary layoffs. The Brechling analysis

concentrates on the demand side of the market.

     John Abowd and Orley Ashenfelter (1979) analyze in further detail the

roles of compensating differentials for unemployment and of unemployment


     'Topel and Welch (1979) analyze this result in some detail. They note
that subsidized UI benefits may lead firms to reduce weeks per year worked
per employee, while expanding the size of the labor force.
                                        22


insurance in influencing labor supply. In their mode',it is recognized
explicitly that workers are not free to choose hours of work for those

jobs which are characterized by involuntary unemployment. The constraint

is built into the specification of the labor supply curve.

     Looking back at the list of theoretical linkages in Figure 1 and

comparing it to the behavior analyzed in the papers mentioned above, it

appears that the impact of the UI system on temporary layoff has yet to be

analyzed in a model which fully treats two important aspects of behavior --

adjustments to risk and uncertainty and specific training. The role of UI
as insurance has received some attention (see, for example, Frank Stafford's

(1977) paper and the discussions by Topel and Welch (1979) and Ithowd and

Ashenfelter (1979) ),   but   have yet to be incorporated in a full model

analyzing the impact of UI on temporary layoffs which considers both the supply

and demand sides of the market. Similarly, interactions between specific

training and unemployment insurance and the reasons why these may affect the

probability of temporary layoff have not been analyzed adequately. An

important reason for believing that specific training and unemployment

insurance may interact is that imperfect experience rating reduces the cost

to the firm of placing workers on recall layoff, rather than keeping them on the

payroll but underemployed. Since workers with specific training are the ones

the firm would most like to retain in the long run, and the UI subsidy

reduces the cost of retaining them, it may lower the costs of maintining a

work force which has a high level of specific training.


Empirical Analyses of Temporary Layoff Unemployment

     Feldstein (1978) estimates the relation of the temporary layoff unem-

ployment rate to predicted UI benefit-replacement rates (benefit-wage
                                     23

ratios) and finds strong evidence of an important relationship.1 More

specifically, he estimates an equation based on data from the March 1971

Current Population Survey. The dependent variable is a binary variable

indicating whether the individual is on temporary layoff. The independent

variables incorporate predicted values of UI benefits as a percent of net wages,

which are available both for those who were and were not unemployed during

the period of observation, demographic characteristics and measures indicating

occupation industry and union membership. Ordinary least squares is used.

    The temporary unemployment rate for the sample was 1.6 percent. Coeffi-

cient estimates for various versions of the benefit measure suggest that in

comparison with no UI system, the temporary layoff unemployment rate has

been raised by roughly one-half by the current, average level of benefits.2

Variation in UI benefits is found to have the greatest effect when benefit-

replacement rates lie above 30 to 50 percent. No direct measure of the

degree of experience rating is incorporated in Feldstein's estimates. The

exact interpretation of the coefficient of the UI benefit measure -—   i.e.,
what part of the variation in temporary layoffs should be attributed to

which parameters of the UI benefit and tax schedules —- depends on the

relation among the parameters and the resulting relation between the degree

of experience rating and benefit levels.



     1Hutchens (1979) paper includes an empirical analysis of a supply side
relation consistent with the structural supply equation in the Baily-Feldstein
model. His analysis considers both temporary and permanent layoffs.

     2Remember the caveat noted earlier. If there were no public UI system,
some alternative system with unknown characteristics would have emerged. That
system, however, is likely to have been fully experience rated, so that UI
benefits and tax payments would not only match at the aggregate (state)
level, as they now do over the long term, but there would be no cross-
subsidy among firms within each state.
                                    24



    What one cannot tell from these results is the importance of worker
attachment to the firm. Feldstein's model assumes permanent attachment.
As noted, taxable payroll is unlikely to be affected in that circumstance

by temporary layoff. To the extent that seasonal separations in construc-

tion are permanent, taxable payroll may be increased by turnover. This

phenomenon is further analyzed in the discussion of permanent layoffs.1


Unemployment for Reasons Other Than Temporary Layoff: U, U, U, U

     Looking across row 1 of the Table in Figure 1, the other unemployment

measures which may be affected by the UI system are unemployment due to

indefinite layoff, other job loss, job leaving or entry. As noted in the

introduction to this section, no direct information is available on the

effect of UI on the level of unemployment for each of these reasons. Infor-

mation is available on the impact of UI on the underlying flows found in

rows 2 to 5 of the table. We turn now to a discussion of that information.




     1Terrence C. Halpin (1979) finds a negative impact of the relation
of taxable to total wage base on seasonal fluctuations in .construction
employment, but not on seasonal fluctuations in employment for two other
industries he analyzes——women's, misses' and junior's outerwear, and
millwork, plywood, veneer and other prefabricated wood products. There
is a further discussion of these results below.
                                            25


B.   Impact of UI on the Incidence of Unemployment: p (row 2)

             Stephen T. Marston's (1979) study of the impact of the UI system on

     the incidence of unemployment for those who quit is the only study to be

     classified as falling      in one of the categories indicated in row 2 ——

     i.e.,    to be concerned directly with the impact of the UI system on the

     incidence of unemployment. In the case of those who quit, the state's

     eligibility rules are a major determinant of the expected value of UI

     benefits. In some states, the waiting period is prolonged for job

     leavers. In others, they are barred from collecting benefits at all.

             Marston uses as a measure of the value of UI benefits a measure of

     benefits weighted by the fraction of the spell over which an individual

     can collect. His regressions are based on pooled CPS data for three

     years. Independent variables include demographic factors, labor market

     variables including the wage and broad occupational dummies. Marston

     can find no significant effect of the expected benefit level on quits.

     Thus there is no evidence that making UI benefits available to those

     who quit encourages quits.

             The theoretical basis for Marston's analysis of quits is rooted in

     the supply side of the market. An analysis based on the demand side is

     presented by Brechling. That study, which is discussed in the appropriate

     section below, focuses on the incentives of the firm to follow policies

     which lower the quit rate —— a component of the incidence of quit

     unemployment. Neither the theoretical framework in Marston's study nor
                                     26


the empirical analysis incorporates the role of specific training (job
          1
tenure)


C.   The Impact of UI on Transition Probabilities into Unemployment: p

     As is apparent from the table in Figure 1, none of the relevant

studies has examined the impact of UI on this transition probability.

As will be seen, however, there is important, related theoretical and

empirical work at a slightly more disaggregated level of analysis --     i.e.
on the probability of leaving employment or not in labor force status.

D.   The Probability of Leaving Employment or Not in the Labor Force
Status: y

Incidence of Temporary Layoffs:

     Using BLS establishment survey data and data pertaining to certain

parameters of state UI systems, Frank Brechling (1979) attempts a further

test of the Feldstein-Baily analysis of the relation of UI to the incidence

of temporary layoffs. He points out that the existence of a feedback effect

of UI benefits on wages is a key to the prediction of the Baily-Feldstein

model that with current income tax treatment of UI benefits and imperfect

experience rating, an increase in UI benefits increases layoffs. In the

absence of such a feedback effect, the higher the benefits, the higher the

cost of temporary layoffs to those firms which are not at the maximum tax

rate. But a firm whose workers do not value the higher UI benefits will not

face a lower wage to compensate (or more than compensate) for the tax

costs. Thus the firm has less incentive to engage in temporary layoffs if

there is no feedback effect of UI benefits on wages.


     1Leighton and Mincer (1979) present an analysis of the implications of
job tenure for quits. J. Peter Mattila (1974) has pointed to the tendency for
those who quit to move directly from one job to another -— underlining the
importance of distinguishing between the incidence of quit related unemploy-
ment and the probability of a quit.
                                        27



     Brechling does not standardize for many of the exogenous measures

included in Feldstein's empirical analysis (1978). Nor is there any

standardization for the role of human capital. He does, however, specify

in more detail than in Feldstein the role of the parameters which determine

the shape of the UI payroll tax function as illustrated in Figure 2 above,

noting, in addition, that the parameter of the UI system employed by

Feldstein ——   the   fraction of benefits charged to the firm —— may be

endogenous to the analysis.1

     Findings from Brechling's empirical analysis are (as Brechling views

them), only a first, rough attempt at estimation. Not only are there the

ominissions noted above, but dependent variables refer to aggregated

categories which may include permanent layoffs. Moreover, the benefit

measure used in industry equations refers to the average value for the

state. It is not a parameter from the benefit schedule, nor is it

calculated separately by industry. Nevertheless, it is of interest to

note that the coefficient estimates which indicate the impact of benefits

and tax parameters are consistent with a Baily—Feldstein type of model.2

     1Brechling also discusses and estimates the impact of UI benefits on hours
worked and on duration. The duration results are discussed in the relevant
section below.

     2Brechling finds a positive effect of the benefit level on layoffs, with
a t-ratio greater than 1.5 in 8 of 16 industries. But although the sign is
positive, the t—statistic is less than 1.5 for the benefit variable in an
equation computed with data for all of the industries taken together. An
equal number of positive and negative coefficients with t's above 1.5 is
estimated for benefits in the equations with recalls or hours worked specified
as the dependent variable.
                                  28




    The findings with respect to tax rates support the view that layoffs

and recalls are responsive to the degree of experience rating. While no

measures are incorporated in Brechling's study to indicate how many firms face,

or what fraction of benefits paid are to workers of firms facing,the

maximum or minimum tax rates, these findings indicate that variation in

the parameters of the tax rate schedule have the expected influence. An

increase in the maximum tax increases the range for experience rating

and is associated with reduced layoffs and rehires. An increase in the

minimum tax rate reduces the range over which experience rating applies,

and as would be expected, is found to increase the rates of layoffs and

rehires


Incidence of P3rmanent Layoffs,y: The Theory

     It has been noted above that payroll taxes paid are equal to the

product of the tax rate and taxable payroll. Each of these elements may

be influenced by the number (flow) of permanent layoffs. The basic

theoretical work analyzing this relationship is due to Brechling (1977).

The new element there is the relation between turnover rates and the taxable

payroll—-a relation thatmay be traced to the effect of the ceiling on

earnings subject to the payroll tax. When a worker is separated from



     'In the layoff equations for a total of 16 industries, the measure of
the ceiling tax rate has a negative coefficient with a t statistic above
1.5 in 11 industries and a positive coefficient with a t above 1.5 in none.
In the rehire equations the corresponding numbers are 6 and 0. The minimum
tax rate has a positive coefficient with a t above 1.5 in 5 equations
explaining layoffs and a negative coefficient with a t above 1.5 in 2
equations. For rehires the numbers for the coefficients of the minimum
tax variable are 6 and 3.
                                         29




the firm and not replaced, if the worker has not yet earned the full

$6000 during the calendar year, the separation reduces the taxable

payroll. If $6000 has     already   been earned, the layoff does not immediately

reduce the taxable payroll, but will beginning the next year. Paying a

benefit to the worker who separates (e.g., because he does not locate a

job immediately after layoff) reduces the size of the reserve fund. If

reserves fall relative to taxable payrolls as long as the tax rate is on

the portion of the schedule that is experience rated, there subsequently

will be an adjustment in the tax rate. If the tax rate is not experience

rated, the only effect of the layoff on the firm related to the UI system) is

that taxes to be paid are reduced because the taxable payroll is

reduced.

       Turn now to the case of recurring permanent layoffs where, at some time

after the layoff, the worker is replaced. How might such layoffs with

replacement occur? In some industries, e.g., construction, permanent layoffs

and separation from the contractor commonly follow the completion of a job.

More generally, quits from temporary layoff turn them into permanent
                 1
layoffs expos.        But a worker let go as a result of a downward fluc-

tuation in demand may also be replaced when that fluctuation is reversed.

       Brechling has analyzed the incentive for the firm to reduce turn-

over — an incentive   created by the existence of a ceiling on wages paid to
an individual that are subject to a payroll tax. The reason for this


      1Quits from layoff are examined by John M. Barron and Wesley
Mellow, (1980).
                                      30




incentive is as follows. A firm cannot claim credit for the tax paid

during   the calendar year by another employer on behalf of a newly hired
employee.    Nor when calculating the tax to be paid on behalf of a worker's

replacement can   it claim credit for the tax it paid during the calendar
year on behalf of an employee who has since departed. As long as a

worker's wage exceeds the maximum yearly wage subject to the UI tax,

some of the worker's earnings will be tax free. But if the worker turns

over during the year and is replaced, a tax must be paid on the earnings

of both the worker who left and the replacement.1 This means there is

a penalty for turnover even if the workers who leave e.çperience no

unemployment before securing a new         or if, because of their unemployment

history, workers who leave are ineligible for UI benefits.2 Because of



     1For example, with a tax base of $6,000 and yearly earnings of $15,000,
if   the worker stays with the firm for
                                      the full year, tax must be paid on
$6,000 of earnings. If a worker quits or is dismissed in the middle of the
year and is replaced, $12,000 of the earnings paid for a single year of work
is subject to the tax. A turnover with replacement that occurs near the
beginning or end of the year may involve a smaller cost to the firm than one
in the middle of the year.




     2Brechling demonstrates that at a taxable wage base equal to
one—half of the worker's yearly earnings, the firm has the greatest incentive
to reduce turnover. The incentive provided by the relation between permanent
turnover and the taxable payroll is strongest in the case of firms which are
subject to the maximum or minimum tax rates. For in this case, there is no
initial balance between the flow of UI benefits paid and the flow of UI taxes.
Thus, an increase in the taxable payroll associated with higher turnover will
raise not just the stock of reserves, but the yearly flow of taxes into the
UI system. This will be so whether or not higher permanent turnover is
associated with higher benefit payments.
                                          31



the   relation between separation rate and the amount        of   the wage bill subject

to tax, a rise in the separation rate due to permanent layoffs may affect

the payroll     tax costs to the firm whether       or not there is perfect experience

rating.   But the   nature of the effect will depend on whether the firm's

current   tax   rate is experience rated.

       These relations can be seen most easily by considering payroll taxes in

a steady state. Following Brechling, along the experience rated portion of

the tax schedule, the tax rate (A) is given by




                                    A =                  R
                                            a   -




where a is the intercept of the experience rated portion of the tax schedule

in Figure 2 and s is its slope. R is the absolute amount of reserves. As

noted previously, TP is the firm's taxable payroll. If the steady state

equilibrium occurs along the experience rated portion of the tax schedule,

the   flow of taxes (T) and benefits (B) are equalized


                                   A      TP    =    B




Substituting     into   the equilibrium condition the equation for the tax rate,
reserves in     the steady state are given by




                                    R =   -(aTP - B).



The tax rate is simply
                                             32




                                         A
                                                  TP




Since increased turnover rates raise         the taxable payroll, in the steady
state,   higher turnover raises the required stock of reserves and may lower

the tax rate. As long as the tax rate remains experience rated, the per

period flow of taxes changes only in accordance with any addition to

charged benefits associated with higher turnover.

      The   above discussion   assumes that the firm's tax rate is experience

rated.    With a turnover rate too high       for experience rating (for firms on

the   left-hand portion of the tax schedule), the tax             flow   in equilibrium
is less than   the   benefit flow,


                                     A       TP <      B.



The opposite is true for firms (on the right—hand side of the schedule) with
very low turnover. For both groups, anything that increases the taxable
payroll   will increase the flow of taxes. Thus, an           increase in the per
period    rates of permanent layoff will raise the flow of taxes, although it

will not affect the tax rate.

       Note that quit rates from layoff are likely to be higher the further

away the expected recall date and the less firm             the   prospect for recall.

Since the value of UI benefits drawn by a worker varies negatively with

the quit rate from layoff, other things the same, firms with no experience

rating   will have the greatest incentive to
                                       33



offer    a certain date of recall and avoid the increase in payroll tax

costs associated with turnover and replacement.


Incidence of Permanent Layoffs,y: Empirical Evidence

      To test for any effects of the ceiling on taxable payroll and para-

meters of the tax structure on turnover, Frank Brechling and Christopher

Jehn (1978) estimate equations with turnover rates as dependent variables

and maximum taxable payroll and tax parameters as independent variables.1

Their data is from the establishment survey and is aggregated into categories

by two digit manufacturing industry, state and year. They do not have

separate    data on rates of temporary and permanent layoffs, but in addition
to   information on total layoff rates they know the accession and   rehire
rates. The parameters of the tax rate schedule are found to have effects
in the expected direction. These effects are very similar to those noted
in the preceeding discussion of Brechling's findings in his paper on
temporary layoffs. The impact of the ceiling on earnings subject to
the UI payroll tax is also in the expected direction. As the theory leads
one to expect, the greatest impact on permanent turnover occurs where the
ceiling on wages subject to the UI tax is roughly one half of average
wages. These results are especially strong for quits and are discussed
below.



     1An intermediate step in studying the effects of the tax structure and
experience rating on turnover is to determine the distribution of firms
along the segments of the tax schedule in Figure 2. For evidence on the
amount of benefits paid to workers from firms with tax rates that are not
experience rated, see Becker (1972) and Topel and Welch (1979).
                                       34




Incidence of Permanent Layoffs, y2: Remaining Issues

     Brechling and Jehn's study is rooted in demand theory. To gain a more

complete    understanding of the effects of the UI tax system and imperfect
experience   rating   on permanent layoffs, it will be necessary to build

into their model a supply side equation indicating the impact of UI

benefits and the probability of layoffs on the wage. This is essentially

the strategy Brechling followed in attempting to integrate his work on

temporary layoffs with that of Feldstein.

     A supply side analysis which could be merged vith Brechling's demand

side framework to make a more complete structural model is contained in

Robert Hutchens' (1979) paper. He analyzes the tradeoff on the supply

side between wages and the probability of a layoff, incorporating into

his analysis the role of UI benefits.1

     What other factors should be brought into the discussion of the

relation   of the UI system to permanent layoff? Consider in this context

the role of specific training. It has already been mentioned that there

is a complementary relationship between imperfect experience rating,

temporary    layoffs and specific training because imperfect experience rating
subsidizes temporary layoffs and reduces the cost of retaining specifically


     'Hutchens also provides some empirical estimates. His major concern
is with the tradeoff between layoffs and wages. Accordingly, his investiga-
tion of the impact of the UI system is not very detailed. His results
suggest that more generous UI benefits are associated with higher probabilities
of layoff.
                                        35




trained workers during periods of depressed demand. There are also other
reasons why the ul system and specific training interact to influence
jointly the firm's layoff policies. First, a tax on earnings encourages
the   substitution of untaxed for taxed inputs. A tax on a part of earnings

encourages the substitution of untaxed for taxed labor——e.g., skilled

for unskilled workers, since a larger part of the earnings of the skilled

will be tax free (John Pencaval, 1970). Investment in specific training

provides returns to the firm that are not subject to the payroll tax,

since such investment and associated compensation policy raise worker

productivity by more than the wage. In addition, to the extent that

specific   training adds to workers' earnings, it       may be expected to do so

in   a range that is high enough not to be subject to the UI payroll tax.
For   this reason, UI may encourage   further investment in specific training,
thereby   reducing the incidence of indefinite layoffs, separations for

other reasons and quits.

      Second, as Brechling points out, the cost of turnover is increased

where there is a ceiling on the amount       of   wages subject to the payroll tax.

To the extent that firms share the benefits of specific training with the

workers, and in that way reduce turnover, specific training will also

reduce the cost to the firm   of   the UI payroll tax) Thus, specific

training   provides an added benefit to the firm where the UI system exists
and is financed by a payroll tax system with a ceiling on taxable wage.
      Third,   to the extent that: a) the UI system encourages more extensive



     1Nicholas M. Kiefer and George R. Neumann (1979) find that longer past
job tenure is associated with a larger decline in the reemployment wage of
those separated, implying that the loss of specific training to job changers
is greater for those who spent more time with their last employer.
                                    36



search and brings about more perfect matches between potential employees

and jobs, and b) firms are more willing to invest in specific training

the more perfect the match, the UI system may encourage investment in

specific training. An implication, noted again in discussing implica-

tions for future research, is that the interaction between the UI system

and specific training might reduce the incidence of job separation and

increase job tenure.

     One final point germane to a discussion of the impact of the UI

system on layoffs is suggested by comparing the list of theoretical

linkages between the UI system and unemployment related market flows

listed in Figure 1 with the theoretical linkages considered in the studies

reviewed above. The models already discussed—-—those analyzing the

influence of both temporary and permanent layoffs———assume that firms

and workers are risk neutral. They generally ignore any role for pure

insurance. A more complete approach would consider the relation of UI to

layoffs, occupational choice or firm   hiring   and inventory policy in a world

in which individuals and firms prefer to avoid risk. Martin Baily (1977b)

and Frank Stafford (1977) provide relevant discussions. Topel and Welch

(1979) also discuss relevant material on the role of unemployment

insurance as insurance.


Incidence of Quits: y
     From the relation of the ui system to permanent layoff, we turn now to

consider the next labor market flow noted in the analytical framework for

which any relevant information is available--i.e., the incidence of quits.

     In discussing studies of the relation of the UI system to the
                                        37



probabiliby      of quitting and becoming unemployed, mention was made of

Marston's (1979) study—-—a study which considers only behavior on the

supply side of the market. Effects of the UI system on the firm's

incentive to pursue policies which reduce the incidence of quits is

considered by Brechling (1977). As was true in his analysis of permanent

layoffs, of central concern in Brechling's study is the incentive

created   by the impact of turnover on taxable payroll. In this analysis,
however, it plays the central role. The reason is that benefits paid
to someone who quits are not normally chargeable to the firm where the
person   last worked (Becker, 1972). Accordingly, the payroll tax rate

will not change as a direct result of any benefits drawn by the person

who quits.          The only route by which such turnover can    affect   payroll

tax costs is through its impact on taxable payroll.

      What does this mean for the relation of the firm's costs to the quit

rate? As has been pointed out, the steady state condition for equilibrium

in the UI system for firms with tax rates on the experience rated segment

of   their tax schedule is that the flow of tax payments equal the flow
of benefit payments. Since quits raise taxable payroll in the same way
that permanent layoffs do, yet the flow of tax payments         remains unchanged

for   experience rated firms, this must mean that the tax rate varies
negatively with quits in proportion to the positive variation in taxable
           1
payroll.


       1Note that there will be a once and    for all increase in the stock         of
required       reserves associated with higher quit rates for a firm with a
tax rate that is on the experience rated portion of the tax schedule.
                                         38



       Of course, if the tax rate is not on the experience rated portion
of the tax   schedule,   then the flow of tax payments will be increased as

quits   increase, providing the firm with an    incentive to reduce quits

by    adjusting hiring or personnel   policies or compensation. It should

be   stressed that this taxable payroll effect attributable to the $6000
ceiling on taxable payroll provides an incentive to reduce turnover
even in the absence of chargeable benefits and is       very much magnified

where   there is an absence of experience rating.
       One part of the Brechling and Jehn study noted earlier uses data
on turnover in manufacturing by state and year to analyze the relation
of parameters of the UI     tax   system and of the   ceiling on taxable payroll

in the state to the incidence of quits. The most impressive results in

the quit equation are for the effect of the ceiling on taxable payroll.

Signs are as expected with t—ratios exceeding 1.5 in 10 of 16 two—digit

manufacturing industries) Indeed, in an equation for all manufacturing,

the   ceiling is found to have maximum effect on quits when it is roughly
one half of annual earnings, which is the value predicted by Brechling's

analysis   of the relation between the marginal cost of a turnover and the
taxable wage base.
       Again, these results are suggestive. But there are no controls for
individual characteristics or for the role of human capital. It would         be
quite   interesting to carry on this type of analysis using a micro-data

sample where the state is identified, and if possible where some information

is given on job tenure (as in the Michigan Panel Study on .Income Dynamics



     1For the four industries in which an incorrect sign is; found, none
of the relevant coefficients is significant.
                                      39




or   the Parnes Data).
           interesting point about the effect of the ceiling on taxable
wages is that in a dynamic world with continuous turnover and replacement,
this is a feature of the UI system that acts to reduce turnover———having
the opposite effect on unemployment from other better known effects, such
as   those of UI benefits on duration.

       Despite the potential effect of the ceiling on payroll subject to

UI taxes, results may sometimes be unaffected if a measure of the

ceiling is not included as an    independent variable in a cross—section
regression    relating parameters of the tax system to unemployment. The

reason is that during some time periods, the value for the ceiling does

not vary very much among states. That is especially true if the Federal

ceiling has recently been increased.1 This does not mean, however, that

the effects of ceiling on turnover should be ignored in summing up the

impact of the UI system on unemployment. It does mean that difficulties

may be encountered in attempting to estimate its impact in cross—section

studies.


     1The ceiling on the taxable payroll varies moderately among states,
and in some years very little. For example, some interstate variation
in the taxable wage is evident in the period covered by the Brechling-Jehn
study (1963—1967). At the end of the 1965 eighteen states had raised the
taxable wage base above the $3,000 federal level. For most of these
eighteen states the level was set at $3,600 (Merrill G. Murray, 1966, p. 36).
Ten years later only six states had tax bases exceeding the $4,200 federal
level which went into effect three years earlier (Hainermesh, 1977, p. 7) .  If
there has been only limited variation in the ceiling on taxable payrolls,
this means that even though a study may have ignored the incentive for
limiting turnover from this source, estimates of other coefficients obtained
are not biased. The omitted independent variable was effectively held
constant.
                                         40


Interdependence Among Labor Market     Flows
     Before   leaving the discussion of how the UI system affects the

incidence of turnover from employment for various reasons, it is appro-

pritate to note that the incidence of temporary layoffs, permanent layoffs,

other job loss and quits may be jointly rather than independently determined.

Most of the studies of the impact of the UI system on these various

turnover rates do not consider such interdependence in formulating and

interpreting estimating equations.

     Consider three reasons for the existence of interdependence in

turnover rates. First, as Stephen T. Marston (1979, p. 17) notes when

disucssing Feldstein's analysis of temporary layoffs: "If firms respond

(as Feldstein asserts) by increasing layoffs, some workers may be less

likely to quit, anticipating they will become unemployed anyway through

layoffs." Furthermore, It is especially important when longitudinal data

are used to consider the implications of quits from layoffs for inter-

dependence in the determination of temporary and permanent layoffs. For in

this case, temporary and   permanent   layoff are defined on an ex post basis.

Consequently, a quit from layoff turns what would otherwise be a temporary

spell of unemployment into a permanent one. A second reason why inter-

dependence may be important is provided by the human capital literature.

The analysis of specific training points to the very close relation between

the decisions to lay a worker off temporarily and permanently) Therole

of the UI system in influencing such decisions has been discussed

above. A third reason, namely potential

     1
         Gary S. Becker's (1975) book is a basis reference.
                                          41



interdependence between the quit rate and the rate of discharge for
cause,is    discussed by James   Medoff (1979) in the context of an analysis
of   the impact of unions on layoffs.

      An implication of such interdependence is that equations designed

to estimate the impact of the UI system on each type of turnover may

require a common set of explanatory variables. For example, even

though the cost of temporary layoffs      to the firm is not likely to be
influenced   by the    ceiling on payroll subject to the UI tax, the relative
incidence    of temporary layoff may be influenced by the ceiling on taxable
payroll    because the relative costs of quits and permanent       layoffs    are

influenced by the height of the ceiling.

       One more aspect of interdependence among labor market flows and

the potential impact of the UI system should be mentioned. The standard

approach to determining whether the UI system facilitates more efficient

search is to analyze the impact of UI benefits on wages subsequent to

unemployment (see, for example, Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Ronald Oaxaca,

1976) .    Finis   Welch (1977) has   pointed   out some difficulties with such

an approach. An alternative approach, consistent with our framework

for analysis, is to investigate whether higher UI benefits are associated

with another implied effect of a better job match—--stronger attachment

to the job. The better the match between a worker and a finn,           the    less

likely a    permanent separation ought to be. This means that, other things
the   same, if the longer duration of unemployment brought about by the

availability of UI benefits is associated with more effective search and

a better match, a result may be a lower rate of incidence of permanent
                                       42



layoffs or quits in states which offer higher UI replacement rates.
       Available studies do not provide reliable information about the
effects of UI benefits on incidence of permanent turnover. For example,
in the case of quits, neither the Brechling and Jehn study nor the
Mars ton study provides an indication of whether the incidence of quits
or   quit unemployment is reduced in states that offer higher UI benefits.

The Brechling and Jehn study includes no measure of UI benefits.

Marston's measure of UI benefits is weighted by the probability it

will be received by a person who quits. This is inappropriate if one

is trying to isolate the effect of duration in the previous spell on the

probability of a subsequent quit.

      A second measure of firmer job attachment is job tenure. However,

to produce a reliable analysis of the impact of UI on job tenure or

permanent turnover, a more detailed modeling effort which spells out

the role played   by specific training and the   implications of the UI system

for   job tenure and turnover   is required.


Number   of Spells
      Having discussed the impact of the UI system on the incidence of
a separation from past employment, consider its impact on a measure
related to incidence———the number of spells per person. A technique for
measuring   the probability of repeated spells and   attempting   to isolate

the role of heterogeneity———that is, individual specific characteristics

leading to repeated separations and spells of unemployment———is discussed

by Linda Leighton and Jacob Mincer (1979). It would be of interest to
                                               43



     determine    how much, if any, of the impact of the UI system is due to
     its   effect on the likelihood of repeated spells of unemployment rather
     than to its impact on the probability of a random individual experiencing
     at    least one separation. While the data are available for such an

     investigation,        it has not been undertaken.
            If we are to understand the relation of UI to unemployment associated
     with repeated spells, the following questions should be investigated:'
          •  Do UI benefits and taxes affect the likelihood of individuals
     experiencing         repeated spells of unemployment? Of repeated spells

     resulting in permanent separation?
             •
                 What portion of the probability of repeated spells and    of total

     time   spent unemployed is due to individual differences in preference or
     individual characteristics (heterogeneity) and what part is due to the
     fact that a person with short tenure on the current job has a greater
     likelihood of turnover? How does UI influence this outcome?



E.   The Impact of UI on the Probability of Unemployment Conditional on a
     Turnover,      z'.
                      1

            There    has been no separate study of the relation of parameters of the
     UI system to the probability of unemployment conditional on a turnover.


           1Heterogeneity    may affect duration as well as indidence of unemploy-
     ment. More      specifically, heterogeneity may lead to adverse selection as
     those with      a strong preference for leisure time choose jobs where permanent
     separation      is more likely and then prolong their spells. Additional questions
     for future      investigation are;
            Does duration differ for those experiencing repeated spells? Is the
     impact of UI on duration different for those experiencing repeated spells?
                                                 44



     One might    expect   that in the   case   of a temporary layoff there is little

     room for the tjl system to affect the value of such a probability. On

     the other hand, it may be argued that the propensity to locate a job

     before quitting and thus avoid experiencing unemployment varies

     negatively with the expected value of UI benefits to those who quit.

     But, as noted, Marston's (1979) findings do not support this argument.

            It   might be expected that UI benefits affect the probability of
     unemployment by influencing the probability of          an unemployed person--—

     either   on temporary      layoff or permanently separated—--taking a temporary

     position, perhaps on a part—time basis. This effect should depend on

     both   the relative level of UI benefits and        the way   these benefits are
     reduced in the face of part—time work. Raymond Munts (1970) presents
     evidence that work activity is influenced by rules governing the payment
     of partial benefits.
F.   The Impact of the UI System on the Stocks of Those Employed and Not In
     the   Labor Force: S.'
                            1

             If the UI system affects transition rates into and out of employment
     and thereby the stock of unemployed, it also affects the stocks of the

     employed and those not in labor force. There are at least three reasons

     why, as part of our analysis of the impact of UI on unemployment, we

     should be interested in determining the effects of the UI system on. the

     number employed and not in the labor force. First, as demonstrated in

     Section I, a portion of the effect of the UI system on unemployment

     results from its impact on these stocks. Accordingly, to determine the
                                     45


full impact of UI on unemployment, its impact on the number employed or

not in the labor force must be understood.

      Second, it is important to determine Whether any increases ——     or,
in certain instances, decreases ——   in   the number of unemployed attribut-

able to the UI system come from its effect on employment or the number

not in the labor force. Most crucially, we would like to know whether any

addition to the stock of unemployed represents a real effect of a reporting

effect. It is a real effect if those who would have been employed in

the absence of UI choose unemployment because of its availability. It

is a reporting effect if, for example, some put off exit from the labor

force in order to remain qualified for UI benefits.

      Third, the fact that certain aspects of the UI system may affect

the stocks of those employed or not in the labor force provides further

opportunity to test for the empirical importance of effects suggested by

various theories.

      Three recent studies which consider the effects of the UI system

on employment and/or not in labor force time will be mentioned. One is

a study of seasonal employment patterns by Terrance C. Halpin (1979).

The second is a study by Daniel Harnermesh (1979a) which examines UI

induced effects on labor force participation that, in turn, are reflected

in employment. Hamermesh's is a supply side study of behavior in the

short term and is based on data for married women. The third is a study



      1An alternative is to use the estimates of the impact of UI on the
nine transition rates among the three states of unemployment, employment
and not in the labor force to produce an estimate of the full impact of
UI on unemployment. For a discussion of the appropriate formulae, see
Stephen T. Marston (1976) and Ronald G. Eherenberg (1979).
                                  46


by Gary Solon (1979) concerning the effects of extended benefits on

unemployment, employment and not in labor force status for a sample of

the long term unemployed.

      There are two important innovations in Halpin's study. First, he

includes as an independent variable a measure designed to capture

seasonal shifts in the demand curve (weather conditions by state). The

presence of a direct measure of the position of the demand curve acts

to reduce specification error in a study such as his which draws on

demand side behavior. Second, he makes an effort to measure directly

the degree of experience rating. He finds that for two of three

industries examined, more perfect experience rating is associated with

reduced seasonal employment fluctuations.1

      Two effects are considered in Hamermesh's study. On the one hand,

women who work and earn beyond a threshold level this period are entitled

to receive UI benefits next period, if they become unemployed for

acceptable reasons next period. Moreover, once having qualified for the

minimum, higher earnings raise benefits, at least up to the maximum.

The fact that working in the current period increases potential benefits

in future periods provides an added incentive to work.2 The more

generous the UI benefits, the stronger the "entitlement effect" should

be. On the other hand, once a person has qualified for UI benefits,



      1The dependent variable is a measure based on spectral analysis of
the seasonal patterns in employment.

      2Unless, of course, there is a fully compensating wage differential.
                                   47


since higher benefits lower the price of unemployment relative to employ-

ment, higher benefits may discourage work effort. Using data from the

Panel Study on Income Dynamics, Hamerinesh finds evidence for both of

these effects, but finds they are largely offsetting.

      Using a survey of people who had exhausted their regular UI

benefits, but who were not equally qualified to receive extended benefits,

Gary Solon found, for a sample of workers in New York State, that those

who were eligible for extended UI benefits were unemployed for a longer

time, and that, other things the same, they spent less time employed or

not in the labor force. Eligibility for extended benefits caused a

different response for those who had been unemployed in at least two of

the last five years than for those who had not. The "repeaters" were

more likely to reduce employment time, spending more time unemployed

if they were eligible for extended benefits. Nonrepeaters

spent more time inemployed at the expense of time that would have been

spent out of the labor force. There is some question about these

results because Solon indicates there was a high correlation between

the labor market conditions a worker faced and eligibility for extended

benefits. Nevertheless, the questions asked are quite important and

should be investigated in a cross—section setting for a more representa—

time sample of the unemployed.
                                        48



G.    Impact of UI on Unemployment Duration: d.

      There has been a great deal of work, both theoretical and         empirical,
attempting to explai.n how and why the UI system affects unemployment

duration. The empirical work, which has applied a variety of econometric

techniques   to analyze data from a number of different sources, suggests,
consistent with the bulk of the theory, that higher UI benefits are
associated   with longer spells of unemployment.1 Indeed, it is fair to

say that the positive relationship between weekly benefits and duration

is the most reliable result we have on the impact of the UI system.

Despite this, it should be recognized that we do not have enough in-

formation to fill in the bottom row of the table in Figure 1, thereby

indicating the effects   of the   various    features of the UI   system on duration

of   unemployment for those experiencing unemployment for different reasons.
Usually, an "average" duration is calculated for a group which includes

individuals unemployed for a number of different reasons. The group may

include all the unemployed or all the insured unemployed, all job changers

or insured job changes.2


      1Findings   on the impact of UI benefits on transition rates out of
unemployment are not as extensive as those on duration. Normally, studies
of UI's impact on transition rates focus on the effects of UI coverage,
but not on the impact of variation in benefit levels.  (E.g., see John M.
Barron and Wesley Mellow, 1979.). Since UI coverage is endogenous, care is
required in interpreting these findings. The related problem in duration
studies is selection into samples of covered workers.
     2There are some exceptions. E.g., as will be mentioned below, Kathleen
P. Classen's (1979) study analyzes the determinants of duration separately
for those insured unemployed who are on recall layoff. But most studies
do not separate the unemployed by reason for unemployment before analyzing
UI's impact on duration.
                                      49




      Since, as Feldstein (1975) (1978) has noted, duration varies by

reason for unemployment, if benefit replacement rates do not have the

same effect on the incidence of unemployment for different reasons,

variation of average duration of an unemployment spell will reflect

the   influence of two forces——the impact of variation in parameters of
the UI system on duration and its impact on the mix of unemployed by
reason   for unemployment. Suppose, for example, that the equation for

estimating duration is of the form:



                           d = f(UIB,
                                    CD,           w, x)



where d is the duration of unemployment, UIB is some measure of benefits,

CD is the period of covered duration, W is the past wage and X is a

set of supply side demographic and human capital characteristics.

      From Equation 6, Section I, we have



                                U =          •    d.



That is, unemployment is equal to the product of average incidence (ti)

and duration of completed spells (d). Noting from Equations 6 and 7 that



                               u =         p.d.
                                      1
                                            11


and using Equation 1,
                                      50




                                           1 d.
                                     1 1.1
                                 d — ____


or


                          1   (p.d
                               ]i + d.p)
                                     I1       —   1    1)1 1
                                                      iJ.d.
                      =
                                ()1                    ()2    1



That is, since average duration is equal to the sum of the products of

incidence and duration by reason for unemployment divided by total inci-

dence, d' depends not only on the effects of variation in benefits on

duration by reason for unemployment (each of the d), but also on the

level of incidence by reason and variation in incidence by reason resulting

from variation in benefi,ts.

     Having   noted that the dependent variables used in most duration
studies measure duration for an aggregated group of those who are unemployed
for different reasons, and also having noted the consequences of this
fact, consider now the information that is available on the impact of
UI on duration for groups unemployed for different reasons.

Duration   of Temporary Layoff Unemployment, d

     The theory relating the UI system to the duration of temporary

layoff   unemployment is an extension of that in the Baily-Feldstein
models. Just as the UI subsidy (imperfect experience rating and the
tax break) may encourage the incidence of temporary layoff unemployment1 a
liighersubsidymayleadto the prolongation of spells. Whether duration is
                                          51



increased   where the subsidy   is   higher depends on the impact of the subsidy

on the relative incidence of shorter spells.

      Findings from two studies will be noted. Classen (1979) calculated

the impact of UI benefits separately for those recalled by their initial

employers. The UI parameters in her estimating equation referred only

to the benefit formulae. Administrative data from Pennsylvania and

Arizona   were used as a basis for analysis. The coefficient estimated

for the benefit measure is two to three times smaller in the equations

estimated   for those recalled by their previous employers than in the
equations for those not recalled.
      Frank Brechling (1979) has tried to test an extension of the Feldstein-
Baily model by including tax parameters as explanatory variables in a
duration equation. 1-us observations are by state and by year. However,
the dependent variable used is average duration of unemployment by state
computed for the entire group of unemployed in the state, whatever the
reason for their unemployment.        Moreover, none of the exogenous measures
included   by Feldstein (1978) in his analysis are standardized for by

Brechling in his. As a result, it would seem        most prudent to view this
study (as does Brechling) as a first, rough attempt at analyzing the
impact of the tax side of the UI      system   on duration of temporary layoff
unemployment. Brechling finds that the parameters of the UI tax system
have a systematic relation in the expected direction to overall duration.
Less perfect experience rating is associated with longer spells. With
tax   variables in the equation, the benefit measure does not have a

significant impact, although the sign on the benefit variable is positive.
                                        52




Duration of Unemployment for Permanent Layoffs, Other Job Losers and

Job Leavers, d, d, d'

       As noted in the beginning of this section, separate findings are

not available for the impact of UI on duration for those who were

permanently laid off, lost their job for other reasons or quit.       (Moreover,

those on temporary layoff are often included in the same sample-withtheseothers.)1

Accordingly, this part of the discussion of the impact of UI on duration,

by necessity, is based on results for these groups taken together.

       The features of the UI system of greatest importance to these

analyses are the benefit level or replacement rate and the potential

duration of benefits. Job search requirements and     eligibility   rules

may   be important, but their effects are not normally standardized for
in    available studies.   (See, however, the studies by Arlene Holen and

Stanley Horowitz, 1974, and Stanley Horowitz, 1977).)

        To avoid needless duplication with previous surveys which have

covered both the relevant theory and empirical work explaining the impact

of the benefit replacement rate on unemployment duration, let me cite

conclusions from two of the major surveys of this literature and then

go on to discuss the impact of potential duration on actual duration.2

        Based on his survey, Hamermesh (1977) concludes "that a 10—percentage

point increase in the gross replacement rate leads to an increase in the


     'There has been an effort in some studies to analyze separately those
who are unemployed for different reasons. For example, in addition to
Classen's study, Ronald G. Ehrenberg and Ronald Oaxaca (1976) separate
out from their samples those on temporary layoff. Also, there is the work
of Henry E. Felder (1978) on duration and disqualifications which is dis-
cussed below. Finally, in their study of differences in transition
probabilities out of unemployment associated with UI coverage, Barron
and Mellow (1979a) include as independent variables a set of dummies to
indicate the reason for unemployment.

     2For anoverview of recent developments in the theory, see Steven A.
Lippman and John J. McCall (1979).
                                      53



duration of insured unemployment of about half a week when labor markets
are tight" (p. 37). Topel and Welch's best guess is that a.l increase
in the benefit replacement ratio extends the average unemployment spell
by 1.2 weeks for job changers(p. 84).

        Some of the studies covered in these surveys were based on program

data from state UI systems. Dependent variables in these studies are

truncated because the length of the recorded spell is limited by maximum

weeks of compensated unemployment, so that unemployment beyond the

time when benefits are exhausted or before the time when potenXial recipients

register for benefits is not recorded. More recent studies, such as those

by Floyd C. Newton and Harvey Rosen (1979) and    Classen   (1979), employ

maximum likelihood techniques to deal with truncation, at least on the

far end of the spell. Their findings are consistent with those of

earlier studies.

      Turn now to consider the impact of potential duration of UI benefits

on   actual   duration of unemployment. Findings as to the impact of

maximum   potential duration are mixed.1 One problem is that program data
may not provide much variation in maximum potential duration because
many observed    individuals are at the maximuw, especially in states where

those   who are eligible for benefits at all are made eligible for the
maximum duration allowable. Another is that the required estimating


     'For example, Ehrenberg, and Oaxaca (1976) find no significant
impact of potential duration, Newton and Rosen (1979) find there is one
and Classen (1979) finds a significant impact in one of two states
examined.
                                          54




procedure is quite complicated because the UI budget constraint changes

slope at the point where UI benefits run out. Thus the opportunity

cost    of unemployment is increased to the full foregone wage for weeks
beyond the maximum. As a result, the opportunity cost relevant to
an individual's marginal decision is endogenous.
        In   one of the most technically sophisticated of the studies of this

subject, Robert Moffitt and Walter Nicholson (1979) focus on the impact

of    Federal Supplemental Benefits (FSB) on duration. By extending
potential duration by 26 weeks, this program created wide variation
in potential duration during a time of cyclical downturn. They con-
cluded that "an increase of one week in potential duration resulted

in a .1 week increase in weeks unemployed.          .the entire FSB program

resulted in increasing weeks unemployed by about 2.5 weeks." (pp. 34-35)

       A third feature of the UI benefit structure is the disqualification

provisions. Henry E. Felder (1978)        has used program data to compare
the   differences in duration between those disqualified from receiving

UI   benefits for various reasons on the one hand and all qualified
recipients     on   the other. His results suggest that those permanently
disqualified        from receiving benefits during a given spell because they

quit their last job are       unemployed for a shorter period of time than
are those who are qualified for benefits. Since the group who are
qualified includes those on temporary layoff and the duration of their
unemployment is short, the difference brought about by permanent dis-
qualification may be somewhat understated. Felder also finds that
those   who quit and are disqualified for a waiting period, but not for
                                     55



the   full duration of the spell:1 have longer spells than qualified

recipients, as do those who are disqualified for declining suitable

work. The results for those discharged for misconduct vary among states.

Separate duration equations are not presented for those who quit, were

discharged for cause, etc.


New Entrants d

       It has also been argued that duration of unemployment for new entrants

may be affected by the UI system. One reason may be that the sooner a

job is accepted, the sooner one is eligible for potential future benefits

(Hamermesh, 1977, p. 37).

       On apriori grounds one would not expect this type of effect to play

a major role in influencing duration of entry level unemployment; but

there is no evidence either way.


Future Research on Duration

       What are the questions that need to be answered if the effects of

the UI system on duration are to be pinned down more precisely? First,

more disaggregation is called for so that the differential effects of

the UI system on duration by reason for unemployment can    be   understood.

Second, it is important to determine the size of errors which have been

introduced because the measures representing benefits or taxes are

endogenous to the analysis. This is most obvious when actual benefit

replacement rates, or measures such as the fraction of benefits paid to

employees   of firms paying the maximum tax are used. But even parameters
of a state's benefit and tax system may be endogenous, especially in
view of the fact that over the long term, benefit and tax payments must
                                       56

                              1
balance at the state level.       One would expect that the greater the degree

of aggregation, and thus the less important the role of differences among

individuals or firms in determining the error term, the more serious these

simultaneous equations problems will be.

    Third, if we are to zero in on the effects of the UI system on duration,

we need a careful effort to catalogue the differences in findings that are

associated with using different data sets, or more broadly, different defini-

tions of labor market flows. There are at least four major categories of

surveys used to test theories of the relation of unemployment insurance to

unemployment -— CPS type surveys, the BLS employer surveys (observations by

state, industry and year) ,   longitudinal   surveys, such as the Parnes data and

Michigan's Panel Study of Income Dynamics, and surveys based on program

data which include only those who are in employment covered by the UI system

or are receiving UI benefits. Different surveys define differently some

of the unemployment related flows. (Martin S. Feldstein [1975) discusses

some of these differences.)

     The CPS measures current unemployment and duration of incomplete spells

for the five subgroups of the unemployed noted in Figure 1. Further informa-

tion can be gained either by matching panels from the CPS and calculating

flows as changes in status between survey periods (Clark and Summers, 1979,

Barron and Mellow 1979), or by calculating escape rates from the information

on duration of incomplete spells of unemployment and using them to estimate

the duration of completed spells.

    The longitudinal surveys are used to provide information on the

incidence and duration of completed spells. However, even though


    1Note also that if the legislature takes local economic circumstances
into account in designing the UI system, this may cause the parameters of
that system to be endogenous in many analyses. See Hamermesh (1978b) for
some discussion of this issue.
                                    57



longitudinal   surveys provide information about   status   during the week

of the survey, in an effort to take advantage of the unique characteristics

of these surveys, temporary layoff is normally defined in an expost

rather than exante sense as in the cPS   (e.g.,   see Leighton and Mincer,

1979, and Ehrenberg and Oaxaca, 1976). Thus, for example, those that

quit from temporary layoff unemployment and secure a job for a new

employer are counted in these surveys as permanent layoffs. Program

data utilize similar definitions, but as noted above the sample covered

by program data is censored and   appropriate   adjustments are required.

    In addftion, different data sets incorporate different measures of

exogenous influences. A systematic attempt should be made to catalogue

the effects of including or excluding particular subsets of exogeneous

variables to reveal how much of the differences among studies reflect

differences in specification of the estimating equation.

     Fourth, although studies of duration are based on longitudinal

data, they normally do not distinguish between effects of the UI system

on the behavior of those who frequently experience spells of unemployment

as compared to those who do not. If we are to isolate parameters that

truely reflect the impact of the UI program on an individuals' behavior,

it is important to standardize for the effects of the heterogeneity

(e.g., see Solon (1979)).

     Fifth, it may be useful to distinguish spells that end out

of the labor force from those that end in a new job. We are just begin-

ning to consider this distinction in analyzing the impact of unemployment

insurance.
                                    58




          III.   Summary and Implications for Further Research


    In   the first part of this paper, a framework for viewing develop-

ments in the literature analyzing the relation of unemployment insurance

to unemployment was constructed. That framework provided an outline for

section II, which contained a discussion of recent developments in

that literature. In the process of discussing the literature,

an effort was made to point to important questions which, if answered,

would lead to a more complete understanding of how the UI system affects

unemployment.

     This concluding section will attempt to summarize briefly some

major points raised in the discussion and to highlight some of the

broader questions for future research that are suggested by the foregoing

review. The more specific questions that arose during the course of dis-

cussing particular developments in the literature will not, however,

be repeated.


Temporary Layoff Unemployment

     Consider first the available information concerning the relation of

the UI system to temporary layoff unemployment. The basic theoretical

work has been carried out by Baily (1977) and Feldstein (1976). There

is one major empirical study (Feldstein, 1978) focussing directly on

the impact of UI on the level of temporary layoff unemployment. In

addition, Brechling (1976) has pointed out how parameters of the UI tax

system might be incorporated into this framework.
                                        59




     Less information is available on the effect of the UI system on

the probabilities which underlie the level of temporary layoff unem-

ployment. Brechling's work on the incidence of temporary layoff is

very rough. There is no empirical work analyzing the relation

of UI to the conditional probability of unemployment given a temporary

layoff (although this probability may be high and not very much affected

by UI) .   Moreover, of the two studies focusing on UI's impact on duration

of temporary layoff unemployment, one (Classen, 1978) focuses only on

a supply side explanation, and the other [Brechling (1979)1 isbased

on highly aggregated data.

     The information we have on the impact of the UI system on the

incidence and duration of temporary layoff unemployment confirms the

direction of Feldstein's findings. But the size of the effect found

in his study is very large. In view of the importance of this effect,

and since his study did not control for interstate differences in the

degree of experience rating, an important priority for future research

is to attempt to confirm or refute Feldstein's findings, while incorporating

innovations suggested by Brechling.


Permanent Layoff Unemployment

     The review of findings on the impact of UI on permanent layoff

unemployment has indicated that these results are incomplete. Only

limited work on the relation of UI to the incidence of permanent layoff

unemployment   has been carried out. That work, which is mainly due to
Brechling and Jehn (1978),   analyzes   the impact of UI   on the   incidence of
                                       60



total layoffs arid recalls. Direct evidence concerning the size of the

impact of the UI system on the incidence of permanent layoffs or on

unemployment conditional on permanent layoffs is not available. Moreover,

while duration studies confirm that the impact of UI benefits is in

the expected direction, most of the duration studies do not separate

individuals    by reason for unemployment. Additional work aimed at
spelling out the structual relations underlying the incidence of per-
manent layoffs    by merging supply and demand based models, and providing

estimates of UI's impact on duration for those on permanent layoff,

could help us to zero in on a point estimate of the effects of the UI

system on permanent layoff unemployment.


Other Job Loss, Quits and Entry

      similar comments to the    above apply to the information that is
required    if we are to come closer to having point estimates of the

impact of the UI system on unemployment associated with other job

loss or quits. Some work on the supply side is available relating

UI benefits to the incidence of quit unemployment. But there is none on

the   relation of the UI to the incidence of unemployment from other job
loss, to   the probability components of unemployment due to other job

loss, or to entry unemployment.


Gaps In the Theory    and   Implications for Estimation

      A    few more general comments about gaps in the theory are in order.
It has been apparent throughout the discussion      that more work is needed

analyzing    the relations between the UI system and specific training on
the one hand and layoff policies of the firms or corresponding supply
                                      61



side incentives to quit on the other. Relatedly, we have no information

on the positive aspects of the impact of the UI system on unemployment -

i.e.,   or any reduction in the incidence of unemployment over the long

term and, perhaps, increases in job tenure due to improved job matches

resulting from prolonged search financed by UI benefits.

        In addition, it would be useful if theoretical analyses of the

relation of UI to unemployment incidence placed more emphasis on the

roles of risk and uncertainty, and if they considered more fully the

implications of heterogeneous preferences.


The UI System

     The effects of two features of the UI system deserve closer study.

The feature are the ceiling on taxable wages and the procedures for determin-

ing eligibility and qualification for UI benefits. It is particularly

important to isolate the impact of the ceiling and to determine how

important it is because it may operate systematically to reduce turnover

with replacement, and thus in contrast with many of UI's effects, to reduce

unemployment. The impact of the maximum taxable salary on turnover rates

has been examined using aggregated data for manufacturing by Brechling

and Jehn (1978), but more detailed work is called for using micro data.

This work will be difficult to accomplish because, at times, the interstate

variation in the maximum yearly wage subject to UI tax is limited.

     To summarize the findings, when one proceeds systematically through

the analytical framework presented in section I and compares it to the

topics considered in the available literature, a guide to future research

emerges. We have seen that certain labor market flows which determine

in part the number who are unemployed, and which may be influenced by
                                         62



the characteristics of the UI system, have not been studied. Other

relevant labor market flows have been studied, but only partially.

In addition, some aspects of the behavior of individuals and        firms
which may be altered in response to incentives provided by the UI

system have not yet been considered. And the impact of certain features

of the UI system has yet to be fully analyzed.

          It has also been seen that if results from various empirical

studies are to be reconciled, an effort has to made to put together

on a systematic basis information indicating how differences ih the

data      employed, econometric techniques used and specification of
estimating equations affect empirical findings.
       This paper has drawn on a large body of information pertaining
to   the impact of the unemployment insurance system      on unemployment.
It   is   obvious that significant progress nas been made, and that much
of   the information that has been accumulated can be very useful to

those responsible for designing       the UI   program. This information is

especially     useful   when it is viewed within the context of an appropriate

analytical framework. Yet, when viewed in this context, it is also

apparent that a great deal of work remains to be done.
                                    63




                               Appendix


Worker Heterogeneity and Adverse Selection: 2½n Examp

    The role of moral hazard provides one explanation for the observed

positive relation between the level of UI benefits and unemployment

duration (see for example Steven Shavell and Laurence Weiss, 1979).

This appendix provides an example in which workers with the strongest

preference for nonmarket time may select those occupations where

permanent separation occurs most frequently, taking advantage of the

availability of UI benefits to further increase their yearly unemployment.
                                                  availability of UI benefits
While in this example there is full coverage,so

does not influence the choice of industry by workers, it is seen that

because those who have the strongest preference for nonmarket time will

choose to work in industries where unemployment is most likely, the effect

of such occupational choice is to magnify the impact of moral hazard.

This adverse selection is seen to operate in that workers with a strong

preference for nonmarket time choose industries where unemployment, rather

than UI coverage, is more likely.

     To highlight the mechanism and to simplify the example, it will be

 assumed that there is no uncertainty about demand fluctuations and that
                                                             so there is no
 workers have full information about employment prospects,

 need for search. It will also be assumed that the UI system is fully

 experience rated. The imperfection which accounts for the effect of UI

 on duration is an assumed inability of firms to determine which workers have

 a strong preference for time away from the job)


     1Firms with experience rated UI would have an incentive to screen out
 such workers, or to offer them a lower wage, but in this example, do not
 do so successfully.
                                         64




       To be more specific, assume there are two industries, A and B,

and workers in both industries are covered by unemployment insurance.

Further assume that it is known with certainty that in A there will be

no unemployment, while in B there will be a layoff for one of n periods.'

The layoff is treated as permanent, although in the period following

the   layoff anyone who wants to work can find a job at one firm or another
in   the industry. Instead      of returning to work after one period, however,
employees   are assumed to have the option of extending the spell of

uneixployment     for another period, while remaining covered by unemploy-
ment insurance. This option corresponds to the possibility that unemploy-
ment may be voluntarily prolonged even though the search required to
qualify for UI benefits is "formally" met by the unemployed worker.
       Yearly earnings and the per period wage rate are reported in Panel
I of Table 1 for the dominant group of workers, who, for purposes of
example, are assumed to place a zero value on any nonmarket time arising
from layoff. This group, through its mobility and dominance of employment,
determines what the wage structure will be. Another smaller group
exhibits a positive preference for nonmarket activities. They allocate
themselves among industries in light of this wage structure and employ-
ment prospects, choosing that industry which offers the most attractive

combination of earnings, UI benefits and leisure       time. Finally, for
convenience, assume     that industry A, the industry for which there is no

possibility of unemployment is very large. As a result, it        is possible
to   ignore any   adjustments   in the yearly wage paid in that industry as



       'Once laid off, it takes one period to locate a job in any industry.
                                            65


                                         Table 1


                        Panel I: Value of Layoff Time = 0


                                                                    Total Value of Choice
                         Yearly              Per Period                 (Earnings     + UI +
                        Earnings              Earnings                           Leisure)
No Unemployment   (A)
                         w                   w                  w
                             0                   0                  0
                                             n


Unemployment      (B)
                         w(n-l)
                         0
                                                     w
                                                     0          w
                                                                    0
                         (n — 1) +           (n — 1) +



                  Panel II: Positive Value of Layoff Time


No Unemployment   (A) w                      w                  w
                             0                   0                  0
                                             n



u1
Unemployment      (B)        wo(n — 1)
                         (n—l) +             (n—i) +
                                                     w
                                                         o
                                                                wo +         (1)



u2                (B)
                          w (n — 2)                  w0         w 1(n
                                                                    0
                                                                             —
                                                                                 2) +   2J
                           0
                         (n — 1) +           (n          1) +           (n   -   1) +
                                                                                         + (2)
                                                66




labor shifts into B. A full analysis must, of course, relax each of

these simplifying assumptions.

        The following notation is used:


        w          =    Yearly earnings in industry A, the dominant industry with
                        no unemployment

        n          =    Number of periods per year

        cx         =     Proportionate   rate of replacement for earnings by UI

        (t)             Value associated with t periods unemployment for those
                        with a positive preference for nonmarket time.


It can be seen from Panel I that for those who attach no value to noninarket

time,        labor mobility causes wage rate adjustments which equalize the total
returns to working in each industry             at w   (Column 3). This is so whatever
the   level of UI        benefits or average unemployment experience. Moreover, as
long    as cc, the       replacement   rate for UI, is less than one, with 13(t) = 0

for Group I no one who works in industry B will choose to exercise an

option to take an extra period of unemployment.               (It is easy   to derive
analogous         conditions under the assumption that for the majority group

13(t) >      0,   but is less than the value of leisure for the minority group.)

        Pane].     II   examines the case   for that smaller group of workers for
whom there is a positive value to time spent not at work—-i.e., for whom

13(t) >      0.    There are few enough of them so that the wage rate structure

they face is independent of their behavior. Their yearly earnings are

obtained by multiplying the wage rate by n or n - 1 periods, depending on

whether there is mandatory unemployment associated with their industry.

The calculation in the last row is made to illustrate the value of choosing
                                          67



a    second period of unemployment. The total value of each choice is equal

to    the value of earnings plus the UI payment replacing wages at the rate
of      times the number of periods unemployed, plus the value of noninarket
time. From these results, conditions under which those with a preference
for nonmarket time will choose to lengthen their unemployment after
choosing to work where unemployment is expected with certainty can be
determined.
       Note that since wages reflect the preferences of Group I so that mone-
tary returns are equal in both industries, those in Group II with a pref-
erence for nonmarket time will sort themselves into industry B. The value
of    total returns there is higher for them     than   it is in A,where there is

no unemployment. The difference is equal to the value they place on non—

market time. A central question is under what conditions will those in

Group II choose to lengthen their unemployment voluntarily beyond the

mandatory period length, and if    they   do, what role will unemployment in-

surance play?     The condition for staying unemployed two periods rather
than one is that


                    w [(n — 2) + 2°j
                      (n — 1) +
                                       + 13(2)    >     w   +   13(1)



or
                                                      1-
                             (13
                               2
                                 —13)
                                  1
                                      >w       o(n-l)+
More simply, the worker with a positive preference for nonmarket time will
choose an extra period of unemployment if time away from the job is valued
                                          68


at   more than   foregone   earnings not covered by UI benefits.

       In sum, this example     points out   that if labor allocates itself among

jobs in such a way that those with the strongest preference for uriemploy-

ment are concentrated where permanent separation is most likely to occur,

the potential for UI benefits to have an adverse impact on duration

is increased) Most studies of duration, however, have not

tested for and do not control for the influence of heterogeneity of

worker preferences.




        related point is made by Gary Solon (1979) with regard to the
effect of UI on labor force participation. He points out, that if UI
encourages participation, it does so for those most prone to long spells
of unemployment. Solon is careful to note, however, that by increasing
participation by those with a weak preference for work, UI is not
creating a disincentive for work. In contrast, UI does create such a
disincentive in the above example.
                                       69



                                    References


Abowd, John and Ashenfelter, Orley. "Unemployment and Compensating Wage
     Differentials," mimeo, 1979.

Baily, Martin Neil. "On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment,"
     Econometrica, July l977a, 45(5), pp. 1043—1063.
                                                                              a

_______ "Unemployment Insurance as Insurance for Workers," Industrial
     and Labor Relations Review, July l977b, 30(4), pp. 495—504.

Barron, John M., and Mellow, Wesley. "Unemployment Insurance: The
     Recipients and Its Impact," mimeo, 1979.

_______    "Search Effort in the Labor Market," Journal of Huma Resources,
     Spring 1980, 14(3), pp. 389—404.
Becker, Gary S. Human Capital, second edition. New York: Columbia
     University Press, 1975.

Becker, Joseph M. Experience Rating in Unemployment Insurance. Baltimore:
     Johns Hopkins University Press, 1972.

Brechling, Frank. "The Incentive Effects of the U.S. Unemployment Insurance
     Tax," in Ronald Ehrenberg (ed.) , Research in Labor Economics, I,
     Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, 1977.

_______   "Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance," Arlington, Virginia:
     Center for Naval Analyses, February, 1979.

Brechling, Frank, and Jehn, Christopher. "The Unemployment Insurance Tax
     arid Labor Turnover: An Empirical Analysis," Technical Analysis Paper
     No. 56. U.S. Department ot Labor, ASPER, October 1978.

Brown, Eleanor. "Experience Rating for Unemployment Insurance Taxes,"
     niimeo, Princeton, December 1979.

Burdett, Kenneth, and Hool, Bryce. "Temporary Layoffs and the Unemployment
     Insurance System," mimeo, University of Wisconsin, February 1979.
Clark, Kim B., and Summers, Lawrence H. "Labor Market Dynamics and Un-
     employment: A Reconsideration," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     I, 1979, pp. 13—60.

Classen, Kathleen P. "Unemployment Insurance and Job Search," in Steven
     A. Lippman and John J. McCall (eds.), Studies in theTheory of Search.
     Amsterdam: North Holland, 1979.

Ehrenberg, Ronald C. "The Demographic Structure of Unemployment Rates and
     Labor Market Transition Probabilities," A Report to the National
     Commission on Manpower Policy, July 1979.
                                        70



Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Hutchens, Robert, and Smith, Robert. "The Distri-
     bution of Unemployment Insurance Benefits and Costs," U.S. Department
     of Labor, ASPER Technical Analysis Paper No. 58, October 1978.

Ehrenberg, Ronald C., and Oaxaca, Ronald. "Unemployment Insurance: Duration
     of Unemployment and Subsequent Wage Gain," American Economic Review,
     December 1976, 66(5), pp. 754—766.

Felder, Henry E. "A Statistical Evaluation of the impact of Disqualifica-
     tion Provisions of State Unemployment Insurance Laws," Report to
     the Department of Labor, Stanford Research Institute, February 1979.

Feldstein, Martin S. "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on Temporary
     Layoff Unemployment," American Economic Review, 68(5),Decernber 1978,
     pp. 834—846.

______       "The Importance of Temporary Layoffs: An Empirical Analysis,"
     Brookings Papers, 3, Washington, 1975, pp. 725-745.

_______      "Lowering the Permanent Rate of Unemployment," Study for the
     Joint    Economic Committee, 93d Congress, 1973.

_______   "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment," Journal of
     Political Economy, 84(5October 1976, pp. 937—957.

________  "Unemployment Compensation: Adverse Incentives and Distribu-
     tional Anomalies," National Tax Journal, 37(2), June 1974,
     pp. 231—44.

Fields, Gary. "The Direct Labor Market Effects of the U.S. Unemployment
     Insurance System: A Review of Recent Evidence," Industrial Relations,
     February, 1977, 16(1) , pp. 1—14.

Frank, Robert H. "How Long Is a Spell of Unemployment?" Econometrica,
     March, 1978, 46(2), pp. 285—302.

Hall, Robert E. "The Nature and Measurement of Unemployment," National
     Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 252, July 1978.

Halpin, Terrence C. "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on Seasonal
     Fluctuations in Employment," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
     April 1979, 32(3), pp. 353—362.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. "Entitlement Effects, Unemployment Insurance, and
     Employment Decisions," Economic Inquiry, July 1979a, 17(3), pp. 317—322.

______• Jobless Pay and the Economy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
     Press,   1977.
                                          71




Hainermesh,   Daniel S. "Social Insurance and     Consumption——An      Empirical
     Inquiry    ,"   mimeo, June 1979b.

        •     "Unemployment Insurance and the    Older   American," W. E.   Upjohn
     Institute, mimeo, February 1980.
        •     "Unemployment Insurance and   Unemployment    in the United States,"
     in Herbert G. Grubel and Michael A. Walker, Unemployment Insurance,
     Global Evidence of Its Effects on Unemployment. Vancouver, l978b.
_______       "Unemployment   Insurance, Short Time Compensation and the Work-
     week," Special       Report No. 28, National Commission for Manpower Policy,
     October 1978a.

Holen, Arlene, and Horowitz, Stanley. "The Effect of Unemployment In-
     surance and Eligibility Enforcement on Unemployment," Journal of
     Law and Economics, October 1974, 17(2) pp. 404432.

Horowitz, Stanley. "A Model of Unemployment Insurance and the Work Test,"
     Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1977, 30(4) , pp. 462466.

Hutchens,Robert M. "Determinants of Labor Supply to Unstable Unemploy-
     ments," mimeo, Ithaca, October 1979.
Kaitz, Hyman W. "Analyzing the Length of Spells of              Unemployment," Monthly
     Labor     Review, November 1970, 93(11) ,   pp.   11—20.

Kiefer, Nicholas M., and Neumann, George R. "An Empirical Job—Search
     Model, with a Test of the Constant Reservation-Wage Hypothesis,"
     Journal of Political Economy, February 1979, 87(1) , pp. 89—108.

Lancaster, Tony. "Econometric Methods for the Duration of Unemployment,"
     Econometrica, July 1979, 47(4) , pp. 939—956.

Leighton, Linda, and Mincer, Jacob. "Labor Turnover and Youth Unemployment,"
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 378, August 1979.

Lippman, Steven A., and McCall, John J. (eds.). Studies in the Theory of
     Search. Amsterdam: North Holland, 1979.

Marston, Stephen T.   "Employment Instability and High Unemployment Rates,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1976, pp. 169-203.

_______    "Unemployment Insurance and Voluntary Unemployment," Report to
      the National Commission on Unemployment Compensation, October 1979.

Mattila, J. Peter. "Job Quitting and Frictional Unemployment," American
     Economic RevieW, March 1974, 64(1) , pp. 235—239.
                                           72




Medoff, James. "Layoffs and Alternatives Under Trade Unionism," American
     Economic Review, June 1979, 69(3), pp. 380—395.

Moffitt, Robert and Nicholson, Walter. "The Effect of Unemployment
     Insurance on Unemployment: The Case of Federal Supplemental
     Benefits," mimeo, September 1979.

Munts, Raymond. "Partial Benefit Schedules in Unemployment Insurance:
     Their Effect on Work Incentive," Journal of Human Resources, Spring
     1970, 5(2) ,   pp.   160—176.

Murray, Merrill, G. Proposed Federal Unemployment Insurance Amendments.
     The W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, February 1966.

Newton, Floyd C., and Rosen, Harvey. "Unemployment Insurance, Income
     Taxation, and Duration of Unemployment: Evidence from Georgia,"
     Southern Economic Journal, January 1979, 45(3), pp. 773—784.

Nickell, Stephen. "Estimating the Probability of Leaving Unemployment,"
     Econometrica, September 1979, 47(5) , pp. 1249—1266.

Parsons, Donald 0. "Models of Labor Market Turnover: A Theoretical
     and Empirical Survey," in Ronald Ehrenberg (ed.), Research in Labor
     Economics, Volume      1, 1977,   pp. 185—223.
Pencaval, John. An Analysis of the Quit Rate in American Manufacturing
     Industry. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1970.
Perry,   George. "Unemployment Flows in the U.S. Labor Market,"   Brookings
     Papers   on Economic Activity, 2, 1972, pp. 245—278.

Salant, Stephen, "Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1977, 91(1), pp. 45-63.

Shavell, Steven, and Weiss, Laurence. "The Optimal Payment of Unemployment
     Insurance Benefits Over Time," Journal of Political Economy,
     December 1979, 87(6) , pp. 1347—1362.

Solon, Gary. "Labor Supply Effects of Extended Unemployment Benefits,"
     Journal of Human Resources, Spring 1979, 14(2), pp. 247—255.
Stafford, Frank P. "More on Unemployment Insurance as Insurance," Indus-
     trial and Labor Relations Review, July 1977, 30(4) , pp. 521—526.

Topel, Robert, and Welch, Finis. "Unemployment Insurance: What the Theory
     Predicts and What the Numbers (May) Show, Survey and Extensions,"
     mimeo, UCLA, September 1979.
                                    73



Von Furstenberg, George M. "Stabilization Characteristics of Unemployment
     Insurance." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1976, 29(3),
     pp. 363—376.

Welch, Finis. "What Have We Learned from Empirical Studies of Unemploy-
     ment Insurance?" Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1977,
     30(4), pp. 451—461.
