                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ADJUSTMENT PROCESS
            OF INTERNATIONAL ASSET RISKS: EXCHANGE
            CONTROLS, INTERVENTION AND POLICY RISK,
                      AND SOVEREIGN RISK

                       Willem H. Buiter


                     Working Paper No. 516




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           July 1980




This paper was given at the Conference on Internationalization of
Financial Markets and National Economic Policy, April 10—11 at
N.Y.U.  I would like to thank Robert Stern and Clas Wihlborg for
detailed comments on an earlier version. Financial support from an
N.S.F. Research Grant is gratefully acknowledged. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #516
                                                                         July, 1980




                 Implications for the Adjustment Process,
                     of International Asset Risks:
             Exchange Controls, Intervention and Policy Risks.
                            and    Sovereign Risk:

                                   ABSTRACT



      This paper analyzes the implications of international asset risks      for

the operation of the international adjustment process, with special emphasis

on the scope for monetary policy. After a brief review of actual practice

in   the evaluation of country risk, the paper discusses a number of modifi-
cations in the standard   theory   of efficient international financial markets
that are necessitated by the existence of country risk., For macroeconomic

policy, the major implications are that domestic and foreign assets become.

imperfect substitutes and   that world demand   for domestic assets is likely

to   be less than perfectly elastic, even in the "small country" case, Even
under a fixed exchange rate, a measure of domestic control over domestic
interest rates therefore exists..




                                                     Willem H.. Buiter
                                                     Department of Economics
                                                     University of Bristol
                                                     alfred Marshall. Building
                                                     40 Berkeley Square
                                                     Bristol,    BS8 IHY
                                                     Engl and

                                                     Tel:       027224161
I     Introduction



II    The measurement of country risk.



III   The standard economic view of international financial markets.




IV    The implications of political risk for the modelling of
      international financial markets.




V     The implications of political risk for the international
      adjustment   process with particular reference to the role
      of monetary policy.


vi    Conclusion
                                    —I-
 I.     Introduction

        International asset risks are those risks that distinguish an

 international loan from a domestic loan which is otherwise the same in all

 respects (size, maturity, repayment schedule and even currency denomination).

 This loan can be for portfolio investment or for direct investment, to and

 from private or public agents.     The importance of international asset risk

 or country risk is recognized by the financial community and by governments.

 For instance, Citicorp, stating that country risk is the "principal
                                                        1/
 difference between domestic and international business" and that "Country

 risk exists whenever Citicorp lends, places or invests funds across a
                 2/
 country border", devotes a sizeable sectionof its 1975 Annual Report to

its international lending operations.      Alexander Mc.W. Wolfe, Jr. defines
country risk as "...    the primary additional component which distinguishes
an international loan from a domestic loan.      Regardless of whether the
borrower happens to be a government, quasi—public
                                                      company or private entity,

an appraisal of economic and political factors becomes a vital element in
                                                3/
evaluating creditworthiness or country risk."        Finally, Wihlborg defines

country risk as uncertainty about laws, regulations and property rights that

depend solely on the country of issue of a financial
                                                        asset (Wihlborg [1978, p. 5]).
In    recent years attention has been focussed mainly on   lending by commercial
banksin the western world, especially the U.S.A., to L.D.C.'s. The rapid
expansion of this category of international lending has generated fears about
the possibility of default.     As the recent freeze on official Iranian assets

in the U.S.A. has demonstrated, however, sovereign risk can affect even those

who lend to the most developed country in the international
                                                                financial community.
The precarious external debt positions of countries as varied as Poland, Turkey,

Zaire, Yugoslavia and Indonesia show that political risk can be a major factor

regardless of ideology, religion, or stage of development.
                               —2—
                               Table 1



              Classification     of types of risk



 Domestic                                      Foreign

Economic risk -      specific                  Economic risk -   specific
                 -
                     general                                 —   general


 Political risk (sovereign risk)               Political risk (sovereign risk)
                 —   wars                                    —   wars
                 —                                           -
                     coups, revolutions                          coups, revolutions
                 —   expropriation                           —
                                                                 expropriation
                 -
                     discretionary   default                 -
                                                                 discretionary   default
                     debt moratoria                              debt moratoria



Social risk                                    Social risk
                 —
                     regional, tribal or                     —   regional, tribal or
                     class conflict, social                      class conflict, social
                     unrest etc.                                 unrest etc.



Intervention and policy risk                   Intervention and policy risk



Legal risk                                     Legal risk
                 -   jurisdictional                          -   jurisdictional
                     disputes                                    disputes
                 —   disputes between                        -   disputes between
                     borrowers and                               borrowers and
                     lenders                                     lenders
                                                             — exchange controls
                               —3—j

     Table 1 presents a simple classification of the kinds of risk likely

to be encountered by a person or institution planning to invest funds.

While the boundaries between the various categories are often vague, even

conceptually, the classification is quite comprehensive.   The first important
                   almost
thing to note is that,every kind of risk that is likely to concern investors

is likely to be present with domestic investment as with foreign investment.

Important differences in degree do often exist, however.     Economic and

financial risk can be specific, related to the economic performance of a

specific investment, project, sector or industry, or general.,    related to

a country's economic performance with respect to inflation, real output growth

and external balance.     Since economic policy is a major determinant of

specific and general economic performance, economic risk and political risk,

or "sovereign risk" are inextricably bound up.     "Sovereign risks" are the

risks associated with adverse political developments-—wars, coups, revolutions,

expropriation of foreign ownership, discretionary defaults or discretionary

debt moratoria etc.     Political and economic risks are themselves functions

of wider social and cultural uncertainties.     Intervention and policy risk

can be viewed as the less spectacular forms of sovereign risk.     Even broad

macroeconomic fiscal and monetary stabilization policy may affect the return

on certain investments.     Together with specific forms of market intervention

(price controls, credit ceilings) and changes in allocative or structural

policies (tax credits, depreciation allowances, subsidies, tariffs, quotas)

they constitute intervention and policy risk.     Sovereign risk and intervention

and policy risk merge into legal risk,     Changes in contract law, liability

and disclosure laws, problems of conflicting and overlapping jurisdictions,

methods for resolving disputes between lenders and borrowers, legal restrictions

on the repatriation of dividends and profits of foreign investors and other

forms of exchange control, all affect the rate of return to the investor.

A measure of the variety and scope of exchange controls is the Annual Report

on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions issued by the IMF, which

for 1979 ran to 470 pages (IMF [1979])
                                     - 3A   -




       It should be noted that country risk is typically asymmetric:   the degree

of risk depends, for a given borrower, on the country of habitat (or nationality)

of the lender, or for a given lender, on the country of habitat (or nationality)
                     country risk also often is not a zero—sum risk in which gains
of the borrower.
to borrowers necessarily equal losses to lenders.     To the extent that the

risk "game" has a negative sum it cannot be diversified completely.     Also, since

political risks are to a greater or lesser extent under the control of the

participants in the international loan market, there are obvious moral hazard

problems limiting the extent of coverage against political risk.

       Exchange risk and political risk

       This paper focuses on the implications of political risk in the most

 general sense (i.e. including sovereign risk, intervention and policy risk

 and legal risk) for the modeling of international financial markel$ and for

 the international adjustment mechanism.

       In its widest possible interpretation, political risk should include

a significant share of any exchange risk faced by an investor.      Government

actions affect the exchange rate either directly, through exchange rate

pegging    or other more flexible forms of exchange rate management or indirectly,
by altering the proximate determinants of exchange rates determined in
 markets   without direct foreign exchange market intervention.   The current

 and   anticipated future course of irnetary policy and the current and prospective
 future magnitudes 'f the public sector borrowing requirement are anng the
                                          —4—


major channels through which governments affect the behavior of spot and

forward exchange rates, even in a "freely floating" exchange rate regime.

Exchange risk, in the absence of political risk and without adjustment costs

in international financial markets, has been studied exhaustively by economists.

A recent elegant statement of the extent to which exchange rate risk can be

diversified can be found in Frankel [1979].         I shall for the most part

ignore exchange risk and concentrate on those risks associated with international

lending and borrowing that would exist even in a world with rigidly fixed

exchange rates which are confidently expected to remain that way forever.

Alternatively, one could interpret the analysis as applying to a world in

which lenders and borrowers of any nationality can issue or purchase financial

claims denominated in any currency or basket of currencies, and in which,

because Frankel's conditions for complete diversifiability are satisfied
                                         5/
there remains no residual exchange risk.

     Finally, it should be noted that the "nationality vector" of an

international loan can have a very large number of components indeed.

Table   2 provides a summary of the most important dimensions.

        Table 2   Some "nationality dimensions" of an international loan
                         - Nationality of lender
                         —
                           Country of residence of lender
                         - Nationality of borrower
                         - Country of residence of borrower
                         —   Location   of market (i.e. place of issue)
                         — Currency denomination of loan
                                     —5—



E.g.   the German branch of an American bank could lend, in London, to the

Dutch branch of the State-owned Bank of L.D.C.-x, with the loan denominated

in S.D.R.'s.

       The remainder of the paper is laid out as follows.    Section II

briefly considers actual practice in the evaluation of country risk.

Section III reviews the standard economic view of international financial

markets--an application of the theory of efficient capital markets.

Section IV studies how this view of international financial markets must be

modified when country risk is introduced in a number of different ways.

Section V considers the implications of the analysis for the operation of

the international adjustment process, with special emphasis on the scope for

monetary   policy.



II. The mea.surement of country risk
       Unless   there is a dramatic case of market failure in the markets for

information, the expenditure of resources on the assessment and evaluation

of country risk should be a useful indicator of the importance attributed to

country risk by investors and financial managers.       While there is a large

literature, in book and journal article form on the management of foreign

exchange risk (e.g. Aliber [1973, 1975, 1978], Jaque [1978]).

written work on country risk analysis lives mainly in internal memoranda

and pamphlets written by non—academic economists and other practitioners

of the art (but see Zuheir Sofia [19781 and Mc.W. Wolf [1975]).       A study

of the available literature suggests that following features are shared by

most applied studies of country risk.       (See e.g. Blask [1976], Harberger
                                        —6—

[1976], Maroni [1977], Frank and Clive [1971], Feder and Just [1977], Nagy

[1978], Fisk and Rimlinger [1979], Bench [1977], Schuler [1977], Sargen

(1977], Goodman [1977], Puz [1978], Export—Import Bank Policy Analysis Staff

[1977], Mc.W. Wolf [19751, Eaton and Gersovitz [1979, 1980]).




1)      What potential lenders attempt to assess is the probability of the

borrower defaulting on the loan.        Both "discretionary" default (sovereign

risk)    and "bad luck" default (economic and financial risk) are evaluated.
In practice default is but one position on a continuum of different kinds
and degrees of breach of contract (or "arrearages and delinquencies"),
ranging    from a strictly temporary moratorium on debt service, accompanied

by a rescheduling of debt payments, all the way to a complete and permanent

repudiation of all debt obligations (interest and repayment of principal).

Examples of this most extreme kind of default are the refusal of the Soviet

government to honc financial commitments incurred under the Tsarist regime

and the unwillingness of Castro Cuba to honor the obligations of the Battista

era.      Country risk analysis consists of formal and informal, qualitative

and quantitative study of the observable (if not       always measurable) correlates
                          the
of   default risk. E.g.1 "checklist" system of assessing risk of future debt
servicing    difficulties is    used by five out of thirty—seven U.S.   banks

surveyed     in 1977   by the Export-Import Bank.   The system consists in assigning
a    cardinal rating to each country with respect to a number of indicators

 (see Table 3).        These ratings for the various indicators are then averaged

 into a summary statistic for each country, using a common set of weights.

 This summary statistic becorsone of the inputs into the final risk evaluation.

Other banks and institutions make use, in a less formal way, of similar
                                    —7—
information in their assessment of country risk.       Outside the banks,

academic economists have applied more formal statistical methods (regression

analysis, discriminant analysis etc.) to the assessment of country risk.

(Frank and   dive    [1971], Feder and Just [19771, Sargen [1977], Export—Import

Bank Policy Analysis Staff [1977], Eaton and Gersovitz [1979-80].




                                 Table 3

     Indicators included in checklist system of American banks,
     surveyed by Export—Import Bank, that used such a system.


                                 Variable


     I -   Variables   relating to the internal economy

              GNP
              GNP per capita
              Growth in GN? per capita
              Inflation rate
              Money Supply growth
              Ratio of investment to income
              Net budget position
              Ratio of income growth to fixed capital formation

    II -   Variables    relating to the external economy

              Exports and export growth
              Imports and import growth
              International reserves
              Ratio of reserves to imports
              Trade and current account balances
              Debt service ratio
              IMF brrowings
              Current collection experience of U.S.    suppliers
              Debt    service payments
              Ratio    of principal payments to total external debt
              Share    of gold holdings in total reserves
              Share    of leading non—oil export in total exports
              Share    of trade in GDP
              Share    of short term credit in total credit
              Total    external debt

   III —   Social    and political vaiab1es

              Political stability
              Past trend in unemployment
              Regional rating


 Source: Goodman       [1977].
                                    —8—
2)   The analysis is done on a country-by—country basis.         "When assessing

the country risk of a particular nation, it should be analysed separately

and treated on its own merit.       No two countries are exactly alike." (Zuheir

Sofia [1978].      If this statement, and otheis like it, referred only to the

need to recognize the uniqueness in space and time of every specific country

or lending project, it would be trite but unobjectionable.         It seems to reflect,

however, a failure to recognize one of the more robust implications of

portfolio analysis, that is the need to look at a lending institution's entire

portfolio of assets and liabilities rather than at each project or loan

separately.



3)   The procedures for evaluating country credit risk seem on the whole

to be rather crude and unsatisfactory.         This negative view appears to be

shared even by the major U.S. banks that account for much of the analysis.

Especially striking is the apparent reluctance to systematically test the

ex—post predictive accuracy of the country risk evaluation procedures.         Even

where an   attempt   is made to analyse the available data systematically, the

absence of a clear theoretical framework makes the interpretation of the results

a very uncertain and ambiguous exercise.         Two examples will suffice to illustrate

this point.

     The policy analysis staff of the Export-Import Bank used logit analysis

to solve the binary choice problem as to whether or not a given country will

reschedule (Export-Import Bank Policy Analysis Staff [1977]).         The probability

of a country rescheduling was related to the following set of explanatory

variables.      1) percentage change in the CPI (with a positive coefficient),

2) reserve position in the IMP     divided   by imports (with a negative coefficient),

a measure of the country's ability to pay its international bills, 3) exports

divided by GDP (with a negative coefficient), a measure of "a country's

foreign exchange generating ability subject to the total demands of the

economy", 4) disbursed     debt outstanding divided by exports, a measure of the
                               —9—
country's "overall debt situation", (with a positive coefficient, 5) largest
                 total
export divided byexports (with a positive coefficient), a measure of the

vulnerability of a country's foreign exchange revenues to external price

fluctuations, 6) international reserves divided by imports (with a negative

coefficient), a measure of the "international financial stability of the

nation".

     The second example is a study by Sargen [1977] using discriminant analysis

to classify a group of L.D.C. countries into a rescheduling and a non—

rescheduling category.   The explanatory variables were 1) debt service ratio,

2) reserve-import ratio,3) export growth rate,4) growth rate of real GNP,

5) level of real GNP per capita, 6) rate of change of the CPI, 7) growth of

    a 'Measure of relative purchasing power parity".

     Both these studies and others not mentioned here suffer from the absence

of an explicit model of default.   Specifically, they cannot differentiate

between "bad-luck" default and "discretionary" or "dishonest" default.        If

the r.h.s. variables in these regressions measure any relevant aspect of the

default decision, they try to assess the borrower's current and future

opportunity set, i.e. his ability to repay.     This is adequate for a full

analysis of default only if countries never default when they have the economic

ability to pay their debt obligations.      However, a solvent borrower may

choose to default if the expected benefit from doing so exceeds the anticipated

current and future costs.   These costs are mainly reflected in the defaulting

country's inability to have access to international credit in the future.

This will be a serious constraint if its exports and imports are large, variable

and uncertain.   While export variability may therefore make it hard for a

country to service its debt obligations when exports are temporarily (and/or

unexpectedly) low, that same variability provides an additional incentive not

 to fall in arrears on its external debt.     This more complete view of debt

 repudiation has been developed and implemented empirically by Eaton and

 Gersovitz [1979, 1980], who model and estimate optimal borrowing arid   default
                                  - 10   -


behavior    by debtors and optimal credit rationing by lenders.     It would seem

that this approach should lead to better predictions than the ad hoc approaches

adopted in the earlier literature.



4)      The occurrence of "arrearages and delinguencies" since World War II

is a comparatively rare event.      As of September 30, 1978 total arrearages

and delinquencies on post-World War II debt of U.S. Government agencies

was $612 million, compared with a total post-World War II foreign debt on

the books of the U.S. government on that date of $45.7 billion.        (Bergsten

[1979]).     Data on non—guaranteed private loans are much harder to come by.
A dramatic recent example is the failure of Zaire to pay interest on its
loans    since June 1975.   It is estimated that private debt to commercial
banks    up to $930.5 million may have been affected by this (Zuheir Sofia

[1978]).      In Zaire's case default was not "discretionary" but reflected

"bad luck" and bad management.      Given the ability to pay, the incentive

to default is an increasing function of the volume of outstanding debt and

a decreasing function of    a country's likely future need for access to
international   credit markets.    The relative infrequency of default may

be a reflection of the superior country risk analysis of public and private

international lending agencies.      This seems unlikely, given the quality

of most of the work that I have seen.        It is more likely to reflect the

high cost of default, in the form of loss of access to the international

capital markets.      Unlike bankrupt individuals, countries can't relocate

and open shop again under a new name.        It would therefore seem useful to

do a careful cost-benefit analysis of the resources devoted to the      evaluation
of   country risk
                                  — 11 —


III.   The Standard Economic View of International Financial Markets

       When modelling behavior under uncertainty, professional economists tend

to simply postulate the existence of (objective or subjective) probability

distribution functions for the unknown current and future events whose

outcomes will determine the degree of success or failure of some set of

economic decisions.     At its most general level the theory applies the same

paradigm--expected utility maximization--to household consumption, labor-

leisure and portfolio allocation decisions as to the financial and real

investment decisions of the business sector.       Porfolio theory——in its

mean—variance incarnation——has become established as the highest form of

rational financial decision—making under uncertainty.        This holds for

international as for domestic investment and portfolio management.        Rather

less attention has been paid by economists to the exact nature of the

risks faced by different economic agents, the working hypothesis apparently

being that there is a natural division of labor between the practical man

of affairs who evaluates the risks and returns of the various projects in

his domain, and the economist who uses the fruits of this labor to compute

the Markowitz frontier.     Unconstrained by any perceived need to relate

their assumed distributions of risks and returns to the realities of

practical portfolio management, economists have tended to go the way of

analytical least resistance.     In the field of international finance this

has resulted in a stylized view of the world that I shaell call efficient

international capital markets theory. Efficient international capital

markets are characterized by a number of properties.

1)     Instantaneous and continuous market clearing.      Given the information

available to all actual and potential market participants, given their

expectations of the future and given the other state variables (exogenous

and predetermined) that together fully describe the state of the system

(the set of international financial markets) ,   asset   prices and rates of

return always assume the values required to equate demand and supply in all
                                   — 12 —


2)    Competitiveness of all markets.       The implicit or explicit

assumption of free entry and many actual or potential traders implies that

all market participants are price takers.      The demands and supplies that

are kept in continuous balances are the notional demands of competitive,

expected utility or market value maximizing agents.

3)    Rational expectations and incomplete but not asymmetric information.

The anticipations of all agents are based on subjective probability density

functions of future returns that are the same as the true, objective

probability density functions generating these uncertain returns.      Since

the theory seldom goes leyond the first two moments of the distribution of

returns, this assumption means in practice that all lenders and borrowers

know the correct means vector and variance-covariance matrix of asset returns.

This assumption that all agents have the same (albeit incomplete) information

will turn out to be very restrictive and very important.

4)    All assets are perfectly divisible and perfectly "liquid", i.e. all

assets are marketable in any quantity at parametric prices.      There are

no transactions costs (including costs of gathering information) and r

restrictions on short sales.

5)    Each country issues an asset that is risk free in terms of that

country's currency.      Investors can borrow or lend any amount at these

risk—free rates.      Except for their currency denomination, these risk-free

assets are identical in all respects.

      A market with properties 1) - 4) is inforinationally efficient in the

sense that the prices determined in such a market "fully reflect" the

available, homogenous information.      Property 5) is not essential for market

efficiency but is the simplest way to generate one of the important

propositions of international financial market theory, i.e. interest parity.

I shall not be concerned with the issue of the extent to which prices in

markets with non-homogenous asymmetric information are efficient aggregators

of this diverse, heterogenous information (on this see e.g. Grossman
                                     — 13 —


        Some of the important implications of efficient international capital
markets theory are the following.

a)      For the risk—free assets mentioned under property 5), international
interest parity prevails: the domestic interest, r, equals the foreign
interest rate r* plus the forward discount on the domestic currency,
     r =   r*   + E.

b)      International investors can    and   will engage in instantaneous stock-
shift rebalancing of their portfolios between domestic and foreign assets
in response to new information.

c)      Even with risk—averse investors, the forward exchange rate will be an
unbiased, mean squared error miminizing predictor of the future spot rate
with the appropriate maturity, if the conditions stated by Frankel [1979]
are satisfied.         These assumptions were 1) rates of return on nominal
assets are independent of rates of return on real assets and 2) there are
no 'outside' assets denominated in the currency of the country that issues
them.

d)      The "small country" assumption that the interest rate on its own
liabilities is parametric to a borrowing country (i.e. that there is an
.nfinitely elastic world demand for the country's debt) is an appropriate
one for a large number of actual 'small' countries, i.e. countries with a
small share of world wealth, GNP and trade (although not, presumably for the
U.S.A.).

e)      Foreign exchange market intervention (sales and purchases of international
assets by central banks) is irrelevant for the real economy to the extent
that it is anticipated and harmful to the extent that it is unanticipated.

f)      Capital controls and exchange controls lower potential welfare.

g)      Monetary (and fiscal) policy cannot affect domestic interest rates
except to the extent that it affects the forward premium.           Under fixed
exchange rates, therefore, domestic interest rates are independent of domestic
monetary and fiscal policy (other than differential tax treatment of domestic
and foreign interest income etc.).           In the next section, I shall describe
some of the ways in which propositions a) through g) must be modified in
the presence of political risk.
                                          — 14 —


IV.   The Implications of Political Risk for the Modelling of International
      Financial Markets

      IV.l       The demise of interest parity in the presence of political risk

       The proposition that political risk, especially default risk, causes
departures from international interest parity -—                     equality     of interest rates
on domestic and foreign assets after allowing for the cost of forward cover ——
is well—established         (Kenen [1965] ,   Kouri     [1976] ,     Eaton [1978]). The
following example is taken from Eaton [1978].

       Consider an investor from country 1 who maximizes the expected utility
of terminal wealth W1 by optimally allocating his initial wealth
between domestic assets paying a safe nominal return r and foreign assets
earning a rate of return               in terms of foreign currency (country 2) with
probability Q* and a rate of return -l with probability 1 - Q*.                                          lç*
is the foreign debtor's probability of default. est denotes the logarithm of
the spot exchange rate in period t, e the lcgaritbm of the one period
forward exchange rate in period t.                  The investor from country 1 allocates
a fraction XF of his initial wealth to the bond of country 1.                                         A fraction
      of his initial wealth is used to purchase country 2's currency forward.
The balance sheet of this investor is given below, in Table IV.l together
with the expressions for the returns on his investments.                            There is assumed
to be no risk of default on forward contracts.                       At time t the forward
exchange rate e5+1 is a random variable with mean e5+1 and variance
cY.       For our purposes it is immaterial whether the investor's utility is
a function of nominal wealth                  or of real wealth w/p where Pt iS
the appropriate general price level index.                    For simplicity I shall consider
the case where                is the appropriate argument in the utility function.
The investor maximizes E(tJ(wt1)). u' > 0, u 0, where                                                   is given
by

 (IV.l)
                                       s s                              *       s
           - W    =     I
                                    + X (e          - ef                    + e           -       e
                                                               + XF(r
                      Wtt(l_XF)rt             t+l                                   t+l
                                                                                              *
                                                              with   probability Q
                                                    —          —
                      Wt[(l_XF)rt +                     et)
                                                              with   probability l_Q*.
                                   — 15   —




                      Table IV.1



           Assets            Liabilities



Foreign bonds


Domestic bonds



Forward purchase of         Forward sale of
foreign currency      W     destjc            currency \yj




                           Net worth




  Rate of return on the foreign bond:                          with probability Q
                                                      &

                                                               with   probability 1_Q*
  Rate of return on the domestic bond                          with probability 1
  Rate of return on the forward contract .             - with probability 1
                                                          4:
                                                 — 16    —




By taking a second—order Taylor Series approximation at                             we can express
expected utility as:



(IV.2)                              u(w) + U' t)E(w+i) + ku" (Wt)E(wt+i_w)2
          EIU(Wt+i)}
          The    first-order         conditions for a maximum can be rewritten as:




(IV.3) AS =
                 —s
                 e+1
                           —
                                ef
                                     -

                       e


(IV.4)    F=      (r r)    -
                                     rR 0*(l_0*) (1+)]1.
          with
(IV.5a)                    =    (r*+     et_ est) 0* -    (l_Q*).

(Iv.5b)               R=        —




         Similarly,            in country 2 investors maximize E(U*(W*t+1)) where
           is given by:


(Iv.6)Wt÷1 —          W=       W*tI(l_AF*)r*t + A*S(eft —                + A*F(rt + est —
                                                                est+l)                      esti))
                                                             with probability Q

                               Jt*f(l_AF*)r*t + A*(e —                   —
                                                                estl)        A*FJ

                                                             with probability 1 - Q.

1-   Q    is the probability of country 1 defaulting on debts to country 2,
A*F is the share of country 2's wealth invested in country l's bonds,
and A*5 is the share of country 2's wealth allocated to the forward sale
of country l's currency.

     This yields:
                      —s             f
(Iv.7)     A*5 = e1 —
                                          —

                        R*cY2
                                e


                  =
(Iv.8)
                      (r_       r*t) [R*Q1_Q (12)11
                                                               — 17 —

           with

(IV.9a)               =
                              (r + est — e)Q —                         (1—0)



(IV.9b)        R* =       Ut" (* )W*/U*l (w*)

     Let Bt the stock of country 1 bonds and B*t the stock of country
2 bonds.        Market equilibrium in the two bond markets and in the forward
market is given in (v.10-12).                            It is assumed that the initial distribution
of wealth is as follows: residents of country 1 own a fraction ct1 of the
stock of domestic bonds and a fraction                                                       of the stock of foreign bonds.



(IV.lO)        (l_XF)(clBt +                            exp(e)) +                       X*F((l_c)B+(l_)B*              exp(est))         Bt

(IV.ll) AF(B + lB*texp(est))                                           +
                                                                               (l_X*F)((l_al)Bt        +
                                                                                                            (l_i)B*texp(eSt))
                                                                                                                                     =
                                                                                                                                         Bexp(e
(Iv.12)        AS(aB + l3*texp(es)                             +           XS          (l_ci)Bt +   (1_$l)B*texp(est)
                                                                                                                            =   0.

     The following conclusions can be drawn immediately:
                                                                                         *
a)   If there is no risk of default (Q = Q = 1), market equilibrium requires
                                   *       f
interest parity: r +                    e-e=
                                                                                   *
b)   If there is default risk (0 <                                     Q, Q < 1),               but there is risk—neutrality
      *
(R = R     =   0),        market equilibrium might seem to require:

                  *            f       s *                     *
               (rt        +
                              e    -
                                       e)Q
                                                   —    (l-Q       )
                                                                           =


               and


               (r + es                 f                                       *
                                   -
                                       e)Q
                                               -
                                                       (1-Q) =

The expected rate of retirnfrom investing at home or abroad must be the same

to the residents of any given country if they are to hold both domestic and

foreign    bonds; the common expected rate of return could, however, differ as

between residents from different countries:                                                    there is "asymmetric" default

risk for a given borrower vis a                           vis           domestic and              foreign   lenders.      What

happens in fact is that at least one country's bond is held exclusively by

that country's own residents: national capital markets become segmented.
                                      — 18 —

                                               *
c)   If there is default risk (0 <      Q, Q < 1)       interest parity will not prevail,

regardless of the presence or absence of risk aversion.


     Note that in the presence of default risk, forward cover cannot fully

eliminate exchange risk.        Even if the forward contract is free of default

risk, as we have assumed, not all exchange risk can be eliminated if, as we

have assumed, the default risk is attached to an asset, that is denominated

in terms of foreign exchange.        If there is no exchange risk (a2 =      0,
e = e+1      =
                 e = e),    default risk alone is sufficient to prevent interest

parity from being established.        The forward rate will be an unbiased
                                                   —s         f
predictor of the future spot exchange rate (e+1 =                 if either there is
                                                             e)
no exchange risk or there is risk—neutrality.


     IV.2.       Risk, asynunetric information and the 'Lemons Principle' in
                 International Financial Markets

     The 'Lemons Principle', due to Akerlof [1970) states that in markets

with asymmetric information between buyers and sellers (e.g. the buyer does

not know the true quality of the goods he buys while the seller does), there

exists an incentive for sellers to offer poor quality goods because both

high and low quality goods sell at the same price.            The result is a

reduction in the average quality of the goods traded and a contraction in the

size of the market.        This analysis has been applied to credit markets by

Jaf fee and Russell [1976) who developed it into a theory of credit rationing

and by Webb [1979] who uses it to refute Barro's public sector debt neutrality

theorem (Barro [1974)).        This section applies Jaffee and Russell's (J.R.)

and Webb's analyses to international financial markets.             For simplicity,

exchange risk is abstracted from i.e. the analysis is set in a fixed exchange

rate world which is confidently expected to stay that way.

     Consider a two-period world in which a large group of borrowing countries

faces an international financial market in which lenders have access to funds

at a constant rate of interest i.        All borrowing countries have identical,

non-stochastic income streams (y1, y) and identical preferences defined on
                                       — 19 —


 consumption in the two periods (c1,             Some countries, however, are
                                         c2).
 "honest" and others "dishonest".       Honest countries will not default in

 period 2 on their loans contracted in period 1.        Dishonest countries will

 default on their loans if default results in a higher value of second period

 consumption   than   repayment of the loan.    In the absence of a penalty for

 default,   z, dishonest countries will always choose to default.      bte that
 default in this set-up is always discretionary, as income is non—stochastic.
 The model can be extended to allow for stochastic income streams.       This results

 in 'unlucky' honest countries going into default as well as dishonest countries,

whether 'lucky' or 'unlucky'.       We are not concerned here with the fundamental

determinants of discretionary (or dishonest) as opposed to unlucky default.

These determinants may be entirely psychological, reflecting differences in

national "tastes" for honesty, or they may reflect inter-country differences

in the perceived cost of default, i.e. in the value of z.        Eaton and Gersovitz

 [1979, 1980] provide an interesting positive theoretical model of default

behaviour and test it on a sample of LDC's.

     There is assumed to be asymmetric information insofar as lenders cannot

differentiate, in period 1, between honest and dishonest borrowers if both

demand the same amount of loans, L, at any given borrowing rate, r.--—     If--tenders
could identify   dishonest borrowers, they would be excluded from the market.-"

Without such an exclusion rule, dishonest borrowers would always contract for the

largest possible loan.       With this exclusion rule, dishonest borrowers will

duplicate or mimic the borrowing behavior-of the honest borrowers.        It is

assumed that the solution to the two—period Fisherian intertexnporal choice

problem   without default, involves a positive amount of borrowing which is the
same for all borrowers (utility functions are strongly separable in
consumption during the two periods and the 'propensity to default').
     With first—period consumption chosen by all borrowers "as if" they were
honest, and with utility an increasing function of consumption in both periods,
the dishonest will default on loans if the value of second period consumption
                                                           - 20   -


under default exceeds what it would be without default.                                 With default second

period consumption is y2 -                           z.   Without default, second period consumption

is y2 —         (l+r)   L, where L is the size of the loan.

       To characterize the market equilibrium that is generated by this

asymmetric information structure we first derive the demand for and supply of

loans.

       The utility maximization programs of the honest borrower is given by

equations (IV.13-15)- that of the dishonest borrower by (IV.l6-19).


(IV.l3)          max
                                 u(c1, c2)
                  cl,c2

                  subject to:

(Iv.l4)           c1 = y1 + L

(IV.15)           c2 = y2 —          L       (l+r)


(IV.16)           max
                             u(c1, c2)
                  c11c2
                  subject to:

(Iv.17)                 =        + L
                  C1        y1

(IV.18)
                  C2
                        = max {y2 —             L(l+r,,    y2 —   z}

(IV.19)           L = L

Given (IV.19), L =                   L   =   L, say, and the demand for loans by both types of
borrowers is fully determined by the behavior of the honest ones, represented in

(IV.13      —
                 15).       This yields a demand function                  for loans,
(IV.20)           Ld =                    y2, r).

We only consider solutions involving borrowing, i.e. Ld >                               0

We assume that                   <   0 : an increase in the borrowing rate reduces the demand

for loans.              The substitution effect of a higher interest rate favours

   <   0,       and the negative wealth effect of a higher interest rate on borrowers


will also tend to reduce c1 and thus I. ,                              if c1 is a normal good.
                                                      — 21 —

         The Supply of loans is derived from the risk-neutral
                                                                                             expected profit
 maximizing behavior of lenders.
                                                     Following Jaffee and Russell we assume that
 the cost of default varies among dishonest individuals.
                                                                                             There are very high
 values of z, specifically z >
                                               l+r   , for which          no-one defaults.              (Note that
 y2(l+r) is the largest loan ever demanded by honest borrowers).
                                                                                                           We also
 assume there to be a minimum value of z, z                                                                    z.
                                           nan
                                               .                             For   loans less than              nii n

                                                                         l+r
 no-one defaults. Assijjne there is a continuous distribution function of

dishonest borrowers by z for values of z above z    .   The distribution of
                                                mm
defaults then is a continuous function of
                                          (1+r)L for values of L >
                                                                                                         l+r
Let A = A((l+r)L)be
                    the probability that a loan is not defaulted on.
A((l+r)L) = 1 for (1+r) L < z
                                           m.n
                                                 .
                                                          A((l+r)L)       is a continuous function of
(l+r)L with A' <0 for (l+r) L > z
                                                 mm           Expected profits, ir            ,   of   the lending
institutions are given by
                                                              7/
(Iv.21)         =       (l-i-r)L   A((l+r)L) —   (l+i)L.
Assuming a competitive loan market with costless and instantaneous free
                                                                        entry,
Tr =   0, and the supply function for loans
                                            is given by:
(IV.22) (l+r) A((1+r)L) = 1 ÷ i
           z                                                       z.
ForL<  iran
    — l+r           ,    A=landr=i.              ForL>1
                                                                    nan
                                                                           wehave A< 1 and r>i.
                                           z.                                   z.
Beyond knowing that for L —
                          <
                                            iran
                                           1+r       ,r   =   i    and for L >   nan
                                                                                       l+r    ,   r > i,   the slope

of the supply schedule of loans, LS, is amiDiguous.                             LS =        2.5(r, i) with              =
          (l+r)A'L)
                                                                                                                  r
— (A +
                                   This supply schedule will be upward-sloping if the
        (l+r)2A'

elasticity of the A function with respect to A exceeds unity i.e. if

A'(l+r)L >
           1        .        For reasons of space this is the only case considered in
what follows.             The demand and supply schedules for loans are drawn in

Figure Iv.l.             If, as drawn in Figure IV.l, the demand and supply schedules
                                          z.
                             mm n
intersect at a value of L > l+r   , then                      A< 1    and r >      i          the equilibrium
borrowing      rate exceeds the lenders' marginal cost of funds: honest borrowers

pay a premium above the opportunity cost of funds, 1 + i                                ,    which subsidizes
          — 22   —




        Figure IV.1




r


                      S




I




    0
                          L
                                     — 23 —


      The application of the Jaffer-Russell model to international lending in

the   presence   of discretionary default risk suggests the following proposition:

Proposition iv.l.        If the international financial market clears (we are

at Q in Figure IV.l), the presence of sovereign risk (discretionary default

risk) can lead to the violation of interest parity: the borrowing rate, r,

will be above the marginal cost of funds to the lender, i.

      A   second important potential departure from the efficient markets
paradigm is that a strong case can     be made for the existence of non—market

clearing, rationing equilibria.       The assumption of a competitive lending

market with free entry is maintained.         Suppliers are therefore always on a

zero expected profit schedule.        The assumption of mimicking behavior    by
dishonest borrowers is also maintained, and the A function underlying the

supply schedule         is therefore unchanged.   Consider again the "normal" case of

an upward—sloping jS schedule.        Market clearing occurs at 2 ,    the   intersection

of d and 9. Normal competitive pressures may appear to rule out any

other position on the         schedule as an equilibrium. At an interest rate

below r1    in Figure   3 there is excess demand for loans, putting upward pressure on

r;    at an interest rate above r1 there is excess supply and downward pressure on

r.     However, honest borrowers would prefer a     rationing   contract such as

Indifference curves in r -      L space have the shape of 10 and I in Figure IV.l.
They are horizontal where they intersect the demand schedule, with a negative

slope to the right and a positive slope to the left of the intersection.            They

are strictly concave in the neighborhood of the intersection.           Higher utility

levels correspond to lower indifference curves.         Given mimicking behavior by

dishonest borrowers, I is the highest utility level that can be achieved by

honest (and dishonest) borrowers.        While they would prefer to borrow         at the

interest rate r2, honest borrowers prefer the rationed loan L2 at interest

rate r2 to the unrationed loan         at r1.2" Dishonest borrowers always prefer

the larger loan but their preferences are not effective because they do not

wish to reveal themselves.        Consider the simple, and not implausible price-
                                       — 24 —

setting    paradigm in which lenders set borrowing rates.      If they offer the

loan L2 at the interest rate r2 there will be excess demand for loans, but

honest borrowers will never offer a higher interest rate than r2 for a larger

loan    that can be   supplied profitably by the lenders.    Lenders could make

positive    profits for contracts above 2 (ignoring free entry for the sake of
argument), but every such contract is dominated by (r2, L2) from the point of
view    of the honest borrowers.     Contracts below l are   preferred by   honest

borrowers but cannot be supplied profitably.        If lenders were to offer L2

at r2, there are therefore no clear market forces at work which would cause

lenders to change their behavior.        At ', there is no effective excess demand.

It can therefore be viewed as a (Wilson) equilibrium)" The implications for

the modelling of international financial markets are summarized in Proposition

IV.2.

Proposition IV.2.        In the presence of sovereign risk (discretionary default

risk) international financial markets can be characterized by credit rationing.

Even if a market—clearing interest rate—loan configuration exists, it is quite

plausible that a non-market clearing, rationing equilibrium prevails.


        IV.3.   Other departures from market-efficiency associated with
                international asset risks

        In the simple model of Section IV.l the existence of default risk meant

the demise of international interest parity.        By itself, however, international

interest parity is neither necessary nor sufficient for market efficiency.

The Jaf fee—Russell model of Section IV.2 generated both an inefficient market—

clearing equilibrium and a rationing equilibrium.        Such a state of affairs

is indeed inconsistent with the conventional notions of market efficiency

outlined in Section III.        The source of this inefficiency is Lnformation

that is not merely incomplete, but unequally available to different market

participants.         Such a situation creates an incentive for obtaining additional

information; country risk studies are an example of such effects.            The

often quite considerable costs in time, manhours and other resources involved
                                    — 25 —

in   obtaining better information about potential borrowerst creditworthiness

constitutes another departure from market efficiency.      Such portfolio

adjustment costs will impede the instantaneous ('stock-shift') rebalancing of

portfolios in response to new information that characterizes the efficient

markets models.      Instead portfolios will be adjusted in a slower, gradual

process.      High information costs may also be reflected in "thin" markets, with

a low volume of transactions.      Indeed, certain markets (the U.S. Iranian

loan market) may dry up altogether.      Assets therefore become less "liquid".

The assumption that each transactor acts as if he could dispose of his entire

stock of foreign assets without affecting the price becomes untenable.      This

will make the markets less competitive.

      Merely to point out that any or all of these effects may result from the

existence of international asset risks is not to make a judgement as to their

actual importance at a specific moment.      If international asset risks are in

fact negligible, the efficient markets model will be a reasonable description

of reality.     I believe that, merely on the baLs of a quick review of recent

historical events, it is safe to argue that actual international financial

markets are affected frequently and significantly by actual or perceived

 international asset risks.

      The existence of inefficient (especially quantity-constrained) equilibria

means there is scope for policy intervention (foreign exchange market intervention,

capital controls etc.) that is potentially welfare increasing.      No serious study

of the theory of second best as applied to inefficient international financial

markets has to my knowledge been undertaken.      The next section of the paper

analyses some of the positive policy issues associated with the presence of

international asset risks.     The familiar ad hoc macromodel that is used is

adequate for a narrow positive analysis of policy effectiveness, but does not

permit a consideration of the normative issues.
                                  — 26 —

V.   The implications of political risk for the international adjustment process
     with special emphasis on the scope for monetary policy: the rehabilitation
     of "imperfect capital mobility" and the non-horizontal BP Curve.

     The first implication of international asset risk is that domestic and

foreign assets no longer are perfect substitutes to the domestic investor, even

if they are identical in all other respects, including currency denomination.

Specifically, there no longer exists any foreign asset that is riskiess to the

domestic investor, even in terms of the currency in which it is denominated.

The second implication of international asset risk is that rationing may occur;

the supply of loans to an individual borrower (or country) is no longer

perfectly elastic at parametric prices or rates of return.     The third major

implication is that transactions costs in international financial markets,

especially the informational costs of evaluating the credit-worthiness of

individual lenders and borrowers is raised significantly.     This has

significant implications for the investor's incentive (or indeed ability) to

execute the instantaneous stock—shift changes in portfolio composition that

are such an integral part of contemporary financial theory.     I shall analyse

the implications of international asset risk from the point of view of the

authorities' ability to affect domestic interest rates.     For reasons of

space only monetary policy is considered.    The effect of variations in the

domestic money supply, brought about through open market purchases or sales

of domestic government bonds on the domestic interest rate is analysed in

three models.    The first incorporates the assumption of perfect international

credit markets and perfect substitutability of domestic and foreign assets.

The second relaxes the assumption of perfect substitutability and replaces it

by the assumption that domestic and foreign assets are gross   substitutes.
Foreign   demand for domestic bonds also is no longer perfectly elastic at some

exogenously determined rate of interest.    Both models 1 and 2 maintain the

assumption   of negligible transactions costs: stock-shift changes in portfolio
composition   between domestic and foreign assets are both feasible and optimal.

The third model assumes significant transactions costs for foreigners
                                                 — 27   —



purchasing               domestic bonds and domestic residents purchasing foreign bonds.         These

transactions costs are assumed to be such that stock—shift changes between domestic

and foreign assets are never optimal.                       This requires that there be costs associated

with the instantaneous rates of change of asset holdings.                      Lumpy transactions costs

associated with finite changes in asset holdings would still permit instantaneous

stock-shifts in portfolios.




 Notation

     A               :     domestic absorption

     Y                     domestic output

     X                     trade balance surplus
                           demand for real money balances
         *
     h               :     foreign demand for domestic bonds
     j               :     domestic demand for foreign londs
     W               :     private wealth
     G                     government spending
     T           :         taxes net of transfers
     M           :         nominal stock of money balances
     B                     nominal stock of domestic government bonds
     Bd          :         domestic holdings of donstic government bonds
                           foreign holdings of domestic government bonds
         *
     B           :         domestic holdings of foreign bonds (denominated in foreign currency)
         *
     R           :         official foreign exchange reserves (denominated in foreign currency)
     r           :         interest rate on domestic bonds
     r*          :         interest rate on foreign bonds

     p       :            price of domestic output

                          price of imports (in terms of foreign currency)
     e       :            spot exchange rate (price of foreign exchange in terms of domestic
                          currency)
    p        :
                          domestic and foreign cost-of—living index

                          instantaneous stock—shift (differential) operator
    (\                            .              .
                                                                 — 28 —


Model 1: A simple model without international asset risks.

             The model is represented in equations V.1 -                                  V.12.
(v.1) A=Y-X                                               (LM)

(V.2)                L =                                  (Is)
                            p

(V.3)                A =    A(r      —
                                          np/p, p/ep, Y, W, G, T); A1 < 0;                       A2 >    0; 0 <     A3
                                                                                                                          <   1;

                                                                                  A4>O; O<A5<l;                           l<A60.
v.4)                 2.   =9.(r,         Y, W)                              ;
                                                                                  £       <0;    2.2 >   0;   0 <
                                                                                                                    £3
                                                                                                                          <   1.

(V.5)                X =    X(r      -    xp/p, p/ep, Y, W, G, T); X1 > 0;                       X2 <    0;   - 1 <      X3 < 0;

                                                                                  X4<O; —l<X5<O; 0<X6<l.
                                                 *
(V.6)                W      CM + B + eB )/p


(v.7)                r =    r*   +

                                         * (l—c)
(V.8)                p = p       (ep )                                      ;     0   <   c <   1.

To stay as close as possible to text-book practice I shall consider the

"Keynesian" version of the model which has Y endogenous and p, the price

of domestic output as exogeriously fixed.                                       The model can of course be

easily adapted to handle the "classical" case with Y fixed and p endogenous)-"

For reasons of space only the fixed exchange rate case is considered.                                                         In

model 1 it is assumed, without loss of generality for our purposes, that all

domestic government debt is held by domestic residents.                                              Capital formation

is ignored, but could easily be included.                                        The exogenous variables are p,
    *        *                                                                                                                     *
r       ,   p    ,   G and T.             Predetermined variables are private net worth M + B + eB
                                                            *
and public sector net worth eR -                                 M -   B.

The instantaneous stock-shift constraints on changes in public and private

sector portfolio composition are:

for the private sector
                                            *
(V.9)                6M + S8 + eóB                   0

and for the public sector
                                            *
(V.10)               5M +   SB    - e'SR         E   0.
                                            —29—
The continuous flow constraints are:

the balance of payments identity

(V.11)
             .*      .*
         eB +eR pY+reB —pAEpX+reB
                                       **                **
and the government budget identity:
                          .*
(V 12) M + B - eR              pG + rB - pT.

In the Keynesian version under a fixed exchange rate,    =    =0
                                                       p
The LM curve will be upward-sloping and with mild restrictions the IS
                                                                                    *
curve will be downward-sloping.                The horizontal line with intercept r

in Figure V.1 is often referred to as the BP or balance of payments

equilibrium schedule.             It is of course no such thing.      I shall refer to

it as the EPB or external portfolio balance schedule.                It shows the

combinations of r and Y consistent with portfolio equilibrium as between

the stocks of internal and external debt.                The flow balance of payments
                                            .*
equilibrium       condition (V.11 with R E 0) has no convenient graphical

representation in r—Y space.-' The story of the ineffectiveness of

monetary policy as regards the interest rate is familiar and follows immediately

from equation V.7 with e = 0.               An open market purchase of domestic bonds by an

amount will not result in an increase in M.                  Private agents will use the

additional money to purchase foreign bonds to the tune of                   in the process they

return the increase in M to the authorities in exchange for foreign exchange

required to purchase the foreign bonds.                The instantaneous result of this

stock-shift portfolio rebalancing is an unchanged M, a reduction in B by an
                                       *                           *
amount   ,   a reduction in eR by              and an increase in eB by .      The interest

rate and the level of output are unaffected.                Domestic (and foreign) portfolio

holders are indifferent between holding domestic and foreign bonds at the common,
                                   *
exogenous interest rate r because they are assumed to have identical risk

properties.


Model 2: A simple model with international asset risks but without
          transactions costs.

     In this model domestic and foreign lxnds no longer are perfect substitutes

in private portfolios.            With foreign assets perceived as risky by domestic

residents and domestic assets viewed as risky by foreign residents, the domestic
  - 30 -



Figure V.1




              LM(rl) ie)
             =        M




             E r '3




                 I
                                                                     —31—
interest rate is no longer automatically equal to the foreign interest rate plus

the forward premium on the foreign currency and a fortiori it will no longer be

always equal to the foreign interest rate plus the expected rate of appreciation

of the foreign currency.                             The model is summarized in equations IV.13 -                                IV.17.
                    *              *         d   *
 (V.13)   A(r-p/p, r +e/e-p/p, p/ep , Y, (M+B +eB )/p, G, T) =
                                 *                *                                         d     *     -
          Y -          X(r—Lp/p,r +Le/e-Lp/p, p/ep , Y,                                (M+B +eB )/p, G, T).

          A1 <         0, A2 < 0,                  A3 >      0, 0 <    A4
                                                                             <   1, A5 > 0;       0 <
                                                                                                            A6
                                                                                                                    l —    1 <        <   0.
                                                                                                                                 A7
          X        >   0;              >   0, X3 < 0,            —   1   <
                                                                             X4
                                                                                  <   0;   X5 <   0;        — 1 <         < 0;   0 <
                                                                                                                                          X7
                                                                                                                                               <   1.

                        *                     d   *
(V.14)    9(r,r +e/e,                  Y, (M+B +eB )/p) = M/p

                   <
                               2                   3 °                           1.


               *             d   * -.      *-
(V.15)    j(r,r +e/e, Y, (M+B +eB )/p) = eB /p

                   <   0;              >   0;                  0; 0 <             < 1.

           *                           *
(V.16)    h (r—e/e, r                                    )   = B /p.


(V.17) B + Bd = B.


Without transactions costs each domestic or foreign investor acts as if, at

parametric interest rates, existing portfolios can be reshuff led costlessly.

The stock—shift constraint of the public sector is given as before by (V.10).

The stock—shift constraint for the domestic private sector allows for the

fact that some domestic bonds are held by the rest of the world, as given

by (V.9').
                                           *
(V.9')    'SM +        'SBd + edB                  E 0

Note that (V.10) and (V.9') imply:

(V.18)    'SR =
               *
                         'SB
                               f   —   e6B
                                               *


The continuous flow constraints are:
the balance of payments identity
(V.19)    eR +eB -B =pY+reB* -rBf -pA=pX+reB
         .*     .* .f          *          * *
                                              -rBf
and the government budget identity, which is the same as before (V.12).
                                                        — 32 —


          Equations (Iv.14) and (IV.15) represent the domestic demand for money and
the domestic demand for foreign bonds.                                  The domestic demand for domestic bonds,

h, is suppressed using the balance sheet constraint                                                + h + j E W E (M + Bd
      *     —
+ eB )/p.                Money, domestic and foreign bonds are 'gross substitutes'.                                        If the

demand for noney balances depends positively on income, i > 0, then h + j, E
-         < 0.           Using (IV.l6) and (IV.17) to substitute for Bd and B, and assuming

a fixed price level and a fixed exchange rate, we can summarize the monetary

equilibrium as in equations (V.20, 21 and 22), choosing units such that
                 *
e=p=p                    =1.
                           *                        *           *                      *
(V.20)       A(r, r , 1, Y, M + B — h (r, r ,                           ..)   + B , C, T) =
                                 *                          *            *                     *
             Y       -   X(r,   r ,   1, Y, M + B - h           (r, r ,       ..)      + B , G, T)                   IS

                           *                    *       *                  *
(V.21)       i(r, r , Y, M + B — h (r, r ,                      ..)     + B ) =            M                         LM

                           *                    *       *                         *            *
(V.22)       j(r, r , Y, M + B — h (r, r ,                      ..)     + B           ) = B                         EPB

                                                                              *
The three endogenous variables are r, Y and B if the authorities choose to

control M.                Figure V.2 illustrates the effect of an increase in M brought

about by an open-market purchase of domestic bonds by the government.                                                     With
                                                                    *
M   an instrument of government control, B adjusts instantaneously to satisfy
                                            *
(V.22).          Diagrammatically B adjusts to make the EPB schedule pass through the

intersection of the IS and LM schedules.                                 There is a different EPB schedule

for every value of B*.                   If j is positive, the EPB schedules will be upward—

sloping, if it is negative it will be downward—sloping.                                               If it is upward-
                                            *
sloping,         a higher value of B shifts the EPB schedule to the right; if it is
                                                            *
downward-sloping a higher value of B shifts the EPB schedule to the left.
Whether the EPB schedule is upward-sloping or downward-sloping, the effect of

an increase in M is to lower the domestic interest rate.                                               The open market purchase

of domestic bonds will, if the EPB schedule is upward-sloping (Figures V.2a and

V.2b) lead to a stock-shift outflow of capital.                                            This stock-shift outflow is
                                                              f                                                 *           *
made up of a reduction in foreign holdings of domestic bonds (B = h (r, r ,
                                          — 33 —


                                         Figu v.2

                             E PB



                                ,• EP'
                                                                        /
                                                                       /
                         I
                                                                   /
                                                               /
               /                                           I
                                                          'I
                                                                        /

                                                          //
                                                                   Is
                            1                                               1
         (a)                                        (d)




P.
                                            V




                            /
                        / /
                   /
                             E PI




     /                 Is

         (c)                                        (a)
                                          —34—
                                                                      *             *
and an increase in domestic holdings of foreign bonds (B =                 j(r,
                                                                           •
                                                                                   r ,   Y, W).

Since domestic and foreign bonds are not perfect substitutes, domestic and

foreign portfolio holders can only be induced to hold the smaller volume of

domestic government debt by a decline in its interest rate.                    In Figures

V.2c and V.2d the income effect on the domestic demand for foreign bonds is

negative and the EPB schedule is downward—sloping.                 In V.2c, where the EPB

schedule is less steep than the IS schedule the lowering of the domestic

interest rate resulting from an open market purchase of domestic bonds is again

accompanied by a stock-shift increase in domestic holdin;s of foreign bonds.

In Figure V.2d the EPB schedule is steeper than the IS schedule, reflecting

a very strong negative income effect on domestic demand for foreign bonds.                            In

that case the lower r and higher Y resulting from an open market purchase of
                                                                               *
domestic bonds are accompanied by a stock-shift reduction in B .                        There will
                                     f
still be a stock-shift reduction in B ,           but the combined effect on B -
                                                               -
                                                                                         *
                                                                                              B
                                                                                                  f may
well    be a   decline, i.e. there could be a stock-shift inflow of capital from

abroad.        Note that imperfect substitutability between domestic and foreign

assets results from differences in risk-characteristics of investments among

countries, whether these risk—characteristics are symmetric or not.                          Asymmetric

political risk can make de facto imperfect substitutes out of assets whose

"de-politicized" return      distributions      have identical risk properties.
Model   3:     A simple model with international asset risks and portfolio
               adjustment costs.

        As in the previous model, domestic and foreign bonds are no longer viewed

as perfect substitutes, due to international asset risks.                 In addition it is now

assumed that international asset risks lead to significant portfolio

adjustment costs in international financial markets.                These costs are to be

thought      of primarily as informational.       In the presence of adjustment costs or
other transactions costs, which we shall view as increasing functions of the
instantaneous rates      of change of   asset   stocks, it   will   never be optimal to

engage in instantaneous stock—shift changes in holdings of assets that are

subject to such costs.        In our model this means that instantaneous stock—shift

changes in domestic portfolios between M and B are possible, but not between
                                                                    — .3.5 —

        therefore        always have the dimension of continuous instantaneous rates of

        change with respect to time.                        The literature on optimal capital accumulation

        in the presence of adjustment costs shows that in general the optimal investment

        functions will be complicated functions of the initial state and the current

        and    expected future values of all variables that are viewed as parametric by
     the optimizing agent. If we assume that domestic and foreign bonds have
     identical "de-poljticjzed" risk characteristics, model 3                                can be viewed as
     closest to the asymmetric political risk
                                                                            case, i.e. risk depending on the country
     of nabitat of the lender or borrower.
                                                                           If transactions costs (including information

     costs) are not an increasing function of the rate of change of asset holdings,

     stock—shift changes in portfolio composition would occur whenever exogenous

    parameter changes or disturbances of a certain minimum size occur.
                                                                                                              For simplicity
    I shall assume that the "asset accumulation
                                                                                functions" describing the portfolio
    behaviour of domestic and foreign residents
                                                                                can be represented by simple partial
    stock adjustment functions based on the no—adjustment costs asset demand functions
                *
    j    and h specified in (V.15) and (V.16)                                   The model can now be described by
    equations           (V.13),     (V.15), (V.17) and:


    (V.23)          d
                        (B ' h (r-Ee/e, r*, ..) -
                            p
                                    =
                                               *
                                                                                                       > 0;
                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                             0.

    (V.24)          deB1
                        1       )       Y
                                                   *
                                             j(r, r +                   d
                                                           e/e, Y, (M-i-B
                                                                                   *
                                                                          +eB )/p) —
                      p                                                                            >   0;     (O) =     0.
                                                   *                                         *)
No       stock—shift changes in B will ever be optimal, therefore
 (V.25)             5M + 6Bd            0.
There      also will be no stock-shift change in R *
          In the presence of "internal" portfolio adjustment costs there is
                                                                                                              no
EPB      function.                                                                     *
                                The historically given stocks of B and B are always "willingly
held".           There is, however, a well—defined flow balance of payments equilibrium
                                     Since eR = pX + r *eB*— rBf — eB.* + B
schedule or BP curve in r—Y space.           .*

we can, using (V.23) and (V.24) derive the locus of r and Y pairs for which
R       = 0.
          For the case in which e and p are constant, and setting e =                                               *
                                                                      p                                       = p        1,
this gives:
(V.26)          X(r,r ,
                          *
                                1, Y, M+B—B f+R - (
                                                       *
                                                               'P    -1-
                                                                           **
                                                     —36—
The slope of this schedule is given by:


              dr                      J3 — X4
(V.27)
                   BP
                        =
                             *1*
                            'i' h1-j1+X1-B
                                                        f
In the denominator the "capital inflow" effects of an increase in the interest

rate h1 - 'Yj1                   are positive and will be reinforced by a possible effect of

interest rates on import demand (X1 >                   0).     A higher interest rate will, however,

increase the cost of servicing the outstanding volume of foreign—owned domestic

debt.        Only if this effect is not too significant will the denominator of

(v.27) be positive.                An increase in domestic income will worsen the trade

balance (X4 <         0).        If it increases the (long—run) stock demand for foreign

bonds (j3      > 0)     the flow capital account will also be adversely effected.

If       <   0, the increase in Y would improve the capital account.                       In the 'texthook

case' both numerator and denominator are positive and the BP curve is upward—

sloping, as in Figure V.3.                     The initial equilibrium at 2 is assumed to be a

position of balance of payments equilibrium.                       An increase in M via an open market

purchase of domestic bonds shifts the LM curve to the right, lowers r and raises Y.

The balance of payments moves into disequilibrium.                            The interest rate falls

because no instantaneous stock—shift change in portfolio composition is possible.

A lower interest rate is required to make domestic bond holders willing to hold

a smaller stock of domestic bonds.                     Figur& V.3 aTho incoroorDtes the currcn

account equilibrium schedule, CA, whose equation is given by:

(V.28)
                   *
             X(r,r ,
                                           f    *
                            1, Y, M+B-B +3 , G, T) +          r **
                                                                 B -   rB
                                                                            f = 0.            (CA)


Its slope is given by
                                    -x 4
             dr              —

                                  X1—B
Unless B is very large this will be upward-sloping.                             Unless    is very

large and positive the CA curve will be steeper than the BP curve.                            In

Figure V.3 the initial momentary equilibrium 1 was also assumed to be a

position of current account equilibrium.                      The momentary equilibrium after

the open market purchase at 2' is therefore also a position of current account
           — 37   —




          Figure V.3




                       CA               Lt-1
                                        /
                       I
                       /             / /       LM'

                      /
                       //
                                //
                                /
                                    //
                                    /           6
                            /



              ,1
V
    _/

         //            N
                                N
/


                                               '1'
                                                — 38 -

                                                                      I             *1
        In   the limit, as transactions costs go to zero and i'           and 'I'        tend to

infinity together, model 2 re-emerges and the slope of the BP curve tends to the
                                                             *   dr        = _______
slope of the EPB schedule for a given value of B                 dY EPB       * —
                                                                              h1         j1
When domestic and foreign bonds in addition are perfect substitutes


(h1 = +           =—
                                 EPB
                                       =   0   which is the case of model                ForQ to bea
                                                                                    *
full (stationary) equilibrium it is in addition necessary that h = B                          ,   j    = B

and that the government does not run a deficit or surplus nor engages in

'continuous flow' open market operations (M = — B).                Given a policy function

or financing rule to determine M and B, we can trace the full dynamic adjustment

of the model as described by the behavior over time of the four state variables,
    *
B, B , M and B .
                   f    This   analysis is omitted here for reasons of space.                         Also,

it makes little sense to study long-run asset stock adjustment while maintaining

the short—run assumption of sticky prices.




Conclusion

        International asset risk implies that domestic and foreign loans cease to

be perfect substitutes in private portfolios, even if they are denominated in

the same currency and are identical in all other respects.                  The main implication

for the international adjustment process is that even small, financially open

countries regain control over domestic interest rates.                Without international

asset risks domestic interest rates were independent of domestic monetary and

fiscal policy actions (other than asymmetric tax treatment of domestic and

foreign bond income) under a fixed exchange rate regime.                  With market-determined

exchange rates domestic policy actions could only alter domestic interest rates

by changing the forward discountor premium.                In the presence of international

asset risks, domestic policy affects domestic interest rates even under a fixed

exchange rate regime.          For this conclusion to emerge it is not necessary that
                                   — 39 —


there   be transactions costs or other adjustment costs associated with changes

in   international portfolios.   All that is required is that domestic and foreign

bonds be perceived as imperfect substitutes and that world demand for the domestic

bond is less than perfectly elastic.     Stock—shift portfolio rebalancing will

take place but is not carried to the point that all government-initiated changes
in portfolio composition are arbitraged away. If international asset risks
cause international financial markets to become significantly less 'perfect' and
portfolio adjustment costs rule out instantaneous stock-shift changes in portfolio
composition, the much—maligned flow balance of payments and the non—horizontal
BP curve can reclaim a measure of respectability.
*
    I
   would like to thank Robert Stern and Clas Wihlborg for detailed written
 comments on an earlier version of the paper.   Financial Support from an
 N.S.F. Research Grant is gratefully acknowledged.

FOOTNOTES


1/ Citicorp, 1975, Annual Report, New York, p. 18.



        Citicorp,   1975, Annual Report, New York, p. 18.



3/ Mc.W. Wolfe, [1975], p. 35.



4/ From 1967 to 1975 debt to the private markets of 86 country governments

        on which the World Bank reports has quadrupled.      Even after allowing for

        inflation this represents a sizeable real increase (see Eaton and

        Gersovitz, [1979, 1980]).



5/ These conditions are (see Frankel [1979]): 1) All assets are nominal

        assets (money and bonds) whose returns are riskless in terms of their

        currency of issue, or else -—   if   there are other assets ——    their   real

        returns are independent of currency values.      2) All nominal assets are

        "inside" assets.



6/ Section II reviewed some of the ways in which lenders evaluate the default

        risk of prospective borrowers through "risk analysis".       As long as

        borrowers retain information about their own default risk that is

        superior to lender information, the analysis goes through.            Of course,

        with honest borrowers in a "lucky—unlucky" model, the lender's expertise

        may well give him information about the borrower's default prospects

        that is superior to the information that is available to the borrower.

        Note that this is not the Eaton-Gersovitz model.       They assume that all

        borrowers are potentially dishonest.      All will default if the returns

        exceed the costs.




7/ For convenience, the lendinc institutions are assumed iiol-           to   recover any
8/ Jaffee and Russell show that if A has the Pareto distribution and if

      the mean of this distribution does not exist, then the supply curve will

      be positively sloped for r >         i. If it has the exponential distribution
      it will be backward-bending.          The supply of loans relation need not be

      single—valued: it could be a correspondence rather than a function.

      Jaf fee and Russell rule out multiple equilibria through the assumption

      that A, the proportion of borrowers who do not default, rises with

      r   along   the demand curve and     declines   with r along the supply schedule.

      The   assumption about the demand curve is equivalent to c1 and c2 being
      'gross   substitutes': an increase in r increases c2; this amounts to a

      greater than     unitary   elasticity of loan demand with respect to the

      interest     rate.


 9/    I asswne that the rationing rule is non—stochastic.            Each borrower is

      provided with a certain loan of              at an interest rate r2.     If the

       rationing rule were stochastic, risk—averse borrowers would derive a lower

       level of utility than I from         a   random loan rationing rule with expected

      value L2 at an interest rate of r2.



10/ The same conclusion emerges even more forcefully when the backward—bending

      supply schedule case is considered.



      If labour supply depends on the real wage in terms of            p and labour
      demand      on the real wage in terms of      p, the output supply schedule is

      an increasing function of             ,   even in the classical model   as long as
                                      ep
      1abour   supply is not completely inelastic with respect to the real         wage.
12/ Flow balance of payments equilibrium is given by

                                          *
      eB    pX(r, p
                  —- , Y,   M+B+eB            ,       G, T) +    r eB *
                                                                     *
                                                                              .   From the LM
                  ep           P

      function (V.2) we find eB =   — (9,                                 M + 2. —)
                                                                                 B
                                                      r-+-2. Y+(9,. -1)
                                                  1       2      3
                                    2.3                                   p


13/   This kind of partial adjustment function will only be optimal if costs
      of adjustment are quadratic and expectations are static.
p




    Bibliography


    Akerlof, G.A. "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the
             Market Mechanism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84, August
             1970, pp. 488—500.
    Aliber, Robert Z. "The Interest Parity Theorem: A Reinterpretation,"
             Journal of Political Econny, 81, Nov./Dec. 1973, pp. 1451-1460.

    _________________   "Exchange Risk, Political Risk and Investor Demand for
             External Currency Deposits," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
             7, 1975, pp. 161—179.
    _______________     Exchange Risk and Corporate International Finance, Macmillan,
             1978, London.
    Barro, Robert J. "Are Government Bonds   Net Wealth?", Journal of Political
             Economy, 82, Nov./Dec. 1974, pp. 1095—1117.
    Bench, Robert R. "Bank Problems in L.D.C. Lending."     Paper given at the
             AMR International/Euromoney Conference, Financing the L.D.C.'s,
             The Role of the Euromarkets, Grosvenor House, London, October 11, 1977.
    Bergsten, C. Fred. "Statement before the subcommittee on taxation and debt
             management of the Senate Finance Committee," Feb. 5, 1979.
    Blask, Jerome K. "A Survey of Country Evaluation Systems in Use," Policy Analysis
             Staff Paper, Export Import Bank, Washington D.C., Dec. 1976.
    Citicorp. 1975 Annual Report, New York.
    Eaton, J. "A Stochastic Equilibrium Model of       Exchange Rate Determination
             and Monetary Policy with Rational Expectations," Unpublished,
             Princeton, 1978.

    ________ and Mark Gersovitz,"Debt with Potential Reproduction: Theoretical
             and Empirical Analysis," Princeton University mimeo, 1979.
    _________________________,"L.D.C. Participation in International Financial
             Markets: Debts and Reserves," forthcoming in the Journal of
             Development Economics, 1980.
    Export-Import Bank of the U.S., Policy Analysis Staff, "Memorandum on an
             Early Warning Model," August 22, 1977, and Appendix: "Minimum
             Quantitative/Qualitative Country Evaluation Information to be
             Developed for Foreign Public Sector Credit Review Committee Meetings."
    Feder, G. and R. Just, "A Study of Debt Servicing Capacity Applying Logit
             Analysis," Journal of Development Economics, March 1977.
    Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, "Key Issues in International Banking,"
             Boston, 1977.
    Figlewski, Stephen. "Market 'Efficiency' in a Market with Hetergeneous
             Information," Journal of Political Economy, 86, August 1978,
p




    Fisk,    C. and F. Rimlinger, "Non—Parametric Estimates of L.D.C. Repayment
                Prospects," Journal of Finance, Papers and Proceedings, May 1979.
    Frank,    C. and W. dine, "Measurement of Debt Servicing Capacity: an
                Application of Discriminant Analysis," Jurnal of International
                Economics, Feb. 1971.
    Frankel,    Jeffrey A. "The Diversifiability of Exchange Risk," Journal of
                International Economics,
    Freeman, Richard "Optimal International Borrowing with Default," Federal
                Reserve   Board International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 129,
                Jan. 1979.
    Goodman, Stephen "How the Big U.S. Banks Really Evaluate Sovereign Risks,"
                Euromoney, February 1977.
    Grossman, Sanford "On the Efficiency of Competitive Stock Markets where
               Traders have Diverse Information," Journal of Finance, 31, May 1976,
               pp. 573—586.
    Harberger, Arnold C. "On the Determinants of Country Risk," Paper prepared for
                the University of Chicago--Department of State Project on the
                International Economic System, Dec. 1976.
    Hellwig, Martin "A Model of      Borrowing and Lending with Bankruptcy," Ecoriometrica,
               Nov. 1977.
    International   Monetary Fund Annual Report, Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
               Restrictions, 1979,    Washington  D.C., 1979.
    Jacque,    Laurent L. Management of    Foreign Exchange Risk, Lexington Books,
             D.C. Heath, 1978.
    Jaffee, Dwight M. and Thomas Russell,"Imperfect Information, Uncertainty and
             Credit Rationing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, Nov. 1976.
    Kenen,   P.B. "Trade, Speculation, Aid and     the   Forward Exchange Rate" in
               R. Baldwin et al. Trade, Growth     and the Balance of Payments,
               North Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
    Kouri, P.J.K. "The Determinants of the Forward Premium," Institute for
               International Economic Studies Seminar Paper No. 62, Stockholm,
               August   1976.
    Maroni, Yves "Approaches for Assessing the Risk Involved in Lending to
            Developing Countries," Federal Reserve Board International Finance
            Discussion Paper, No. 112, Nov. 1977.
    Mc. W. Wolf, Jr., Alexander "Country Risk," in John F. Mathis (ed.)
               Offshore Lending by U.S. Commercial Banks, Philadelphia: Bankers'
               Association for Foreign Trade and Robert Morris Associates, 1975.
                                                                                  I'




Nagy, P. "Quantifying Country Risk: A System Developed by Economists at the
        Bank of Montreal," Colombia Journal of World Business, Fall, 1978.
Puz, Richard "How to Find Out When a Sovereign Borrower Slips from Al
        to E5", Euromoney, August 1978.
Sargen, Nicholas "Economic Indicators and Country Risk Appraisal," Federal
        Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review, Fall, 1977.
Schuler, Harold D. "Evaluation of Risk in International Lending: A Bank
        Examiner's Perspective."   Paper given at the Federal Reserve nk
        of Boston Conference on Key Issues in International Banking, October
         5—7, 1977.
Webb, David C. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth when Credit Markets are
         Imperfect," University of Bristol mimeo, October 1979.
Wihlborg, Clas "Risks, Capital Market Integration and Monetary Policy under
         Different Exchange Rate Regimes," Institute for internaticnal Economic
         Studies, Stockholm, Monograph No. 7, 1976.
 ____________ Currency Risks in International Financial Markets,
        Princeton Studies in International Finance No. 44, Deceith'r 1978.
Zuheir, Sofia A. External Debt of Developing Countries; Its Application to
        Country Risk Analysis, The Huntington National Bank, 1978.
