                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRANSITION LOSSES OF PARTIALLY MOBILE
                     INDUSTRY SPECIFIC CAPITAL




                           Don Fullerton




                       Working Paper No. 520




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138

                             July 1980




I   would like to thank John Shoven and John Whalley with whom I
built the general equilibrium model which serves as a starting
point for this paper. J. Gregory Ballentine, Charles Becker,
Harvey Galper, and Mark Gertler also contributed helpful comments,
and I am grateful to the Treasury Department's Office of Tax
Analysis for financial assistance. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Taxation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working   Paper #520
                                                                          July, 1980




                     Transition Losses of Partially Mobile
                           Industry-Specific Capital

                                  ABSTRACT




     Comparative   static models typically assume homogeneous and mobile factors

in estimating the economic effects of a tax policy change. Even dynamic models

employ a given homogeneous capital stock in two different allOcations for the

first period of two equilibrium sequences. This malleable capital assumption

causes overstatement of early efficiency gains from policies designed to

improve factor allocation. on the other hand, immobile factor models would

understate such gains by assuming that no capital ever relocates.

     The model in this paper attempts to bridge this gap by restricting each

industry's capital reduction to its rate of depreciation. The stock of de-

preciated capital from the previous period represents an industry—specific

type of capital which may earn a lower equilibrium return. The usage of

mobile capital above this minimum constraint is limited by the total gross

saving of the economy, including all industries' depreciation and consumer

net saving.

     The industry-specific capital model suggests, for exanpie, that previous

estimates of the dynamic efficiency gain from full integration of personal

and corporate taxes in the U.S. are overstated by about $5 billion. The model

could also be used to estimate distributional impacts on individuals with more

than proportionate ownership of capital in particular industries.


                                                 Don Fullerton
                                                 Woodrow Wilson School of Public
                                                   and International Affairs
                                                 Princeton University
                                                 Princeton, New Jersey 08544
                                                  (609)   452—4811
               Transition Losses of Partially Mobile
                     Industry—Specific Capital




1. Introduction

     General equilibrium tax incidence models from Harberger's (1962) path—

breaking two—sector analytical model to larger and more recent computation-

al models have typically assumed perfectly mobile factor supplies in a com-

parative static framework. McLure (1971) extended the analytical compara-

tive static model to include immobile factors, but still in fixed total

supply. He obtained the now—familiar result that an immobile factor is less

able to escape taxation whether imposed on that factor, on output, or in-

deed on the other factor in a sector with a low substitution elasticity.

This model compared two short—run static equilibria, so the factor was

never in fact given a chance to move between sectors.

     The analytical model was extended to a dynamic, growing economy by

Feldsteln (1974), who showed that the incidence of a factor tax depends on

its supply elasticity. His model had one producing sector, however, and did

not address the issue of immobile factors.

    The size of the tax incidence problem was expanded by computational

models in Shoven and Whalley (1972), and again in Fullerton, Shoven, and

Whafley (1978). These models have more sectors and other extensions, but

are still comparative static with perfect factor mobility. The switch to a

growing economy occurs in Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley (1980), where

a dynamic version of the model is used to evaluate the integration of per-

sonal and corporate income taxes in the U. S. The dynamic model allows the
                               —2—

saving response of one static equilibrium to affect the capital stock of the

next static equilibrium in a sequence of calculations. In any given equi-

librium, however, there is a fixed total capital stock and no barriers to

factor mobility. This homogeneous capital is owned by the twelve con-

sumers in various proportions and can be allocated to any of the nineteen

producers. In particular, the capital endowment in the first period of the

original (base—case) sequence is used as the stock available in the first

period of the simulated (revise—case) sequence. Incidence estimates are ob-

tained by comparing the time path of the economy with the original tax

system to the path of the economy resulting from the hypothetical or pro-

posed tax system.

     None of these models consider a growing economy with temporarily im-

mobile factors. In fact, this is a great limitation of all comparative

equilibrium models, whether static or dynamic. They can describe all at-

tributes of the economy or path associated with an alternative policy re-

gime, but they cannot describe the effects of imposing that policy. They

miss the efficiency effects of misallocated factors which are slow to de-

preciate, transfer, or retrain, and they miss the distributive effects of

wide swings in relative prices that are necessary to induce eventual re-

location.

     The comparative equilibrium models are also logically inconsistent

when they use a given capital stock in two different allocations. Consider

two possible interpretations of the revised equilibrium calculation. First,

if the tax rates were changed today, one could think of moving from the

original to the revised equilibrium. The problem with this putty—putty

capital assumption is that nonzero net saving over time would imply a dif—
                               — 3-.


ferent capital stock for the revised calculation.

     The second interpretation of the simulation is that it represents

a counterfactual world that might have existed today had the tax rates

been different from the start. The problem here is that if the different

tax rates had caused a welfare gain in each period, and if people saved

some of this additional income, then the capital stock would still have to

be different in the simulated equilibrium. Similarly, if the revised rates

implied a different equilibrium price of capital in each period, and if sav-

ing responded to the rate of return, then again, there would have to be a

different capital endowment for the counterfactual equilibrium calculation.

For positive savirg elasticities with respect to income or to the rate of

return, neither interpretation should allow the simulation to use the

same capital stock as the benchmark.

     The model in this paper is an adaptation from Fullerton, King, Shoven,

and Whalley. It accepts the first interpretation above, and can observe

the movement from the benchmark equilibrium to the revised equilibrium.

The tax change is implemented at the beginning of the first period, and sav-

ing of the first period still augments the capital stock for the second

period. The difference, however, is that capital is not fully malleable,

and cannot move out of an industry faster than that industry's rate of de-

preciation. Essentially, a putty—clay nature for capital is adopted in

order to avoid over—estimating the gains that occur when a new tax scheme

is implemented and capital moves to a more efficient allocation.

     With capital that is specific to a particular industry, it will be

possible to measure the transition cost associated with its relocation.

The depreciated capital stock of the original equilibrium could be viewed
                               —4—

as a quantity constraint for an industry, a constraint which is not bind-

ing if the new tax system would imply an increase or only slight decrease

in that industry's use of capital. For an industry with a binding con-

straint, even though the old capital has lost none of its productive

power, its rental price could fall dramatically, reflecting a decreased

demand for the industry's output. Those individuals who own   capital
specific to a shrinking industry will earn a lower return. National in-

come or welfare will not be as great as it would in a situation without

these adjustment costs, that is, if capital were immediately perfectly

mobile. The model then allows redepreciation in the following periods, con-

straints disappear, and the economy approaches a new steady state.

     The point of this exercise then, is to develop a methodology for

measuring the size and duration of some of these transition costs, in an

equilibrium setting. Clearly the gains from an efficiency increasing tax

change are limited by the short—run losses of individuals who, responding

to tax incentives, had invested heavily in undertaxed industries. The

general equilibrium setting is important for large tax changes because of

the interactive nature of the price mechanism. New relative prices will

determine producer decisions on output and factor demands jointly with con-

sumer decisions on purchases and factor supplies. Input costs will affect

prices for capital goods as well as consumption goods, while differential

income effects across consumer groups can further influence commodity de—

mands and relative prices. These effects hold equally for the low rela—

tive price of a temporarily over—abundant factor specific to a contracting

industry.

     For two reasons, this paper will use the full integration of U. S.
                               —5--


corporate and personal taxes as an example of the new methodology. First,

this proposed tax change is expected to have large interindustry real-

locations and interpersonal redistributions for which the general equi-

librium setting is important. Second, this example will permit direct

comparison with published results of the previous model. As shown below,

the efficiency gains of this reform were indeed overstated by about $5

billion when transition losses were ignored.

     Although this paper continues to use twelve consumers grouped by gross

income class, the methodology introduced here would be particularly useful

to study tax changes with unbalanced portfolios. An urban/rural distinction

could be used for consumer groups in order to capture their disproportionate

holdings of agricultural capital and the large immediate redistributive

effects of a farm tax change. Similarly, grouping consumers by age or re-

tirement status could capture their disproportionate imputed homeownership

income and the redistributive effects of housing tax policy. There may be

substantial time required for reallocation of resources as consistent with

a new tax treatment of these assets.

     The existing general equilibrium model of Fullerton, Shoven, and Whal—

ley is briefly described in the next section. More thorough explanations

can be found in previous papers by those authors, and the familiar reader

may want to pass over this section. This paper will therefore emphasize

changes to equations and to equilibrium conditions that were necessary to

build the new model. These changes are described in section three along

with a few of the problems encountered in this modelling effort. Features

of the old model which are not specifically mentioned in this section were

left intact. Because the particular quantity constraints depend on the tax
                               —6—

replacement, section four begins the full integration example with a

derivation of these minimum capital usages for each industry. Then sec-

tion five reports results of the new model together with estimates of the

effects of integration from the previous model. A final section six pro-

vides conclusion.


2. Carryover Features of the General Equilibrium Model

     The production side of the model includes 19 profit—maximizing pro-

ducer goods industries which each use labor and capital in a constant

elasticity of substitution (CES) or Cobb—Douglas production function. Sub-

stitution elasticities are chosen for each industry as a best—guess from

available literature, ranging from 0.6 to one. The Survey of Current

Business and unpublished data from the Commerce Department's National Income

Division are used to obtain each industry's payments for labor and capital,'

while quantity usages derive from the convention that a unit of each primary

factor is that which earns one dollar net of taxes in the 1973 benchmark

year. A fixed coefficient input—output matrix is derived from Bureau of

Economic Analysis tables.

     An ad valoreui tax on each industry's use of capital is comprised of the

corporation income tax, state corporate franchise taxes, and local property

taxes. The Social Security tax and workmen's compensation are modelled

as an ad valorem tax on industry use of labor. Various Federal excise

taxes and indirect business taxes are modelled as an output tax rate for

each of the 19 industries, while state and local sales taxes apply to each

of the 15 consumer goods in the model.

     Each producer good can be used directly by government, for export, or

for investment, but indirectly for consumption through a fixed—coefficient
                                —7—

"G" matrix of transition into one of 15 consumer goods with suitable

definition for consumer detaand.-' This transition is necessary because the

Commerce Department data includes industries such as mining, electrical

manufacturing and trade, while the Labor Department's Survey of Consumer

Expenditures provides data on purchases of goods like furniture, appliances,

and recreation.

     Industry and government payments to buy labor and capital services

are just matched by total household receipts from the supply of each factor.

The Treasury Department's Merged Tax File provides information on labor

and capital income for each of the 12 consumer classes as well as tax pay-

ments and an estimate of r. ,   the   average marginal income tax rate for

each group. These range from a 1% average marginal rate for the first in-

come class to a 40% rate for the highest income class. A progressive in-

come tax system is then modelled as a series of linear schedules, one for

each group. Pensions, IRA and Keogh plans are modelled as a 30% saving

subsidy to capture the proportion of saving that now has such tax sheltered

treatment.

     Further tax advantages are modelled in the "personal factor tax," a

construct designed to capture industry discriminating features of the

personal income tax. Each industry is assigned a fraction f of capital

income fully taxable at the personal level, determined by proportions paid

through dividends, capital gains, interest and rent' Taxable capital income

is subject to 'r, the overall average marginal personal income tax rate.

At the consumer level, rebates are given to groups with a t.      less   than r,

while additional tax is collected from others. The personal factor tax

acts just like a withholding tax at the industry level, and consumer level
                               —8—

corrections sum to zero. The model thus favors industries with a high

proportion of retained earnings, industries with noncorporate investment

tax credit, and the housing industry.

     Expanded income of each consumer is given by his transfer income plus

capital and labor endowments.-' The latter is defined as 714 of labor in-

come to reflect a possible 70 hour week while working 40 hours. Consumer

demands are based on budget constrained maximization of the nested CES

utility function:



              =
                                                                    (1)

                   U[H(.        ),   C]

In the first stage, consumers save some income for future consumption, Cf

and allocate the rest to a subutility function, H, over present consump-

tion goods. The elasticity of substitution between Cf and H is based

on Boskin's (1978) estimate of 0.4 for the elasticity of saving with re-

spect to the net—of—tax rate of return. Saving in the model is derived

from consumer demands for future consumption under the expectation that all

present prices, including the price of capital, will prevail in all future

periods. Then income for H is divided between repurchase of leisure, i,

and a Cobb—Douglas subutility function defined on the 15 consumer goods,

X. The elasticity of substitution between Z and consumer goods is based

on a .15 estimate for the elasticity of labor supply with respect to the

net—of—tax wage.

     Consumer decisions regarding factor supplies are thus made jointly with

their consumption decisions. Demands for leisure and for saving will de-

pend on all relative prices whether for factor endowments or for commodity
                                   —9—

    purchases. The model simultaneously considers the uses and sources sides

    of income in measuring the gain or loss of any group.

         Saving is converted immediately into investment demand for producer

    goods, with proportions based on national accounting data for fixed private

    investment and inventories. The foreign trade sector is modelled by the

    assumption that the net value of exports less imports for each producer good

    is constant. This simple treatment closes the model, maintains zero trade

    balance, and allows easy calculation of trade quantities given prices.

         The static model is rounded out by specification of the government

    sector. Revenues from the various taxes described above are used in a

    balanced budget for transfers, labor, capital, and producer goods. Lump—

    sum transfers to each consumer group are based on Treasury Department data

    for social security receipts, welfare, government retirement, food stamps,

    and similar programs. Government demands for factors and commodities are

    in a Linear Expenditure System based on Stone—Geary utility.

         Because the data set for this model is so comprehensive, the sources

    are necessarily divergent. The two sides of a single account are often col-

    lected by different agencies with different procedures, and thus do not match.

    In order to use all of this data together, there must be adjustments to in-

    sure that each part is consistent with the rest. To do this, some data are

-   accepted as superior and other data are adjusted to match. All industry and
    government uses of factors are taken to be fixed, so consumers' factor in—

    comes and expenditures must be scaled. Tax receipts, transfers, and gov-

    ernment endowments are fixed, so government expenditures must be scaled to

    balance their budget. Similar adjustments insure that supply equals demand
                              5/
    for all goods and factors.—

        The fully consistent data set then represents a benchmark equilibrium,
                               — 10 —


where values are separated into prices arid   quantities   by assuming that a

physical unit of each good is the amount that sells for one dollar.

Elasticity parameters are imposed exogenously as described above, but the

model is solved backward to generate the remaining behavioral equation

parameters consistent with the data set. Factor employments by industry

are used to derive production function weights, just as expenditures are

used to derive utility function and demand function weights. The result-

ing tax rates, function parameters and endowments can be used to solve the

model forward, perfectly replicating the benchmark equilibrium. This par-

ticular calibration allows for a test of the solution procedure and insures

that the various agents' behaviors are mutually consistent in our benchmark

data set.

     A variant of Scarf's (1973) algorithm is used to solve for prices in

a short—run competitive equilibrium such that abnormal profits are zero

and supply equals demand for each good or factor. Simplex dimensions are

required only for labor, capital, and government revenue since a knowledge

of these three "prices" is sufficient to evaluate all agent behavior.

Producer good prices are based on factor prices and zero profits, while

consumer good prices are based on producer good prices through the G tran-

sition matrix. A complete set of prices, quantities, incomes, and alloca—

tions are calculated for every equilibrium. Since it is not based on dif-

ferential calculus, the computational model could handle any number of

market distortions such as quotas or externalities by adding a simplex

dimension to account for each one. It can measure discrete changes in any

tax or distortion without linearity assumptions and without ignoring in—

come effects. There could be any number of sectors and agents, and any
                                — 11 —


specification   of demand so long as it satisfies Walras' Law. For now,

however, the model assumes no involuntary unemployment of factors, no

externalities, and no other distortions.

     The dynamic model is derived by first assuming that the 1973 con-

sistent data set or benchmark equilibrium is one that lies on a steady

state growth path. Observed saving behavior and the capital endowment are

translated into an annual growth rate for capital, n, equal to .0275661,

and this growth rate is also attributed to effective labor units. This

exogenous growth rate for labor is split evenly between population growth

and Harrod—neutral technical progress. The benchmark sequence of equilibria

is then calculated by maintaining all tax rates and preferences fixed, in-

creasing labor exogenously, and allowing saving to augment capital endow-

ments over time.-"    By construction this sequence will have constant

factor ratios and constant prices all equal to one.

     Simulations are performed by altering tax rates appropriately while

retaining preference parameters and the exogenous labor growth rate. Sav-

ing and other behaviors conform to the specified elasticities, growth of

capital diverges from the steady state rate, and the economy begins to ap-

proach a new path with a new capital/labor ratio. Sequences are compared

by discounting the H composites of instantaneous consumption through

time with appropriate terminal conditions. Only leisure and present con—

sumption are included in this welfare measure because saving is reflected

in later consumption of the sequence. The sequence is discounted at a 4%

rate and includes only the initial population. Otherwise, the importance

of future periods would be sensitive to population growth, including total

rather than average consumption.
                                — 12 —



     Finally,   the welfare gain or loss of a tax change is the aggregate com-

pensating variation, defined as the number of dollars at new prices that

would be required for each consumer to attain the old sequence of consump-

tion values. The model thus incorporates both interindustry and inter—

temporal tax distortions and efficiency changes.


3. Constrained Factor Movements

     Let        represent the th sector's use of capital in the benchmark

equilibrium with the old tax regime and no mobility problems. These quanti-

ties were measured using the units convention on capital income net of the

corporate income tax, property tax, and the portion of the personal income

tax attributable to capital. The total availability of capital is given

by

                                  20

                                                                     (2)




where the twenty capital users include nineteen industries plus general

government. If a tax change were to occur, suppose that the constrained

minimum   use of "old" capital for the th sector is indicated by K.
The derivation of these numbers is based on annual depreciation rates d.
                                                                       1
and depends on the particular application. Later sections will specify

which sectors are to be constrained in the full integration example, and

which are to have no minimum usage requirement (a     of zero). There exists

a pooi of new or mobile capital which might be used by any sector, given

simply by


                                 -
                                                                     (3)
                                — 13 —



where N is the number of constrained sectors. Thus N heterogeneous old

capital stocks are each specific to the industry in which it was originally

used. One type of new capital can be allocated to any industry, and one

type of labor is still mobile and homogeneous.

     Although there are now N + 2 factors of production, at most three

of these appear in the production function of any one industry. One can

imagine a world with no technological change, where old and new capital

types are perfect substitutes in an industry, and the two types of capital

together are imperfectly substitutable for labor. Rental of an old loom

is equivalent to rental of a new loom in the textile industry, for example,

and new looms are implicitly purchased as investment goods by net savers.

If the textile industry is not expanding, then none of the new saving is

used to purchase looms and none of the new capital is used in that industry.

If the new tax rates would cause the industry to contract faster than its

rate of depreciation, however, there will be "too many" old looms available,

in fixed supply, with an equilibrium rental price that is lower than the price

of new capital.

     Abstracting from the possibility of a corner solution, there is a posi-

tive equilibrium price at which all of the old capital of an industry gets

used by that industry. Where K. denotes the demand for an industry

specific capital type, and       denotes its supply, the market is assumed

to clear at a price PJ.2J This price may be lower than the price of new

capital, K' but it may not be greater than P. If             <     then none
of the new capital would be used, since the two are perfect substitutes.

If P were >       PK   then the producer would try to use none of the old

capital, driving down its equilibrium price, until P <
                                  — 14 —


     There are a number of problems with the model as it has been pre-

sented so far. First, it ignores certain price rigidities and their re-

sulting disequilibrium effects. It does not consider under—utilization

of capacity nor involuntary unemployment of labor. These phenomena can

be better handled in a different type of model, however. The equilibrium

model can be appropriately adapted to consider these quantity constraints,

and the method described here can still measure significant economic ef-

fects.

     Second, we have introduced heterogeneous capital types but assumed

homogeneity within each type. Industries actually use various types of

plant and equipment, and some of these are more readily used in other indus-

tries. Even a dramatically contracting industry could easily move out of

office space, delivery trucks and warehouses.

     Third, the possibility of industry—specific labor could be con-

sidered in similar context. ecause of special trade skills, not all of

an industry's labor force can readily relocate to other uses. Rather than

a criticism, however, this comment reflects the very usefulness of the

method described here. Special skills could indeed attract lower wages

after shifts in government policies. The capital tax examples here should

only be viewed as illustrative.

     Fourth, the suggestion of time—dated investment is ignored.-' We can

imagine a model where capital/labor ratios are flexible ex ante, but fixed

ex post. Then constrained capital, given by the depreciated stock of the

previous period, would have to be used in a fixed proportion to labor. If

the adjustment took more than one period, then each period's investment could

be fixed with a different ratio to labor, and is thus a different type. The
                                      — 15 —


    problem with such a full—scale model is only its computational expense:

    each of these different capital types would require another dimension on

    the price simplex, while costs increase with roughly the cube of the number

    of dimensions.!"

          Fifth, other modelling possibilities exist. A limited form of time—

    dating could be undertaken, or various types of technological change could

    be considered. Many of the model's input numbers such as depreciation

    rates, growth rates, and tax rates should be viewed as illustrative.

          Sixth, and finally, there is a small computational problem with model-

    ling old and new capital as perfect substitutes. As mentioned above,

    caunot be greater than       or else there would be no demand for K1 and

    its price falls. If P is less than             then only old capital is used

    in that industry. If prices are equal, they both may be used. Such factor

    demand functions cannot be used with this algorithm for an equilibrium solu-

    tion, because of discontinuity.

         When the factor prices are taken from the simplex for another iteration,

    it should be possible to calculate each producer's factor demands. Under

    the described scheme, if P is slightly less than             for some industry,

    then all demand for capital falls on old capital. If the supply of this

    old capital is not sufficient, the vector labelling will cause an increase
-   in   P. If the next iteration provides a            that is greater than

    there will be no demand for old capital, a large excess supply, and vector

    labelling which causes       to fall again. Because the algorithm uses

    small but finite steps in its search on the price simplex, it might iterate

    forever around the proper solution of      =        which would allow use of
                                                   PK
    both old and new capital. The algorithm would not solve because large
                                 — 16 —




shifts   in demand (from only old capital to oniy new capital) occur around

a single relative price.

     This problem occurs because old and new capital are perfect sub-

stitutes, and it can be solved by making the two imperfect substitutes.

With a high elasticity of substitution between old and new capital, we

can model a production function that furnishes large but continuous shifts

between capital types as their relative prices change. The adjustment is

similar to that described above, but it is smoother. In particular, we

use a nested CES production function for each industry-'
                                            a
                   [2
              Q=A[ctL'     +(l—) °j

where the o. and A parameters are derived from the data by the backwards

solution procedure and a is the elasticity of substitution between capi-

tal and labor, L. This function is the same as before, except that homo-

geneous capital is replaced by a composite of two capital types, K.

For only the N constrained industries




                         aK_i                           aK_i
                                     +
                  —                             aK_i]
                  K.= K                                              (5)
                                            K1 Kj

where K is new (malleable) capital, and K. is old (industry—specific)
capital. The parameter          is the arbitrarily high elasticity of substi-

tution between capital types, and values between 10 and 50 are attempted

as described below.

     Producers minimize the unit cost of output in a two—stage procedure.

First, differentiate the Lagrangean
                                       — 17 —




                L = PLL +     PKK +                -              + (1      -       a
                                                                                           (6)
                                            1[
with respect to L, K and A1, where                           is a price index, a composite

of P
       K
           and P ..    Solve for the factor demand functions
                Ki

                                                                        a
                                                            1—a
                        —                         K
                                 —
                 RI=AE(1 i((1 —
                                                                                         (7)




                                             1—a
                            I (1—a)P                                   la
                 R =
                       'L            ak'K
                                            L)         + (1 —
                                                                  )j
                                                                                         8)



giving the labor and    composite      capital requirements per unit of output.

These are identical to the previous model except for the bar above the

K.     Producers then go on to minimize the cost of a unit of composite

capital. Differentiate the Lagrangean                                                            a

                                                                                                 aKl
                                                   [         / aK_i             +       aK_1\

                                                                                        KK)            j(9'

with   respect to K, K. and A2 to obtain the demand functions




                                                       aK
                                     laK         •1
                                                      laK
               =L      r1 1'Ki

                                 +ij                                                      (10)
                                        — 18 —




                                                 a1(
                                      1—a
                                         K
                                 ri            il_aK
                      RK:L=                  +11                               (11)



giving the old and new capital requirements per unit of the K composite.

It is then simple to obtain the value for K per unit of output as

K • R-         and the value for K. per unit of output as K .         K-   .   Labor
 jç                               1

per       unit output is just RL.

          If we solve f or A2 in the process of minimizing the cost of com-

posite capital, we. get the appropriate composite price index for capital,



                                                        1
                                 =      +              i—ai
                            A2                                                 (12)
                                             Ki laK]

The       algorithm   first uses gross—of—tax factor prices to calculate            for

each industry. It then derives the factor requirements per unit output as

shown above. Factor prices also determine producer good prices and en-

dowment incomes as before, so that commodity demands and derived total fac-

tor demands can be obtained. These functional forms result in a factor

demand ratio given by
                                                                                          a




                              rP.rK
      S




                 K      —       Ki                                             13
                              LKi
For a high enough aK, this behavioral rule has the desired property that

P slightly lower than                  causes demand for old capital that is much

greater than that of new capital. If the prices happen to be equal, then
                                  — 19 —


the two demands are equal. With             less than infinite, however, pro-

ducers will always use some K in addition to their Ki. This behavior

seems reasonable if investors buy some new capital (perhaps to test) even

though excess old capital exists. The price of new capital will always

exceed the price of old capital unless significant amounts of new capital

are used. Table 1 shows some examples of the sensitivity of factor de-

mands to relative price where the general relationship is given by equa-

tion (13). In examples below,          of 40 was used because the computer

was unable to solve with higher values.



                                  TABLE 1

                RELATIVE USE OF NEW TO OLD CAPITAL FOR
                        DIFFERENT PRICE RATIOS


K/Ki                 aK
                             10       aK = 20          'K = 40

K1'K =               .5987            .3585            .1285


K1''K =   .90        .3487            .1216            .0148




       General government does not have an overall production function

like that of equation (4), but it does have a final demand for

capital based on its own Stone—Geary utility function. This structure

is easily adapted for capital constraints by using the previous capital

demand functions for composite capital, using equation (5) for the

breakdown of old and new capital demands, and giving government its

own composite price index based on equation (12).

       Some adaptations are also required for dynamic sequencing. The

first period of the revised sequence uses specific capital types
                                — 20 —



which are based on the depreciated capital stock of the previous period.

Mobile capital K is given by equation (3), and the equilibrium is

calculated with a new set of tax schedule specifications. The net

saving response of the first period is still used to augment the

total capital stock for the next period, but it augments the malleable

capital stock in particular. The constraints K are re—depreciated,

and the depreciation is also used to augment mobile capital.

      If the re—depreciated constraints are low enough to become

non—binding, then the model should eliminate them as constraints for

two reasons. First, the factor demand functions described above

are not correct for a significant use of mobile capital. (If new

capital exceeds old capital use, then its price would be lower.)

Second, there are computational savingsfrom reducing the simplex

dimensions. The form of the production function provides a neat

procedure for checking constraints, since all industries must use

some of the mobile capital. If a substantial amount is used in one

period, then it is logical to presume that the constraint will not

be binding in the next period. Thus if an industry uses more new

capital than its total depreciation in some period, the constraint

is eliminated, the old capital is added to the malleable capital,

and the dimension size is reduced by one.

      When all industries are off their constraints, the short—run

adjustment period has ended. A single period's fixed capital stock

is now properly allocated among sectors. But the long—run adjustments

will continue while the saving response pushes the economy's overall

capital/labor ratio toward the steady state ratio.
                                   — 21 —


        Next,   the model needs to designate the ownership of all factors,

including industry—specific capital. An important application of this

methodology would investigate the losses of individuals who have dispro-

portionate investments in industries whose relative tax position worsens.

At this point, to concentrate on the methodology itself, distributional

issues will be ignored. For simplicity, all types of capital are divided

among consumers according to their previous total endowment of capital.

This procedure is equivalent to adding up net—of—tax capital income, dis-

tributing it among consumers according to fixed shares, and ignoring

portfolio effects. The risk avoidance behavior of spreading investments

among all industries is not an unreasonable assumption)1

        In previous dynamic sequencing, the government was assumed t.o save

at the steady state rate n. For comparability, this procedure is retained,

and this saving is added to the stock of mobile capital. Consumer saving

is added to the mobile capital stock as well. The total value of new and

old capital in the next period are still distributed among consumers and

government, but in their new proportions of total capital ownership. All

other    functional forms remain unchanged.


4. Derivation of Constraints

     A result of the specification just described is that if an expanding

industry wanted to use more capital than twice the depreciated old capital,

the old price could be driven above the new capital price. To avoid this

difficulty, and to save execution time as discussed earlier, the number of

simplex dimensions can be limited by considering old capital prices for only

those industries that are expected to contract. This procedure is imple-

mented by first making a static comparison from the previous model, with
                                 — 22 —


malleable   capital and no constraInts. The vector of capital use by in-

dustry in the simulation is compared to the vector of depreciated original

capital use to see which industries would disinvest faster than their

depreciation rate. Old capital stocks need only be considered in these

industries.

     Because of capital depreciation, overall growth, and built—in

flexibility on the part of industrial decision makers, a major policy tax

change may be required before minimum capital constraints have a perceptible

influence on capital allocations. A good example of such a major tax change

is the "full integration" of personal and corporate income tax systems.

When the "double taxation" of capital income in the corporate industries is

eliminated, they will draw mobile capital from other industries in an ef-

fort to expand faster than the overall rate of growth. Efficiency gains

of the new—tax regime cannot be fully realized if capital cannot fully re-

allocate. The full integration plan is documented in Fullerton, King,

Shoven and Whalley (1980), where the earlier model with unconstrained capi-

tal movement was used to evaluate its effects.

     First, the twenty sectors are defined in column 1 of Table 2. Coy—

ernment   enterprises is an industry comparable to the other private indus-

tries (except that it has a large output subsidy). General government col—

lects taxes and has final demand for goods and factors. An element K of

the vector sho in column 2 of Table 2 indicates the i         industry's

use of capital in the original (benchmark) equilibrium, net of all taxes.

     Annual depreciation rates d1 are obtainable from data within the

model's production sector, and from sources consistent with
                                                                                                   a




                                                               TABLE   2


                                                THE DERVIATION OF CAPITAL CONSTRAINTS


 •                              (1)                           (2)              (3)          (4)            (5)         (6)        (7)
                                                                                                                                        2
                                                                                                                       l—d        l—d
                              Industry                        K            Depreciation    d1             K        K          K
 (1)       Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries                22,767.8            8,867.     .01558        22,202.5    21,811.87 20,896.07
 (2)       Mining                                             874.8            1,222.     .05588           896.3       803.74     738.47
 (3)       Crude Petroleum and Gas                          2,464.2              613.     .00995         2,415.5     2,374.22   2,287.53
 (4)       Construction                                        835.9           3,529.     .16886         1,303.9       676.14     546.89
 (5)       Food and Tobacco                                  1,308.3           2,300.     .07032         1,859.8     1,183.65   1,070.90
 (6)       Textile, Apparel, Leather                           802.8           1,149.     .05725         1,224.1       736.50     675.71
 (7)       Paper and Printing                                2,097.2           2,344.     .04471         2,719.6     1,949.65   1,812.52
 (8)       Petroleum Refining                                6,555.7           1,231.     .00751         6,494.0     6,331.93   6,115.79
 (9)       Chemicals and Rubber                              2,964.7           3,851.     .05196         4,099.1     2,735.26   2,523.58
(10)       Lumber, Furniture, Stone                          3,311,1           1,907.     .02304         3,703.2     3,148.04   2,993.01    ".3
(11)       Metals, Machinery                                 7,900.3           8,217.     .04160        10,068.1     7,368.48   6,872.49    '-.3
(12)       Transportation Equipment                            100.9             888.     .35200           172.8        63.63      40.13
(13)       Motor Vehicles                                    3,684.4           1,338.     .01453         4,547.0     3,533.52   3,388.77
(14)       Transportation, Communication, Utilities          9,881.2          20,086.     .08131        10,742.0     8,834.20   7,898.18
(15)       Trade                                             7,515,6           9,561.     .05089         9,897.3     6,941.80   6,411.82
(16)       Finance and Insurance                             6,126.4           3,655.     .02386         6,799.7     5,819.74   5,528.46
(17)       Real Estate                                      52,616.1          32,192.     .02447        50,069.6    49,951,50 47,421.83
(18)       Services                                          9,456.7           8,889.     .03760         9,206.3     8,856.97   8,295.30
(19)       Government Enterprises                            6,180.7           . . .      .03167         5,768.8     5,824.44   5,488.70
(20)       General Government                               97,961.2                 •    .03167        91,215.4    92,314.01 86,992.47
           TOTAL                                           245,406.0         111,849.     .03167       245,405.0   231,259.29 217,998.62

 Column
     (1)      gives our aggregation to twenty sectors.
     (2)      K? is capital income net of all taxes in the original equilibrium; with unitary prices these give allocation
              of capital units among industries.,
     (3)      Depreciation is in millions of 1973 dollars; derivation and data are described in the text.
     (4)         is the deprecation rate, equal to (3) times .04 over (2).
              d1
     (5)         is the allocation of capital in the unconstrained "full integration" case; the difference between total
              K
                  and        indicates the specified accuracy for equilibrium calculations.
                        K?
     (6)      Minimum capital constraints after one year.
     (7)      Minimum capital constraints after two years.
                               — 24 —


The estimates of economic depreciation are shown in column 3 of Table 2

in millions of 1973 dollars. These figures are multiplied by y, the

average net—of—tax rate of return to get depreciation of capital services

units: the dollar depreciation numbers are part of gross saving and must

be converted by y = .04    like consumers' net saving to get new units of

capital. Dividing by column 2, we have rates of depreciation, shown in

column 4. The average depreciation rate for private industry is used for

the government enterprises industry and for general government.

     For purposes of comparison, the unconstrained uses of capital under

the full integration tax replacement, K', are shown in column 5 of Table 2.

This is the new allocation of capital if the old version of the model is

used. The minimum required use of old capital for each industry will be

K?, but the size of this constraint depends on the length of each period

and the timing of investment. If, for example, the industries are notified

of the tax change just after they had made investment decisions, then con-

straints would be given by K = K?,      the quantity of capital ready to be-

gin the period under the expectations of the old—tax regime. Comparison of

columns 2 and 5 indicates that under such a modelling, six industries

(numbers 1, 3, 8, 17, 18, and 19) plus general government (20) would hit

their respective constraints, since these are the groups that use less

capital in the unconstrained calculations.

     If, on the other hand, industries are notified of the tax change just

prior to investment decisions, then constraints would be given by the de-

preciated capital stocks of the previous period'



                     1—d
                                                                     (14)
           K=K[1÷1]
where NYRS is the number of years in each period. If periods are

very long, then these constraints could easily be nonbinding.
                                — 25 —


They are less than       because of gross investment over time to cover both

depreciation at rate d1 and net investment at rate n in the steady state.

     In continuous time there is no difference between the two methods.

In the discrete time model, however, with periods of one year, the latter

method results in the constraints of column 6 in Table 2. Looking at the

unconstrained simulation of the full integration tax replacement, it appears

that only two constraints are transgressed (numbers 19 and 20). This com-

parison of columns 5 and 6 is not necessarily an accurate guide to the

number of binding constraints, however, since       were completely mobile.

If one sector were compelled to use more capital, then less is available

to other industries. These other sectors may hit constraints, as is indeed

the case, shown below.

     Column 7 gives the constraints after two years. It is rather sur-

prising that none of the sectors are restrained after such a short period,

but there are two partial explanations. First, the tax change may not be

dramatic enough to require greater capital movements. Second, overall

growth of the economy quickly allows producers to adjust factor ratios with-

out disinvesting. In particular, for industries whose capital tax rates

have been raised in relative terms, growth of the labor force at rate n

provides an easy means to a lower capital/labor ratio.

     For three major reasons, it was decided to model the timing of invest-

ment as after the tax—change announcement. First, this may be a more

realistic treatment since policy decision makers do not typically operate

in secret. Producers get signals of pending tax change proposals and may

hold back investment plans until tax rate uncertainty has been resolved.

Second, the column 6 constraints are smaller than those of column 2, fewer

will be binding, and computation will be less expensive. Third, this choice

will result in lower estimates for the effects of constraints. In this re—
                                — 26 —


spect,   it gives an underestimate for the transition cost of partially

mobile capital in adjusting to full integration. This cost is still shown

below to be significant.


5. Simulation Results

     Previous simulations of full integration used dynamic sequences with

five periods of ten years each. The present value of all efficiency gains

from this model was $179.977 billion if the equal tax yield was acquired

through multiplicative scaling of personal income tax rates)' This

result is directly comparable to the new constrained model, except that a

ten year period is sufficient to depreciate away all constraints. In fact

the surprising result of the previous section was that periods as short as

one year were required to meet binding constraints. For comparison purposes,

full integration was resimulated on the old model for ten periods of one

year each, where all of the standard parameter values were applied. The

present value of efficiency gains (EG) were then $174 .402 billion.

     This figure is taken as the standard of comparison for the constrained

model's results. If new present value of efficiency gains are lower, then

the difference (AEG) is taken as the loss due to partially mobile capital.

Most of these losses will occur in the constrained transition year(s), but

effects might be felt later as well.

     An array of results are displayed in Table 3. The unconstrained re-

sults appearing in the left—hand column include the efficiency gain just

mentioned and the three relative "pricest' of the equilibrium solution. All

solution vectors are normalized by the price of labor which is always taken

as one. The other two dimensions give the relative price of capital and the

tax scalar used for equal yield calculations. The scalar of 1.123 indicates
                                 — 27 —


that   personal tax rates must be 12.3 percent higher to recoup the revenue

lost with full integration. The price of capital rises from 1.0 to 1.105

when integration Is imposed, but falls over ten years to 1.092 as capital

deepening takes place in the economy.

       The first constraint considered was for general government because

this user of capital seemed to be furthest below its depreciated old

capital in the unconstrained simulation. (Table 2 shows two sectors with

column 5 unconstrained equilibrium capital demand less than column 6 con-

straints, but sector 20 has the larger differential.) Once   this   single

constraint takes effect, however, several more industries' capital demands

fall below their constraints. The columns of Table 3 show the results of

different simulations where additional constraints are successively im-

posed. The order of consideration for these additional constraints is

essentially arbitrary, but they generally appear in declining order of im-

portance.

       With one constraint for sector 20, the return to old capital Is in-

deed lower than that of new capital, as seen from comparison of row 5a

and 6a. Government does not want that much capital, so its price falls

to 1.049 in relative terms. With government capital restricted, there is

less mobile capital for other users, and its price rises to 1.149 in the

new equilibrium. Government's demand for old capital at these prices is

92314 units (equal to the constraint as shown in Table 2), and its demand

for new capital is 2465 units. These factors have a .0267 ratio in accor-

dance with equation (13).

       The tax scalar falls to 1.096 in this equilibrium because government's

cost of capital is lower. Its composite price of capital is 1.067, based

on equation (12). Its endowment income has not fallen proportionately
                                           —28 —




                                       TABLE      3
                THE RESULTS OF FULL INTEGRATION FOR SIX SIMULATIONS
                         WITH INCREASING DIMENSIONALITY



1) Number of constraints        None              One            Two       Three         Four         Five


2)   Number of dimensions          3               4              5            6             7           8


3) Tax scalar                   1.123         1.096             1.101      1.113         1.114         1.llf

4) Price of labor               1.000         1.000             1.000'     1.000         1.000        1.000

5) Price of mobile capital
       a. period one             1.105        1.149             1.155      1.176         1.181        1.189
       b. period ten             1.092        1.092             1.092      1.092         1.092        1.092

                                                                                         '
6) Price of old capital
       a.   sector   20          . .   .      1.049             1.053      1.065         1.067         1.071
       b.   sector   1           . .   .      .       .   .     1.064      1.078         1.081         1.086
       c.   sector   17          . .   .      .       .   .     . . .      1.068         1.071         1.075
       d.   sector   19          . .   .      .       .   .     . . .      .   .   .     1.062         1.065
       e.   sector   18          . .   .      .       .   .     . . .      ..      .     . . .         1.096

7) EG: Efficiency gain,        174.402      172.443           171.704    169.774       169.729       169.206
       in billions of 1973$

8) tEG: Transition losses        . . .        1.959             2.698      4.628         4.673
                                                                                             '
                                                                                                       5.196
       of partially mobile
       capital, in billions
                                                                                                 '
       of 1973$
                               — 29 —



because of the diversification assumption, and the result is that less

tax revenue is required to make the same real purchases as in the benchmark.

Finally, the efficiency gains of this computation are $172.443 billion,

lower by $l.959 billion than the unconstrained computation.

     Once general government (sector 20) is constrained, the capital de-

mands of agriculture (1), real estate (.17), government enterprises (19),

and services (18) also fall below their depreciated old capital stocks. As

these constraints are imposed, row 5a of Table 3 shows that the price of

mobile capital rises. Less is available to other industries. The demand

for and price of government—specific capital also rises, since government's

small relative demand for mobile capital gets even smaller as its price

rises. The somewhat more costly nature of government's capital causes a

higher tax revenue scalar, as shown in row 3. Looking across sub—rows of

6 indicates that any industry—specific capital type earns a somewhat higher

return when other industries are also constrained. Every additional con-

straint reduces the quantity of mobile capital in the model, drives up its

price, and makes the old capital relatively more desirable. In all cases,

when the model redepreciates constraints after the first period, it finds

that new capital demand exceeds depreciation and thus removes constraints

for the second period.

     Row 7 shows that, indeed, the efficiency gains of full integration are

reduced as more types of capital are partially immobile. These reductions

are reported in Row 8 and vary between two and five billion dollars)-' The

question that immediately arises is whether these are large or small numbers.

Five billion is small compared to the $174 billion present value of EG,

but other considerations are more relevant for three reasons.
                                — 30 —


     First,   this five billion dollars is a large absolute amount regard-

less of its ratio to any other number. Second, since this $5 billion is

really a loss to the first period, it could be compared to the $6.2 billion

annual efficiency gain of the static comparisons reported in Fullerton,

King, Shoven, and thalley (1980). This comparison makes it a large rela-

tive number as well as a large absolute number.

     Third, the comparison with the $174 billion present value of efficiency

gains depends heavily on the discount rate, set at four percent for these

calculations. A higher discount rate makes the first period $5 billion a

larger relative number since it occurs ear1ier)-"

     Before leaving the new constrained model, there are a few other in-

sights to be gleaned from it. No particular capital owners are injured

by constraints because of diversification, but capital owners generally

are injured relative to labor. Though the price of mobile capital increases

with constraints, the prices of old capital types fall. The net results

are a lower overall return to capital and a U shaped burden distribution

since the capital/labor ratio of income falls and then rises again over the

twelve income classes in the model.

     Other simulations varying aK also reveal an interesting economic

result. As this substitution elasticity is raised, old and new capital

prices come closer together. Since the constrained industry provides only

a small part of the demand for K, however, its price does not move as

much as        moves. When the two factors become closer substitutes, the

industry decreases demand for K and increases demand for         which has

the lower price. The greater demand for K1 relative to its fixed supply

results in a higher equilibrium price. Since         levels off as K is
                               — 31 —


increased in all cases, it is fair to presume that perfectly substitutable
capital stocks would still show         less than K• Reported results

used the highest possible      of 40.

     Finally, these simulations provide information about the computational

expense of the algorithm as applied to this model. As expected, additional

simplex dimensions increase computer cost more than proportionately. How-

ever, there seems to be an acceleration in the rate of increase. At first,

costs rise by less than the square of the number of dimensions, and later

by more than the square. The addition of the eighth price raises cost by

more than the cube of the number of dimensions. These geometrically in-

creasing costs serve to reinforce the adoption of ad hoc assumptions made

earlier to limit the number of dimensions.


6. Conclusion

     Comparative static models typically assume homogeneous and mobile

factors in estimating the economic effects of a tax policy change. Even

dynamic models employ a given homogeneous capital stock in two different al-

locations for the first period of two equilibrium sequences. This malleable

capital assumption causes overstatement of early efficiency gains from

policies designed to improve factor allocation. On the other hand, immobile

factor models would understate such gains by assuming that no capital ever

relocates.

    The model in this paper attempts to bridge this gap by restricting each

industry's capital reduction to its rate of depreciation. The stock of de-

preciated capital from the previous period represents an industry—specific

type of capital which may earn a lower equilibrium return. The usage of

mobile capital above this minimum constraint is limited by the total gross
                                — 32 —



saving   of the economy, including all industries' depreciation and consumer

net saving.

     The industry—specific capital model suggests, for example, that pre-

vious estimates of the dynamic efficiency gain from full integration of

personal and corporate taxes in the U. S. are overstated by about $5 billion.

The model could also be used to estimate distributional impacts on individu-

als with more than proportionate ownership of capital in particular indus-

tries.
                              FOOTNOTES




1.   Labor compensation includes all wages, salaries, commissions, and tips,

     while capital earnings include net interest paid, net rent paid, and

     corporate profits with capital consumption adjustments and inventory

     valuation adjustments. Non—corporate profits were divided between

     labor and capital on the basis of full-time—equivalent hours and aver-

     age wage for each industry. Some industries were averaged over sev-

     eral years to avoid recording transitory effects.

2. The G matrix derives form data in the February 1974 Survey of

     rent Business.

3. All dividends are 96% taxable, reflecting the 4% that fall under the

     $100 exclusion in 1973. All retained earnings are 73% taxable, re-

     flecting the value of tax deferral and rate advantages for capital

     gains, bu including the taxation of purely nominal gains. Interest

     and rents are fully taxable except for the imputed net rent of owner

     occupied homes, while the non—corporate investment tax credit also

     appears as a personal tax reduction varying by industry.

4. Portfolio effects are ignored because dividends, capital gains, inter-

     est, rent, and other capital income types are sumied to obtain capital

     endowments. Since capital is homogeneous, consumers will gain or lose

     according to their total endowment in the model.

5. In particular, the input—output matrix does not conform to the require—
•
     ment that gross output of each good can be measured by the column sum

     plus value added or the row sum plus final demand. Iterative row and
                                —2—

    column scaling converges to a consistent matrix, and similar scaling

    satisfies similar conditions for the expenditure matrix.

6. A dollar of saving is converted into capital service rental units

    through multiplication by y, the real after—tax rate of return.

    The modelassumes that 25 dollars of saving can purchase a capital

    asset that will earn one dollar per period net of depreciation and

    taxes. That is, .04 is used for y.

7. In equilibrium, all of the constrained capital stock appears in the

    industry's production function, but there is no constant added to the

    functional form: the use of old capital is a variable from the pro—

    ducer's viewpoint. Also, there is no monopsony in the purchase of

    specific capital, since competition among firms of a single industry

   would insure that zero profits exist at the equilibrium.

8. Harvey Galper and the Office of Tax Analysis are responsible for this

   useful and enlightening suggestion.

9. The existing methodology requires three dimensions, with labor, capital,

   and goverxment revenue on the price simplex. The methodology adopted

   here would require N + 3 dimensions, with extra prices for the spec-

   ific capital types of only the few contracting industries which are

   given constraints. The methodology just suggested would require prices

   for each time—dated type of capital, and for all expanding industries

   as well. This requirement can be seen by considering the determination

   of factor use ratios from factor cost ratios. The new tax regime changes

   the capital tax rate of each industry in a different way, so every in-

   dustry desires a new capital/labor ratio. Any time—dated capital stock

   with a specific ratio different from the desired ratio would earn a
                                —3—

     lower equilibrium return than new capital with a flexible ratio. Since

     there are twenty sectors and twenty capital types with specific labor

     ratios, there would be twenty—three simplex dimensions in only the

     first period of adjustment.

10. These production functions have suppressed i subscripts for most of

     the parameters. Only K will be the same for all industries.

11. Because government is also endowed with some capital ownership, it is

     also given a balanced portfolio. The implication is that the propor-

     tion of government's capital endowment which is used in the th sec-

     tor is the same as the proportion of other consumers' endowments used

     in that sector. This procedure is adopted once again to short—cut dis-

     tributional problems, but an equally valid solution might assign all of

     government's endowment for use in government. The choice will not af-

     fect measurements of transition loses reported below, but the latter

     suggestion has complications. If the price of government—specific capital

     falls due to immobility, it can severely affect tax rates through the

     equal yield feature. Personal tax rates are adjusted to obtain exactly

     enough revenue to make the same real government purchases as in the

    benchmark equilibrium. With the portfolio model adopted here, the gov—

    ernment's income is lowered whenever a capital constraint lowers con-

    sumers' incomes. Government's cost of capital falls whenever its old

    capital is constrained for use there.

12. For manufacturing industries, Coen (1976) provides estimates of 1973

    depreciation, and for other industries, national accounts provide the

    capital consumption allowance. When possible, the capital consumption

    adjustment is subtracted, to better approximate economic depreciation.
                                    —4—

      The July 1976 Survey of Current Business shows 1973 capital consumption

      allowances, and also shows the capital consumption adjustment for agri-

      culture and real estate.

13.   The benchmark equilibrium is assumed to be part of a steady state
      growth path where n is the annual growth rate (derived earlier as

      .0275661). The previous year's use of capital must have been K/(1+n)

      to grow at this rate and yield K. When the previous year's capital

      is depreciated, we have (14).

14. See Fullerton, King, Shoven, and Whalley (1980).

15. Because the consideration of each additional constraint raises the

      transition loss estimate, row 8 of Table 3 seems to imply the follow-

      ing marginal costs of each constraint:



               NUMBER                 SEC0R               $   BILLIONS

                 20            General government             1.959
                  1            Agriculture                     .739
                 17            Real estate                    1.930
                 19            Government enterprises          .045
                 18            Services                        .523
                                                              5.196


      The order of consideration is arbitrary, however, for once sector 20

      is constrained, all four other sector demands for capital fall below

      K. When Sector 20 is paired with each other sector, the following

      marginal costs result:
                               —5—

             NUMBER              SECTOR                 $    BILLIONS

                1         Agriculture                          .739
               17         Real estate                        1.812
               19         Govertiment enterprises              .317
               18         Services                             .311


    This comparison emphasizes interlinking effects for which a general

    equilibrium model is required.

16. Furthermore, the transition losses of the first period are actually

    somewhat larger than five billion. Because the first period's mobile

    capital price is higher than the unconstrained calculations, and

    because of the positive saving elasticity with respect to this net

    rate of return, the first period saving is increased even though in-

    comes are lower. Because the present tax system distorts the choice

    between present and future consumption, and because full integration

    does not fully offset this distortion, this extra saving inducement is

    a net efficiency gaining change. Since this small effect serves to

    increase the efficiency gains of row 7, the iEG numbers of row 8

    are smaller than the effect of first period transition losses alone.

    This effect is not a large one, however, since the price of capital

    still falls to 1.092 over time. A careful inspection of the complete

    results indicate that all later prices and quantities of the constrained

    and unconstrained sequences are practically identical.
                            REFERENCES



1. Boskin, Michael J. (1978), "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest,"
    Journal of Political Economy, April (Part 2).

2. Coen, Robert M. (1976), "Alternative Measures of Capital and Its Rate
    of Return in U. S. Manufacturing," Evanston, Illinois: Department
    of Economics, Northwestern University.

3. Feldstein, Martin S. (1974), "Incidence of a Capital Income Tax in a
    Growing Economy with Variable Savings Rates," Review of Economic
    Studies.

4. Fullerton, Don, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley (1978), "General
    Equilibrium Analysis of U. S. Taxation Policy," 1978 Compendium of
    Tax Research, Washington, D. C.: Office of Tax Analysis, U. S.
    Treasury Department.

5. Fullerton, Don? A. Thomas King, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley (1980),
    "Tax Integration in the U. S.: A General Equilibrium Approach,"
    Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
    #337R.

6. Harberger, Arnold C. (1962), "Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax,"
    Journal of Political Economy.

7. McLure, Charles E. (1971), "The Theory of Tax Incidence with Imperfect
    Factor Mobility," Finanzarchiv.

8. Scarf, Herbert E., with the collaboration of Terje Hansen (1973),
    The Computation of Economic Equilibria, New Haven, Conn.: Yale
    University Press.

9. Shoven, John B., and John Whalley (1972), "A General Equilibrium
    Calculation of the Effects of Differential Taxation of Income from
    Capital in the U. S.," Journal of Public Economics.
