                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  IMPORT COMPEITION AND MACRO-
                         ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT
                      UNDER WAGE PRICE RIGIDITY


                            Michael Bruno


                        Working Paper No. 522




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                              July 1980




This paper was prepared for: Conference on Import Competition and
Adjustment: Theory and Policy, Cambridge, MA, May 8—li, 1980. I
am indebted to Jeffrey Sachs for very helpful discussions and com-
ments on a rough draft. Except for a few minor changes of wording
this version replicates the paper read at the conference. I am
grateful to Peter Neary and Pentti Kouri for their illuminating
discussion. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Re search.
                                                NBER Working Paper #522
                                                             July, 1980




          Import Competition and Macro—Economic Adjustment
                     Under Wage Price Rigidity


                              ABSTRACT



     The paper analyzes the problem of short—term adjustment to a fall

n the price of competing imports when thee is wage and price rigidity.

This Is done in terms of a two—sector model which incorporates a domestically

producible import good and a semi—tradeable home good. The effect of a

fall in import prices on domestic employment, prices and the balance of

payments under nominal or real wage rigidity is analyzed in the various

market disequilibrium regimes. The possible responses in terms of demand

management and exchange rate (or tariff) policy as well as supply management

are analyzed. The theory is then applied to the stagflationary environment

of the 1970s within a modified framework in which the price of imported

raw materials has simultaneously risen. This helps to show how the above

adjustment problem crucially depends on the nature of the underlying

macro—economic environment.




                                            Michael Bruno
                                            Faculty of Social Sciences
                                            The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
                                            Jersusalem, Israel

                                            Telephone: 02/251—188
+                                  -1-                                     +




IMPORT COMPETITION AND LkCRO-ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT

UNDER WAGE-PRICE RIGIDITY*




A fall in import prices constitutes an improvement in the terms of trade

and is welfare increasing when wages and prices are fully flexible.

Problems of internal adjustment arise when they are downward sticky and

the system is not otherwise in a process of rapid change. Two kinds of

short-run unemployment may occur. Workers may be thrown out of jobs in

the directly competing domestic industry because of a rise in the product

wage. And unemployment may be due to contraction in a home industry which

is an imperfect substitute on the demand side. The second kind of

unemployment can in principle be remedied by macro-economic expansion.

Since it comes from the production side, the first type of unemployment

requires a transfer of workers from the import-competing industry to the

home goods sector. In the short run this means reducing the real product

wage in that sector. If the nominal wage is downward sticky but prices

are upward flexible this could, in principle, be brcught about by

expansionary fiscal policy (coupled with a devaluation). Under certain

conditions, however, even that may not be possible if it also entails a

reduction in the real consumption wage. In this as well as in the other
*     am indebted to Jeffrey Sachs for very helpful discussions and comnents
    on a rough draft. Except for a few minor changes of wording this version
    replicates the paper read at the conference. I am grateful to Peter
    Near>' and Pentti Kouri for their illuminating discussion.
+                                  -2-                                       +



case intervention on the supply side may be required.

      In practice, the employment replacement effects of NIC (newly

industrialized countries) exports seem to have been relatively small.

Since import competition is nothing new one may ask why it has received so

much more attention in recent years. A possible answer is that its

effects depend on the general economic environment. The supply shocks

that affected industrial countries in the 1970s introduced structural

adjustment problems of a kind that turn out to resemble those caused by

import competition. At times of rapid growth and excess demand in both

the goods and labour markets, such as the late 1960s and early l970s,

import competition could alleviate shortages and reduce inflationary

pressure. By contrast, during a period of persistent slack, as after

1973, it may compound existing adjustment problems.

      The aim of this paper is to clarify these issues in the context of

a two-sector open economy macro model which is analysed in terms of the

recent disequilibrium approach. Section I lays out a two-sector model

which incorporates a domestically producible import good and an exportable

home good. The effect of a fall in import prices under nominal or real

wage stickiness is analysed within the main markets (goods, labour, and

foreign exchange). We consider the differential response to import

competition under the main disequilibrium regimes. We also discuss the

extent to which demand management and exchange-rate (or tariff) policy

can be applied. Wage subsidies and capital accumulation are discussed in

Section III. Section IV relates the theory to the environment of the

l970s and briefly considers the problem of import competition in final

goods within a modified framework in which the price of key imported raw

materials has risen. This helps to bring out the point that the adjustment
 +                                  -3-                                             +



problem depends crucially on the nature of the underlying macro-economic

 environment.



I.   ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK


The effect of import competition will here be analysed within a conventional

two-sector framework adapted to our specific purpose.1 The import good

can be produced by a perfectly competitive domestic industry whose output

is denoted by X. With domestic consumption C, the excess (C -                 X)   is

imported. Producers and consumers will face a domestic price           p = p*eT,
where p is the international c.i.f. price, e is the exchange rate,
and r a tariff factor (1 +   rate    of tariff).

      The other sector produces a home good X at price p. This can
be used for private consumption (C), public consumption (G), or

investment (J)•2 Unlike in the simplest two-sector model, we shall

assume that this good is semit'-adable. It can be exported as an imperfect

substitute (E) for a world export good whose price is p. This

modification of the basic model is helpful in that it allows for a

distinction between imports and   exports   and   at   the same time maintains

the similicity of a two-sector macro model for the home economy. We now

consider the main building blocks.



  See Helpman (1976), Bruno (1976), Brecher (1978), RØdseth (1979), for
  applications of such a model in a Walrasian
                                              general-equilibrium set-up.
  Neary (1979) has recently given a disequilibrium formulation of such a
  model along the lines of Malinvaud (1977). A similar
                                                        approach also
  underlies Bruno and Sachs (1979). See also
                                              Liviatan'(l979).
2 For
      simplicity we here assume there is no C    and I    in the X
                                                   1          1           1
 sector, although these could easily be incorporated.
+                                                               -4-                                    +



Production and employment

We adopt the conventional short-run two-factor production framework:


X = X(L1, K1), i                     0, 1. Labour (L1) is a variable factor whose total

supply, L, is assumed to be fixed exogenously. Capital stock (K1) in both

sectors is fixed in the short run (capital accumulation is discussed in

Section III). Labour and capital are gross complements. Denoting the

nominal wage by w and allowing for a tax (subsidy) on wages (O = 1 +

+ tax     rate or 1 - subsidy rate) we obtain the two notional labour demand

functions 14(0w/p, K) and the full-employment constraint


(1)
                   DL       Ld(O w/p
                             0   0       0
                                             ,   K
                                                     0
                                                         )   + Ld(O w/p , K )   -L   0.
                                                                1  1   1   1
                                     —           +                   -    +

          For simplicity, it is assumed that when there is excess demand for
labour (DL >            0) only home-good producers are rationed in the labour market,
i.e., L = L             -
                            LCI(Ow/p)            <       Ld(Ow/p); in that case X/L > w,p.
          Figure 1 shows the two labour-demand curves in a box diagram whose

length, L, marks            total     labour supply. For given                   p, 0., K., the
intersection of the two curves at A (w = w°) gives the equilibrium

allocation of labour between sectors. For example, a fall in the price

p will shift L                   to L' and at the given wage w0 unemployment of

AC will emerge.3 If the nominal wage were set at w' < w°, there would

be excess demand for labour of GE in he original position.                                   By

assumption, labour allocation would be represented by the point G, below

the curve L, illustrating the case where w/p <                                   3X/3L    (and w/p =
=X
      1
          Ia   1
                   ).


    We shall show later that this is augmented by an additional
                                                                                            contractionary
    effect on the demand for home-goods (AB in Figure 1).
+                   -5-                             +




    w                                          w
              L0                    L1
                                         I

          I




    wo                          —
                                             — wo
    w.




    0L0                                      0L1

                   Figure   1
+                                                            -6-                                              +



Product,        income, and houeehold behaviour

Nominal GNP is given by pX +                                pX;       real GNP in home-good units        is
Y = X         + X fir, where ii = p /p                      denotes the internal terms of trade
          o       1                0   1


between the two sectors. Disposable household income is Y T, where T
is total (direct and indirect) net taxes in the system measured in units

of X
          0

              Assume next that a given share, c, of disposable income is consumed

(or s =          1 -      c       is saved), while total consumption expenditure, C, is

broken down            into       its components according to a standard consumption function

C = C1(C,             .1r), where C = C              + C/it. If both goods are normal and are

also gross substitutes,' we have:


                 o<C.ic <1                                                Coc+C /i'r
                                                                                 IC
                                                                                     =          1


(2)              C011. < 0, C1 > 0                                        Co.11. +
                                                                                     C171
                                                                                            C/iT

                 C =          C     +   C/ii=   c(Y - T) = CCX            +   X/ir -T).

Equilibrium in the home-goode market

In addition to household demand for the home good, C, there is exogenous

demand for public consumption, G, investment, 10, and export demand, E.

The last is assumed to be a positive function of world income, Y, and a

negative function of the relative price ratio p1 ep; its price

elasticity is assumed greater than unity. Total demand for the home good

is



    (3)
                          =       C[c(Y    -   T),   71.]
                                                            + C   +   1   +   E(Y*,    p/ep*),


where Y =             X       +   X5/IT,   X5 =      X(Ow/p, K), and X =                    niin(X'1, X5).


      This assumption could be relaxed, see Hanoch and                                  Fraenkel (1979).
+                                      ..7..                                            +



       The notional supply of X         is given by a supply function x

    X(Ow/p, K). Excess demand, D, is defined as the difference XtI - X5.

        It is convenient to express all equilibrium conditions in terms of

two endogenous relative price variables, 71       = p/p        and w = w/p        (as

long as p        remains fixed this is the same as using the two nominal

variables p        and w).    The relative price of exports can be expressed

in the form p/ep* = rrr/Tr*, where rr =        p*/p*    is the given international

relative price ratio, and t       is   the import tariff factor. Similarly, the

real wage in home-good units w/p          can be written as the ratio W/7T.

Equilibrium     in the home-goods market can thus be defined as


(4)         D       xd -      = DOt,   w; z) = 0,

where z is the set of exogenous variables (11*,          *,        K1, etc.).

       As shown in the appendix the assumptions made so far guarantee that

excess demand will be a negative function of 71         (3D/air   <   0),   as is required

by stability.

       The sign of 3D/3w is ambiguous. While an increase in the wage

rate reduces the supply of X, it also reduces disposable income and

consumption through its effect on output in both sectors. There is no

ambiguity when only wages are consumed (see Weary, 1979). As shown in

the appendix, 3D/3w > 0        iff cC0 < , where           =   Lfl/(LT)       +   L)
and r are the labour demand elasticities. This means that the marginal

propensity to consume home goods out of income is smaller than the weighted

share of employment in the home-goods sector, a condition that will probably

hold.5 For convenience we shall indeed use the assumption 3D/3w > 0

    E.g., if c =   0.8, C0 = 0.9, Cc/U = 0.1,          itwil]. hold so long as
    Lfl/(L) < 0.39,        i.e., even if X     is very labour-intensive relative
    to X
        0
+                                            -8-                                                +



and, in          the absence of a full-employment constraint, the elasticity of

the D            curve will in that case be greater than unity.6
            0
            The relevant curve, marked D in Figure 2 (expressed in logarithms

of     iT       and   w),   divides the ir-w     space into a region of excess supply

(to the right of D) and an excess demand region (to the left of D).

An increase in G, Y, iTt, i, 0, or K                      increases D, thus shifting

the D             curve to the right, while an increase in T, 6 ,         or   K       shifts
            o                                                         1            0

it to the left.
The    three main regimeB

To give a fuller picture of the main disequilibrium regimes the labour-

market equilibrium condition is also drawn in Figure 2, now expressed in

terms of the transformed variables               71 and     w,

(1')              DL(Tr, w)        LCI(ew/,T,   K) + Ld(Ow,      K) - L   0.



            As can easily be shown, the equilibrium DL curve in the figure

is upward sloping with elasticity                 =   (Ln   +    Ln'Ln,    which is less

than unity. Below DL there is excess demand for labour, above it there

is excess supply. The curve will be pushed up by an increase in K or

a decrease in O (the case of wage subsidies).

            We can now combine the information about the markets for labour and

borne goods in order to consider the labour market under excess supply of

home goods.

            When      producers   are constrained by the home-goods market employment

6
     The alternative, with the above inequalities reversed, leads to a
     negatively sloped D              curve. This causes no particular problem, but
     will not be dealt with here.
+                 -9-                           +




    log (w/p1)




              c              D0


                                  -K
                                    .• DL




         DL

                                       Df

                                   LD0
     0                             Iog(p0/p1)

                  Figure 2
    +
                                        -10-                                             +


    L will be a positive function of              which in turn is a negative
        0                                     0

    function of the domestic (relative) price, it.       To maintain equilibrium
    in the labour market the wage w         will now have to fall, rather than

    rise, with an increase in the price, 7T. This leads to a downward sloping

    labour-equilibrium curve, LD, when there is excess supply in the home-

    goods market. The whole of region K is thus one of generalized excess

    supply in both the labour and home-goods markets (Keynesian
                                                                     unemployment).
            Any exogenous change such as fiscal policy, shifting the D curve

    to the right, will shift the curve LD with it so that their intersection

always moves along the notional full-employment line
                                                               DL (see for example,
the shift from D ALD           to D'A'LD' in Figure 3 below).
                       0   0       0    0

            Next, note that by our assumption about labour allocation under

rationing there will be no region in which
                                                    excess supply of goods coincides
with excess demand for labour.° The
                                             same downward sloping curve (LD)
must thus also be the continuation of the
                                                  commodity_equilibrium curve D
                                                                                     0

in the labour-rationing region. This leaves the whole of region R               as
that of generalized excess demand
                                        (Malinvaud's 'repressed inflation' case).
'
    This    can be seen as follows from Figure 1:
                                                      a fall in X can be
    represented as a leftward shift of the vertical
                                                          line X from the
    previous equilibrium point A to B (at given nominal wage w°).
    Effective labour demand for
                                  L0 is no lunger represented by the demand
    curve L0    (which will anyway shift up with a rise in p0). Equilibrium
    in the labour market can take
                                   place only at the point H, where the
    nominal wage is below the marginal value product in the
                                                                  X0 industry.
    This would be the underconsumption
                                            (U) region in the terminology of
    Muellbauer and Portes (1978). The
                                            notation K, C, and R is taken
    from their paper.
    If part of L    were also rationed the continuation of the
                                                                      D0 curve
    would lie to the left of
                                 LD0 with the R region correspondingly
    truncated.
+                                       -11-                                                                          +


          The third region, C, is the familiar case of classical unemployment,

combining excess demand for home goods with excess supply of labour.

Since in this model the notional supply of labour is taken as fixed,

demand for home goods will not depend on labour market restrictions. The

difference between actual output, X                      X5(w/ir), and the higher output

demand, X1, takes the form of forced private savings. (i.e., G + E                                            +   I
will always be supplied).


The current     balance   of payments

The current-account deficit is p*(C -
                                        1       1
                                                         X )
                                                          1
                                                                 - (p 0 /e)E 0, in               foreign currency

terms.      For convenience, we divide this by p and refer to excess demand

for tradable goods, Df in real terms,


             Df =   C (C, *) - X (0 w ,     K           - TTIE
(5)
                     1
                          ++
                                 1 11           1
                                                    )
                                                                 0
                                                                     (y*, Tr/7r*)                Df(Tr, w ; z).
                                                                                                          1
                                    —       +                         +        -

          The signs of the derivatives of this excess demand function will, in

general, be ambiguous with respect to the endogenous price ratios i and

w. As is shown in the appendix, under reasonable assumptions we have

                f
-3D /3ir > 3D /3t >
      0
                         0.

          Next, we have 3Df/3w       0 iff 1 -                             =       (1   -
                                                                                            c)   + cC
                                                               cC1/rr
If 3Df/3w > 0,        D, is negatively sloped.'0 If 3Df/3w < 0,                                         Df is
positively sloped and its slope is greater than that of D. The sign of

the slope makes no difference to our subsequent analysis. In the K (or

the R) region the slope of Df is definitely negative.

          The line Df in Figure 2 relating to the equilibrium condition


    When c is close to 1, this is the same condition as on p. 7, but
    there is no presumption that it is so here.




                                                                                                                  S
+                                                                 -12—                                                        +




Df(itI w) =             0       is drawn negatively sloped with deficits (Df > 0) on the

right and surpluses (Df < 0) on the left. This curve will shift in the

same direction as D                                for changes in the relevant exogenous variables

(z), with the exception of the sector-specific C                                              and          By assumption,
                                                                                                     10.
X        is never rationed and the tradable-goods market need not clear.11 The
    1

monetary effect of changes in foreign-exchange reserves will be mentioned

later.


The government budget

Two      types   of indirect taxes, a tax (subsidy) on wages (Of) and tariffs

(t), have already appeared in the system. Next, assume that the government

can      levy   a direct tax, Td, which forms part of total net tax receipts

CT).       [This helps to allow for the net effect of an indirect tax (0 or

t) with total T held constant.]                                     Denoting the government deficit by Dg
(measured in X units), we have


(6)             D           =    G       -
                    g                o



where T =
                    Td
                             +   (w/p)[(0               -
                                                            1)L    + (0   -
                                                                              l)L]    + ('r    - l)(p*e/p)(C - X).

Savings,        investment, and money


Although        we shall not                   make formal use of the nature of wealth formation

and      money in the system, it may help to close the system in this respect.

The savings-investment identity can be "Ut Ifl the form I = S -                                                   +
                                                                                                             Dg       Df/lr,
where I =           I,           S =         s(Y   -
                                                       T)   =
                                                                private   savings, and        all   magnitudes are



        The only way in which rationing does come in is through the effect of
        various regimes on the income response, and                                  thus     on the demand for C
                                                                                                                          1

        (see Section II).
+                                           -13-                                                     +



expressed in home-goods units (assume here that T = 1).
         Suppose now that the current-account deficit is financed by running

down reserves and the government deficit is financed by central bank credit,

the sum of these assets forming the money base, H. The total quantity

of money, H, can be controlled through the money multiplier, m. One can

thus write


 (7)        H =   mH    =
                             m[H_1
                                     +
                                         P0(Dg
                                                 -
                                                     Df)_1]
                                                              =   m[H • p0(S -
                                                                                   I)],
where subscript -1 indicates one-period lag.

         Total investment, I, equals gross capital accumulation in the two sectors.

For simplicity one may assume that                   K1 = I1(R          M/p)   -         (i =   0,
                                                                    ,
                                                                                   S±K
1) and I       10 +   Ii,   where         are profits in sector i,                  is the

depreciation rate, and M/p               is a proxy for the negative effect of the

rate of interest (on investment). In this way one can incorporate the

effect of endogenous or planned changes in real balances in the short run

as well as changes in profits on capital accumulation in the long run. Changes

in K1 will only be mentioned very briefly (see Section III).



II. ANALYSIS OF IMPORT PRICE COMPETITION


Let    us now consider the impact effect of a reduction in foreign                  prices.
We   begin with the case in which p and                       both drop, leaving the

relative price ratio 7f* unaffected. The advantage of considering this

case first is that such a change does not alter the general
                                                                               equilibrium
curves in Figure 2.12 At given price p and nominal wage level w, the


12
     For the moment we also assume that the external market
                                                            (Y*) remains
     unchanged.
+                                -14-                                       +


effect   of a fall in p is to increase the relative prices   ir   and   w

by the same amount, thus moving the economy from an initial equilibrium

point A along a 450 vector to, say, the point B. This point is in the

Keynesian unemployment region, K, with excess supply in the commodity and

labour markets as well as excess demand for traded goods.

      The intuitive explanation is straightforward. A fall in the import

price raises the product wage in the X industry, thus reducing employment

and output in that sector. At given v/p     the potential output supply

in the home-goods industry stays constant. However, the increase in the

relative price of home goods reduces the demand for C    at a given income

and the fall in product and income further reduces C. Also exports must

fall since p has dropped. Producers of X        are thus 'rationed in the

home-goods market and employment (and output) drop.

      Suppose the Walrasian general equilibrium point remains at A. If

prices and nominal wages were fully flexible, a reduction in both of them

by the rate of the decrease in foreign prices would return the economy to

equilibrium. If nominal wages and prices are downward sticky, there is a

policy tool that would have the same effect, namely, a devaluation

(increase in e) by the amount required to bring the domestic price p,

as well as   ir and w, back to their original values, in which case all

markets return to equilibrium and all real magnitudes stay the same (the

only difference now being that the foreign currency value of both imports

and exports has been reduced).

      Next let us consider the more relevant case in which only the price

of imports (p*) falls while the price of exports (p*) stays constant. This

implies that the relative price lr* rises. In this case import substitutes

but not exports are hurt. In terms of the general equilibrium system
+                                 -15-                                       +



(see Figure 3) the implication is that D and Df both shift to the
right, to D' and D' respectively. As can be seen in the appendix,
            0

the relative shift is as shown, namely, Df shifts to the right by less
than D and both shift by less than the initial change in log p. The
       0                                                         1

intersection of D'
                 f
                   and D L is at A and that of D' and DL             is at

A'. If wages and prices were fully downward flexible the new short-run

Walrasian equilibrium would be at A', if the economy actively borrows to

cover the remaining current account deficit, or at A, if foreign

currency reserves are allowed to drop and the money supply is allowed to

contract correspondingly (shifting D' and LD' back to the left). At

any rate the point B lies in the K region with respect to either A

or A' just as in the previous case. But to reach an equilibrium prices

must now fall by less than wages. If wages and prices are downward rigid

a devaluation cannot by itself return the system to equilibrium. A

devaluation moving the system back from B to C will get only the

home-goods market into equilibrium. A further move to C' will achieve

current-account balance but an inflationary gap emerges. A devaluation

all the way to A will achieve full employment with excess demand in the

home-goods market and a surplus in the current account. In theory both

these gaps in the home-goods and foreign-exchange markets can be closed by

a suitable combination of fiscal (Td. G) and monetary policy (m) so that

full-employment equilibrium can be achieved at A. However, this is

obviously a wrong policy from the point of view of optimum resource

allocation since at A the original sectoral allocation of labour would

only be artificially preserved.

      What if wages and prices are flexible upwards and are allowed to

increase from A to A' (or A1)? The resulting reduction in the real
+                        - 16 -                                  +




    log (w/p1)

                                                 ill
                 D         \                    D0



                                                wg


                                            K
           C


          DL                                    LDg'




                     R
                                          LD,
                                    LD0
     0                                log (p0/p1)


                         Figure 3




                                                     -   -   -
                                                                     I!
+                                                  —17-                                     +




product   wage in the home-goods industry may then bring about the                 required
transfer of workers from L                     to L. There are two qualifications to

this solution. One is that the economy must be willing to pay the price

of some inflation for this transfer (on the assumption that it would be

enough to induce workers to move from the depressed industry into the

more profitable one). The other qualification has to do with the

possibility of real, rather than nominal, wage rigidity which may prevent

such a reduction in the product wage.

        Suppose the consumption basket of wage earners consists of

proportions          cx   and 1 -   a,     of home and importable goods, respectively, so

that the relevant consumption price index can be written in the form

Apap, and assume that w                       Apcxp. A minimum real wage line, w,

can thus be defined by


(8)        10gw              logA +      cx   log ir



This may provide an effective constraint on adjustment to full employment

iff a >          where        = L                      L r ), the elasticity of the full-
                                    00/(L00r +          11
employment line DL. In Figure 3 it is represented by the line

which lies between the 450 line (AB) and D1. 13 The higher the share, cx,

of home goods in the wage earners' consumption basket and the higher the

ratio Lfl/Lfl, the less likely they will be to accept the real


13 In the labour market (Figure 1) a fall in                     p   to p will reduce the
      minimum nominal wage which is consistent with a fixed real consumption
                                      cx
      wage, from w0 = APaP                    to w' = APa(P)1_a < w0. At given p0 and
      w' and with equilibrium in the home-goods market, unemployment would
      be EF (This corresponds to the intersection of D" and w in

-
      Figure   3).
+                                      -18-                                           +



product-wage cut, in home-good units, that is required to draw more

employment into the X          sector so as to compensate for the employment

lost in the X sector. If, however, a < ,
                    1
                                                      this   problem does not

arise. 1k


        What is to happen in practice depends on the particular context or

phase in which import competition occurs. If only a small share of C

is initially imported and if X          is a relatively labour-intensive activity

or     r > r), we may get a > .         In   that case, the real wage constraint

will be effective in preventing the achievement of full employment by

means of exchange-rate policy and demand management alone. If, however,

a relatively large share of C          is already imported, and if labour

intensities are about the same, then the share of C              in the consumption

basket will be higher than the share of L           in employment, and we get

a < .       In   that case workers may be induced to move into the home-goods

industry by an increase in prices and wages due to an expansionary policy

while the real consumption wage (we) also rises. The welfare gain of

import competition will not be wasted.

        I-low would the analysis change if the import price fall goes together

with expansion of the external market? What it means is that the            Df and
D     curves both shift further to the right. An extreme case would be one

in which export expansion compensates fully for the rise in imports. In

1k When the expenditure elasticity for home goods is close to unitary and
     wage—earners' consumption is representative of total household
     consumption, we have a Coc• The difference between the condition
     on the slope of w and that on the slope of D     (see p. 7) will
     thus depend mainly on how far c falls short of unity. The assumption
     CCoc <       and the case a >     are not mutually exclusive.
+                                       -19—                                +



Figure 3 this is shown by curve D which pases through point B. The

current account will now balance at B. If there is no intervention in

the commodity market, the corresponding equilibrium curve for home goods

(D") must lie to the right of B, so that point B will be in the
     0

classical unemployment (C) region from the start. However, with excess

demand in the commodity market prices may be free to adjust upwards, while

the nominal wage remains downward rigid. Whether full employment can or

cannot be reached will again depend on whether a real wage constraint has

to be violated. In terms of Figure 3 the question is whether prices must go

through a point such as H on the               line (in the case a > ) on the

way to equilibrium.

         The same consideration applies to the question whether in the

absence of exchange-rate adjustments demand management alone could return

the system to equilibrium. The curve D          can always be pushed far

enough to the right from B so that at given nominal wage inflation wifl

reduce w/p       sufficiently to reach full employment on the DL line.

In addition to the problem of the current account, which would require

suitable fiscal treatment, the feasibility of such a policy would depend

on whether a real wage constraint is or is not violated.


Reeponse under    different   regimee

So far we have analysed the effect of an import price reduction starting
from an equilibrium. If the economy is initially in the K region, the

adjustment difficulties are more pronounced a fortiori. The import price

change would then increase excess supply in both the home-goods and the

    labour market. Things look slightly different if the initial point

happens to be in the C region. Say the equilibrium set of curves is
+                                                       -20-                                       +



given      by DL, D", and LD", while the economy, initially at point C,

moves to point B. Here, an import-price fall removes the need for the

upward adjustment in the domestic price level that would be required to

eliminate excess demand in the home-goods market. However, in moving

from point C to B unemployment increases just the same.

           One would get the best of both worlds if the initial point happened

to be in the R region, that is, if the economy started from an

inflationary, generalized excess demand, situation. An import-price drop,

for example a move from G to A, might serve to eliminate excess demand

in both the commodity and labour markets, thus automatically producing an

anti-inflationary result I

           The effect of an import price change on excess demand under the

various regimes is of some interest in itself. Consider first the effect

on excess demand (supply) in the home-goods market. We have D /ap* =
                                           -                                       for
    cC0
           (3Y/ap*) -
                             (7r/p*)C0          3X/3p*.        Calculating Y/ap*         each of

the regions C, K, R, and denoting the labour share in X by 4, we

get

                    C
                         =
                             (lrp*Y1X(l         +          >    0


                    K                               C               C
(9)                          (1 -   cC) -1                 >


                   R
                  3Y _Y C            1      °
                                                    L      <' C
                  ap*1       ap1 p*••t
                                   1  0
                                        Iii                         1



Now       aX/p* = 0 for the C and K regions but 3XS/p* =
= -(ax        /L )ri L /p* < 0
          0        0 11 1                in the R region since in this case X5 =
                                                                                         0
=   X(L       -
                  L).
+                                     -21-                                                +


       A reduction in p thus causes income to fall and                 excess   supply to

increase more in the K than in the C region. In the R region, income

either falls by less or even increases, while the increase in X5 (which

is due to relaxation of labour rationing) helps to reduce excess demand

in the R region by more than in the C region [DR/ap* < aDC/ap                        by

(9)] thus bringing out the potential anti-inflationary role of import-price

reduction under generalized excess demand.

       Next, consider the current account under alternative regimes.

Differentiating (p*Df) with respect to p one gets, after some

manipulation,

               a(p*D)
(10)
                   a
                          = cp*C      -
                                           Xci   +   d,r)   + rr2C


Applying      the value of aY/ap* given in (9) to each of the three regimes,

we can conclude that (a) a fall in p increases the current-account

deficit under all three regimes [the derivative in (10) is always negative];

and    (b)    the ordering of the regimes by the size of the deficit increment

is R >       C >   K.'5
       The stronger anti-inflationary effect of an import-price reduction

under the R regime is thus obtained at the cost of a greater deterioration

in the current-account deficit, a trade-off which makes intuitive sense.

The effect on excess supply of labour coming from an import-price drop is

the same under all three regimes (aDL/ap* =             Ln/p*)       since, by

assumption, producers in the X            sector are always on their notional

demand curve for labour.


    E.g., for the K-regime we find, after substitution from (9), that
    a(PDf)/aP =         - (1 - CC0cY1(l - C)(l + 4n1) < 0 (since C0 <                   0).
    The rest follows from the fact that aYR < yC < ayK
+                                  -22-                                        +



Tariff change a
The discussion of import-price changes as an anti-inflationary device

seems somewhat artificial since a change in p is an exogenous change

over which the economy usually has no control. Suppose, however, that

one applies the same argument to a planned change in the domestic price

p through a reduction in an existing tariff. Inspection of the

underlying model shows that a change in r works in almost exactly the

same way as a change in p* except for its different quantitative effect

on the current account. (A 1 per cent drop in T worsens the current

account by more than a 1 per cent drop in p. The same applies in

reverse, to the imposition of a tariff.) However, the geometrical

analysis (movement along a 45° line pli rightward shift of D          and Df
curves) for the home-goods and labour markets works in the same way.1'

       In a similar way one can analyse the effect of a tariff imposed in

order to counteract the effect of a fall in p. This is analogous to a

devaluation (a move back from B along a 45° line) except that a

simultaneous upward shift takes place in curves Df and D. The

distortionary effects of a tariff are well-known and need not be repeated here.

       The upshot of this section is that t'e effect of import competition

and the problems of adjustment cannot be treated without considering the

regime in which the economy happens to be when this change takes place.

It will help to alleviate an inflationary situation (in both markets in

an R regime and in the commodity market in a C regime). It may aggravate

an existing unemployment situation (in the K or C regimes) if the wage


16 In this case one has to assume a compensatory adjustment in direct
    taxes, Td, so as to keep total tax receipts, T, constant.
+                                            -23-                                      +



rate      or the real consumption wage is downward sticky.      The additional

unemployment originating in the import-competing sector cannot always be

removed by Keynesian demand management policies. In principle, a change

in the exchange rate can be used, in conjunction with demand management,

•to cure unemployment, but there is always a price to be paid in terms of

inflation. If the real wage constraint is effective (a > 8) a return to

full employment would also involve resource misallocation since the

adjustment to a new efficient labour allocation would then be prevented.



III.       SUPPLY MANAGEMENT AND CAPITAL ACC1"r1JLATION


How should the previous analysis be modified if the response of investment

to changes in profits is taken into account?'7 Consider the initial

experiment in which the import price falls, starting from equilibrium at

A. The same forces that reduced employment in both sectors will also

reduce profits and        investment.    This has two effects. One    is a   further

downward         pressure on aggregate demand (pushing the D curve to the
left) thus increasing excess supply in the ciome—goods and           labour   markets.18

The other,         long-run, effect   is a   fall in K which reduces the optimum

level of employment in both sectors. In terms of the general equilibrium

picture this expresses itself in a downward pull on the DL curve, thus

exacerbating or creating unemployment. A similar analysis will hold if

    the economy is initially in the C region. Only in the R region could

    a fall in p bring about an increase in profits, just as it could lead

    to an increase in total income.
    17 We
          again ignore changes in real money balances.
    18
         We here ignore the reverse pull of new investment directed towards

         NICs.
                                       -24-                                    +


        The effect on capital accumulation can be discussed in the wider

context of supply management policy. / we have seen, import competition

under wage (and price) rigidity leads to unemployment (except in the R

region) which demand management and exchange-rate policy may not be able

to solve effectively; or else it might lead to inflation. Policy measures

which push up the full-employment line, DL, may thus be called for. The

simplest tool, in the short run, is a wage subsidy (or a reduction in

employment tax) in the X sector. This introduces a wedge between the

product wage and the consumption wage and r.y enable producers to continue

production of X      without loss. In terms of our model this implies a

reduction in 0. and a corresponding upward shift in the DL curve (as

well as a rightward shift in the D          and Df curves).19 In principle,
employment L      can   be   kept at its original level (with equilibrium at

point B) if 0        is determined so that 0/ps' stays constant. This

wage subsidy would be superior to a tariff because it avoids the

distortionary tax on consumption of C          (see Johnson, 1962, and Bhagati

and Ramaswami, 1963). However, it shares with the tariff the distortionary

feature of freezing the productive structure (together with profits and

the composition of investment).

        Any measure that would help workers move out of sector X into

sector X      would be better. One candidate in the present context is a

wage subsidy (or reduced employment tax) in the home-goods industry. This

would decrease the product wage 0w/p          (without having to raise p) and

thus increase X5. In order to be effective, however, it must be coupled

19
     Again it is assumed that T stays constant; thus,        Td must be
     increased so as to finance the subsidies (or the reduction in
     employment tax). In terms of Figure 1 curve L' will shift back.
+                                     —25-                                         +


with expansionary measures or a devaluation.20

         Another choice might be investment promotion measures to increase

K      (e.g., investment credits). Some combination of supply management on

XS(O    K 0) '   with   devaluation cum fiscal policy might be superior. To
 0   0'

make this statement more precise involves a more extensive analysis of

intertemporal choice and this is beyond the scope of the paper.



IV.    STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS OF THE 19708: AN INTERPRETATION


When one leaves the theoretical framework for a moment and considers the

world developments of the 1960s and 1970s, two riddles present themselves.

One has to do with empirical estimates of the effect of NIC trade on

employment in industrial countries. Empirical studies have invariably

shown that employment-replacement effects of NIC trade are minute.21 If

they are so small, what is all the fuss about? The second riddle, which

may be connected with the first, has to do with the timing of the debate.

It would seem that in the l960s, when NIC export penetration was at its

most rapid, the issue of internal adjustment was not a major policy

concern in OECD countries; more recently, however, it has become a major

issue--at a time when the rate of penetration appears to have slowed down.22

20 The
         expansion must not only compensate for the fall in demand (X),
    but must also take up the extra slack entailed by an increase in X.
      In terms of Figure 3, DL may be pushed up to pass through point B
    while demand management shifts D0 to D". Alternatively, one can
    devalue from B to C or C' and use wage subsidies to push the
                                                                              DL
    curve up to pass through one of these points.
21 This literature is summarized in a recent OECD Report (1979). See also
    Baldwin, Mutti, and Richardson (1978) and Krueger (1979).
22 Between 1963 and 1973 the share of NIC in OECD imports of manufactures
+                                    -26-                                     +


        A partial answer to the first question lies in the distinction

between net and gross employment effects. A specific sector may be very

badly affected while the net employment effect on the economy as a whole

may be small or even positive (in terms of our model, consider a

combination of a fall in p and a substantial increase in y* and             K).
        Another answer, which also relates to the second question, is the

crucial role played by the general economic environment in which import

competition takes place. During much of the l960s and until 1973

industrial econOmies enjoyed rapid expansion of both productive capacity

and external trade opportunities. More often than not, industrial

economies found themselves in the R regime. Even if the business cycle

would now and then throw an economy into a K regime, unemployment was

never very prolonged and it was Keynesian--it could be eliminated by pure

demand expansion.23 Moreover, it may be that investment behaviour

anticipated the need to adjust to changes in relative prices; in any

event, such adjustments are easier to make when the system is expanding.

The events of 1973-74 came as an unexpected shock to the system and

started a period of prolonged unemployment, a good part of it classical.

Under   such   conditions import competition imposes an extra strain on a

system which is already stuck with a structural adjustment problem.

        Our model can be modified so as to illustrate this point. Let us


    increased from 2.6 to 6.8 per cent. The figures for the following
    years, 1974-77, are respectively 7.1, 6.8, 7.9, and 8.1 per cent
    (see OECD, 1979, p. 23, Table 4).
23 In Figure 4 below the point A' relative to equilibrium at A is in
    the K region, but a shift from          to D returns the system to
    full employment. This would not be so if Walrasian equilibrium was,
    for example, at point E.
+                                            -27-                                            +


introduce an imported intermediate input, N, into the production of the

home good; its international price is p and its relative price

    =
        p*/p*    =
                     pa/p
                            (with r =   1).    Suppose the intermediate input and

labour are gross cnmplements.2 In the labour market an increase in p*

will work like an increase in 0 ,
                                         0
                                              it will   shift the D curve downwards
                                                                  L
(see D in Figure 4). In the commodity market the increase in p will

show as a shift to the right of the D               curve (see the move from D to

D' in Figure 4)25 Both these changes shift the economy from an initial

equilibrium at A into the C region (relative to the new Wairasian

equilibrium at E in Figure 4). If at the same time world demand contracts

and investment demand falls (in response to lower profitability in the X

industry), or if demand policy is contractionary, the D 'curve may shift

to the left by more than the impact effect of p (move to D" in

Figure 4). In that case the economy may find itself in the K region

(see A relative to F), but it is important to stress that the resulting

unemployment is only partly Keynesian, i.e., given real wage rigidity,

pure expansionary policy may fail to restore full employment.

         If import competition in X is superimposed on this situation it

only magnifies the existing structural problem. In terms of the analysis

of the labour market (Figure 1), this can be shown as follows: output in

the X       sector is now constrained along the curve x", with employment


2 For a fuller discussion of such a model see Bruno and Sachs (1979).
    The disequilibrium formulation of that model is analysed in an
    unpublished working paper by the present author.
25 An increase in           p shifts X supply downwards. Similarly, real
    income will now fall [it is now measured as Y =                    -            +
                                                                X0(l       7r/1r)       X1/T1,
    where       .i   is the intermediate import ratio]. With a sufficiently
    strong supply effect, D0 shifts to the right, as with an increase in 00.
+                         -28—                                  +




    log (w/p1)

                                    DI:0

                               // /
                                                  D
                                                //
                                           D0



                 C           //                       EF

                           //
                          /                                DL
                         /
           DL

             L



                     R                                LD,

                                                LD0
                                    LDg
     0                                           log (p0/p1)

                         Figure 4
+                                    -29-                                      +




L    at point M.2' The notional labour demand curve has shifted to the

l:ft (L). Total unemployment (MC) at the nominal wage level        w0 now

consists of some purely Keynesian unemployment, MN, classical unemployment

originating in the home-goods industry (NA), and some unemployment from

the X         industry (AC). In both types of external shock it is supply
          I

management policy that may be called for.

          This brief discussion may help to show why import competition has

played a leading role in policy discussions in the industrial countries in

recent years, a role quite out of proportion to its real long-run relative

importance.

          One final qualification--we have assumed all along that import

competition takes place in final goods while the rise in import prices

was confined to intermediate goods. This seems, by and large, an

empirically reasonable assumption to make, since the bulk of export

penetration is in final goods. However, where there is also import

competition in intermediate goods (e.g., steel or paper), the same

framework can be turned round to show that a price drop may in fact

increase total employment.2'




26
     There are now two variable inputs in the X0 sector and it can be
     shown that cost minimization at a given output level gives a downward
     sloping output-constrained labour demand curve which is steeper than
     the notional L0 demand curve, but is not vertical unless intermediate
     inputs are used in fixed proportions.
27
     In   this case the fall in       must be weighed against an increase in
     L0 coming from gross complementarity of a variable input whose price
     has dropped. The net effect on total employment is an empirical matter.
 +                                                               -30-

 APPENDIX


 Slope of the D curve

 Differentiating                 D         xd - XS          (as defined in (3) and            (4)] by ¶ we have:

 (A-i)               aD/air
                                           cC ..
                                                        +
                                                            C      +
                                                                       E7.
                                                                              -
                                                                                  X.
             Now X07T            X     r /TT and since, in the unconstrained case,
                                  o o o
 Y X [L (w lu)] +                    X (w )/ur ,        we have
         0       0   1                1  1    1


 (A-2)               3Y/ur =           X       - X lit2       =     (X             - X
                                        0'IT        1                    000           /ur)/ur,
                                                                                       1



where        4       is the elasticity of X                        with respect to L and fl                     is the
demand elasticity of L                          with respect to w/p. Also,                            Eo,r < 0, C0 < 0,
by assumption, and thus


(A-3)                aD/air            T1 [cC           X/ur + (1 -           cC)Xc]              +        + E < 0.

Similarly, since X0 =                                                        -Lr,
                                               -L00/ir,          X1,

(A-4)                aY/aw
                             1
                                       -(L y
                                               00   +L
                                                            ii
                                                            n )/ur       <    0


and   thus


                     D/aw = CC(L) -
(A-5)
                                                              X0
                                                                         =        [(1 - cC0)n          -
                                                                                                           cCL]/ir.
It follows that aD/aw                          > 0 iff cC/(]. -
                                                                                  cC0) < Lfl/L or iff
cC0 <            where           =    (Ln       +   Lfl)L                    (see text, p. 7).             When this
condition holds we also have
+                                                                   -31-                                                                 +



                  3 log w                                   TI
                                                                    3D/air
                                                                                      =
                  3logw                I                    w3D/3w
                                                              10                  1
                                       ID
                                       ID
(A-6)
                                                =
                                                              -     cc
                                                                  oc)Xo4)0 0          r       TT +    cC
                                                                                                            OC
                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                    Cow
                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                  > 1.
                                                              w [(1 - cC )L                                - cC     L r 3
                                                               1         OC 0 0                                   OC 1 1


This is easily seen by recalling that 4)0 = w L /irX
                                                                                              10            0



Sl.ope   of the Df                   curve


Differentiating                  Df in equation (5) with respect to iT we have


(A-7)             9Df/3ir                  cCic (.)+C
                                                011
                                                       -t(E +TrE
                                                      171   o                                        071
                                                                                                           ).
         Now C171 > 0 and E +                           TIE
                                                              Olt
                                                                     < 0 by assumption. By (A-2), 3Y/3w > 0
                                                0

if 4)     r'   > X       [lix0   .     This   is an empirically reasonable assumption. At any
         00          1

rate, it is a sufficient (but by no means necessary) condition for

           > 0.

         Next,


                                                              - X
(A-8)             3Df/3w                     CC 3w                                           /rr)L r - (cC1C/it) L
                                                                                      (1-cC IC
                                                        1
                                                                     1W
                                                                          1
                                                                                                  1 1              00

Thus 3D /3w > 0 iff (1 - cC /7r)/(cC /w) > L r /L                                                                      or iff
       f   I               1C      1C       00 11
(1 -     c) + cC OC <                  (See text, p. 11). If both derivatives are positive,

we get


                                       3(log w )
                                                    I   I
                                                                     <        ,
                                        3(log   it)     I


                                                        IDf

         The sign of the slope of Df outside the C region is unambiguously

negative. In the K region, we have Y = xd + x
                                                                                          0           1
                                                                                                           /r     and thus

=   -Lfl/lr(l -           cC0)         < 0 and 3Y1/3ir =                      (-X/7r2 +               C071 + E071)/(l
                                                                                                                             -   cC ) < 0.
                                                                                                                                   oc
+                                                            -32—                             +




Then 3Df/3W          (1 -         c)L/(l            -
                                                         cC0) > 0 and
 [C7 - (TE     +
                   7rE71)](1
                                   -   A)   -     (t     -
                                                             l)irE071,
                                                                          where A

 (cC1/1T)/((l -     c)   +
                              cC1/7r] < 1. Thus 3Df/3Tr > 0 unambiguously in the
K region and the slope of Df must be negative. If Df happens to

pass through the. R region (e.g., if D is shifted to the left in

Figure 2), a similar analysis shows that its slope is negative in that

region too.


Relative   ohifte    of       D     and Df when                  p       changeB

Let us denote by (3ITD0/3p                  ) the shift of D along the ¶ axis due to
a change in p. We get:

              3D        D0          irE
(A-9)        ___23ir
              371 ap
                              +                   =0

Similarly,
              3D         Df                 irE
(A-b)                             - irt(          071)          0.

Multiply (A-9) by irr and                  add     to (A-b) to get
                   3D
              itt—
                 3ir 3p*
                                       +    —
                                            3Df a.TTDf
                                            3ir
                                                       =0
                                                  3p*

and   therefore

(A-il)        ____       =         i
                              — TrT3D/37) ____
               p*                          3p*

Now, from (A-l) and          (A-7)     we find 3D/3ir + 7t1(3Df/3Tt) =
         - c)(X -    wXn)              +      - t)] < 0 for t sufficiently
                                            E71(l                                   close

to 1, and assuming 3Y/3Tr > 0 as before. Thus, -3D/3ir > 1T1(3Df/37T) ?

(TITY'(3Df/371). Therefore in (A-il) 371D0/3(*) > 3Df/3()                                   QED
+                                  _33-                                       +



REFERENCES



Baldwin,   Robert E., John H. Mutti, and    J.   David Richardson. "Welfare

      Effects on the United States of a Significant Multilateral Tariff

      Reduction." Unpublished draft. 1978.

Bhagwati, Jagdish, and V. K. Ramaswami. "Domestic Distortions, Tariffs

      and the Theory of Optimum Subsidy," Journal of Political Economy,

      LXXI (February 1963), 44-50.

Brecher, Richard A "Money, Employment, and Trade-Balance Adjustment with

      Rigid Wages," Oxford Economic Pcers, XXX (March 1978), 1-15.

Bruno, Michael. "The Two-Sector Open Economy and the Real Exchange Rate,"

      American Economic Review, LXVI (September 1976), 566-77.

       and Jeffrey   Sachs. Supply Versus Demand Approaches to the Problem
      of Stagflation. (Discussion Paper No.        796.) Jerusalem: Falk

      Institute, 1979.

Hanoch, Giora, and Mordechai Fraenkel. "Income and Substitution Effects

      in the Two-Sector Open Economy," Ar,rican Economic Review, LXIX

      (June 1979), 455-58.

Helpinan, Elhanan. "Macroeconomic Policy in a Model of International Trade

      with a Wage Restriction," International Economic Review, XVII (June

      1976), 262-77.

Johnson, Harry C. Money, Trade, and Economic Growth. London: George

      Allen and Unwin, 1962.

Krueger, Anne 0. "Protectionist Pressures, Imports, and Employment in

      the United States." Unpublished typescript, 1979.

Liviatan, Nissan. "A Disequilibrium Analysis of the Monetary Trade

     Model," Journal     of International   Economics, IX (August 1)79),
     355-77.
+                                      —34-                                        +


Malinvaud, Edmond. The Theory of Unenrployment Reconsidered, Oxford,
        Blackwell,    1977.

Muellbauer, John, and Richard Portes. "Macroeconomic Models with Quantity

        Rationing,' Economic Journal, LXXXVIII (December 1978), 788-821.

Neary, .3.   Peter.     "Non-Traded Goods and   the   Balance of Trade in a Neo-

        Keynesian     Temporary Equilibrium." Forthcoming in Quarterly Journal
        of Economics.
OECD.    The Impact of    the Newly   Industrialising Countries on Production and
        Trade   in Manufactures.      (Report by the Secretary-General.) Paris:

        OECD, 1979.

RØdseth, AsbjØrn. "Macroeconomic Policy in a Small Open Econoiry,"

        Scandinavian Journal of Economics, LXXXI (No. 1, 1979), 48-59.
