                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE RELATION OF STOCK PRICES TO
           CORPORATE EARNINGS ADJUSTED FOR INFLATION




                         Phillip Cagan




                     Working Paper No. 525




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          August 1980




Financial support for this study to the National Bureau from the
RANN division of the National Science Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions, findings, or conclusions expressed herein are those of
the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #525
                                                                     August, 1980




             The Relation of Stock Prices to Corporate Earnings
                            Adjusted for Inflation


                                  ABSTRACT



     The effects of inflation adjustments of corporate earnings on market prices

were tested by cross section regressions of 485 manufacturing companies for the

period 1966—76 and subperiods. The basic data were company reports and stock

prices.

     For the full period, market prices reflected the inventory valuation adjust-

ment and the decline in real value of net financial liabilities fairly completely,

but they relfected the adjustment for the understatement of depreciation to only

a small extent. The surprisingly low effect of the depreciation adjustment could

only be partly attributed to measurement error, but not entirely.

     The estimated effect of capital gains on stock prices was either in the

wrong direction or negligible.

     The implication of the results is that market investors use a range of

adjustments for the effects of inflation which differs from the estimates used

in this study, though how and why they differ is not clear.

     The adjustments were much lower in the later period 1972—76 than in the

earlier period 1966—71. This seemed inconsistent with the higher inflation

rates in the later period. The explanation for the difference is not clear,

but it may reflect the difficulties of judging the size of the adjustments

in a period of rapid inflation.

                                                     Phillip Cagan
                                                     Department of Economics
                                                     Columbia University
                                                     New York, New York 10027

                                                     (212) 280—5437, 3681
                                                     (until 8/20/80: (202) 862—5821)
                                                                          •Ju lu



                                The Relation of Stock Prices to
                          Corporate Earnings Adjusted for Inflation

                                         Phillip Cagan*


                                     Outline of the Study

The continuing and rising rates of inflation since the mid-1960s have cre-

ated an increasing discrepancy between corporate earnings as they are repor-

ted and as they would be reported if adjusted for inflation. Numerous studies

have pointed to such discrepancies, and various accounting changes to elimin-

ate them have been discussed and proposed. Some changes have already occurred.

Many    firms   have switched to lifo inventory accounting which avoids the mislead-

ing profits of the fifo method. To cornply.with new SEC regulations, many firms

beginning    with 1976 have reported the replacement cost of capital. Some are re-
porting the decline in real value of debt. In general, however, the published
adjustments for the effects of inflation on corporate earnings are far from
complete.
        Rough adjustments for the effects of inflation on corporate earnings can

be made from reported figures. Insofar as investors make use of available in-

formation to assess corporate earnings adjusted for inflation, stock prices

would tend to reflect these 'true" earnings as distinct from the reported earn-

ings. This study tests the extent of such market adjustments. The test is made

by    regressing   changes in the market value of a cross section of 485 manufactur-

ing   companies on   their   reported earnings and the various adjustments for infla-

tion that investors could make from published reports. The period covered is

1966 to 1976. Company data were taken from the Compustat tapes and stock prices

from the University of Chicago CRISP tapes. The adjustments were for changes in

the general purchasing power of the dollar based on the implicit price index of

gross domestic product from the national income and product accounts. A supple-
mentary adjustment based on       specific   price in-
                                       —2-


dexes for individual products was made only for inventories


                                   Inflation Adjustments

The adjustments for inflation were the following:

     1) Depreciation adjustment. Conventional accounting practices based on

historical costs understate the current value of capital and, as a consequence,

current depreciation charges are too low and lead to an overstatement of net

earnings. (Although accelerated depreciation for tax purposes, permitted partly

as a consequence of inflation, may offset the overstatement or even lead to an

understatement of net earnings at times, it is generally not used in reporting

earnings to stockholders and the public.) The appropriate adjustment requires

revaluation of the capital stock. The revaluation in this study, as noted, is

made according to an index of general prices rather than the specific current

value of capital goods. The revalued (net) stock is multiplied by an annual de-

preciation rate to give the depreciation cost. The rate used is the average ratio

of depreciation to net plant and equipment reported by each company. (A depreci-

ation rate of one-eighteenth, based on an average life of capital of 18 years

used in the national income and product acconts of the BEA and on straight-line

depreciation charges, was also tried and proved less successful.) The difference

between our estimate of depreciation and the reported amount is the depreciation

adjustment, representing an extra cost per year because the reported figure is

understated by inflation. This cost is a deduction from reported earnings and

implies a lower market value of the firm.

     2) Inventory valuation adjustment. Production costs can be understated when

materials used, which were purchased at an earlier time, are valued at original

costs that are below replacement costs. The degree of understatement depends on

the accounting method followed. By fifo and the average cost methods, inventory

profits due to inflation can be substantial whereas by- the lifo method they are

zero as long as inventory stocks are rising. Under lifo special calculations have
                                          -3-


to be made when inventories are declining. The inventory valuation adjustment

is an estimate of the amount by which reported earnings are overstated by the

inventory accounting method used. Such a deduction from reported earnings implies

a lower market value of the firm.

     3) Decline in real value of net financial liabilities. Inflation depre-

ciates the real value of claims fixed in dollar terms. Corporations gain a real

return insofar as they are net debtors, as most nonfinancial corporations are.

Their liabilities fixed in dollar terms generally exceed the comparable assets

in the form of cash and receivables. To the extent that interest payments are

higher in recognition of the inflationary depreciation of debt, the deduction of

interest payments from earnings gives rise to a misleading understatement of

earnings if the corresponding gain is not recognized and allowed for in the

calculation of earnings. Even if a company has not had to borrow at the higher

interest rates brought about by inflation, and although the corporation receives

no cash inflow year by year from the decline in real value of debt, the decline

is an implicit addition year by year to its earnings.

     When market interest rates rise as a result of higher infJation or any
other reason, outstanding bonds decline in dollar market value. This change in

market value of bonds is an additional adjustment of the current-dollar value
of net worth, beyond the decline in real value of the face value of the bonds.

It is not specifically an inflation adjustment, however, and has been omitted

in this study. Changes in market value are ordinarily reversed in subsequent

years as the bonds return to their par value at maturity.

     4) Capital gain. Inflation increases the dollar value of capital equipment

and inventories. The dollar capital gain is calculated as the change in market

value of fixed capital and inventories over the period. The capital gain is not

realized (unless the equipment is sold), but it adds to net worth,

since      usable capital and inventories are worth more in current market value

than was paid for them.

     For inventories the capital gain applies to the unused stock, while the
                                          -4-



inventory valuation adjustment pertains to the stock used up in production.

The two are correlated, but not highly.   For fixed capital,

however, there is a high correlation. Consider a simple example of capital pur-

chased at the beginning of the year for $100 and 5 percent inflation (ignoring

capital purchased during the year). If the depreciation rate is 10 percent,

historical-cost depreciation for the year is $10. The revalued capital stQck

at the end of the year is $105 and current-value depreciation is l0.S0. The

depreciation adjustment is $0.50. The capital gain is the rise in value of

the end-of-year capital, that is, 5 percent of $90 or S4.50. The two adtustments

are proportional to the inflation rate and the capital stock. The proportions

will not move similarly from year to year, of course, because the depreciation

adjustment reflects the cumulative effect of past inflation, while the capital

gain depends on the current inflation rate. But they tend to be highly correla-
    among companies.
ted! Statistical problems due to this multicollinearity are noted later.

     Appendix A gives details of the derivation of these adjustments.


                        Framework of the Statistical Analysis

     The main criterion for the form of the regression equations is that the

inflation adjustments appear as independent variables and be arithmetically ad-

ditive to reported earnings. The form chosen relates the change in market value

of net worth to components of the change in net worth. The current-value of net

worth is increased by issues of equity, capital gain, and retained earnings after

adjusting for the understatement of depreciation and inventory costs and the omis-

sion of decline in real debt.

     The variables are measured as follows: The dependent variable of the re-

gressions is the change in market value minus equity issues; it represents changes

in the market's valuation of the equity owners' share in the company. Equity

issues (El) are the reported change in the book value of common equity exclud-

ing total retained earnings during the period.   The change in market
                                              -5-


value of the common stock is the price per share times the number of shares

outstanding at the end of the period (Mt) minus the value at the beginning of

the period (Mt_i). Retained earnings are reported earnings during the period

minus dividends. (Extraordinary income items have been excluded; they are usu-

ally small, and the exclusion has little effect on the results.) The inflation

adjustments to the reported changes in net worth from retained earnings are

as described previously.

       Note that the regression equation relates changes in the markets valua-

tion of the company between years t-n and t to the cumulated flow of adjusted

retained earnings during the intervening n years, rather than the level of the

market value to earnings. If the variation in price-earnings ratios among companies

reflects differences in expected future earnings, changes in prices will reflect

(largely random) changes in expectations and increases in capital which gener-

ate future earnings. If the first of these effects on prices is more variable

among companies than is the second, as seems plausible to me, the relation be-

tween changes in market value and in net worth will be more comparable among

companies than price-earnings ratios are.

       All the above variables are expressed as percentages of the initial mar-

ket value of the firm to allow for size differences among companies. Various

other variables were added to the regressions to test for particular influences,

as discussed later.

       The basic regression equation may be written as follows:
   -
       M    -EI                           RE
                    =   const.   +                  +        +
                                     a1                 a2       a3

                        ÷ a4              +
                                               a5

where the dependent variable was defined above, RE is reported retained ordinary

earnings, DA the depreciation adjustment, IVA inventory valuation adjustment,
                          and
DRD decline in real debt,/CG capital gain (or loss). The a's are regression coef-
ficients, assumed constant across companies. Eighteen dummy variables were added
to the regressions to allow for differences in the constant term among industries.
                                   -6-

They were generally not significant and did not materially alter the results.
Dummy variables for industry differences in the regression coefficients, which
would reflect differences in the expected rate of return on capital, were not
used. (The distribution of the sample by industries is shown in Appendix Table A.)
     The contribution of retained earnings to net worth is dollar for dollar;
hence, if the change in market value were strictly based on the current change in
net worth, a1 would be unity. In most of the statistical results it is greater
than unity. This can be explained by companies in which unexpected increases in
earnings raise the market valuation of net worth. For these companies the earn-
ings produce a more than proportional increase in market value. We can partially
nullify this effect by dividing the variables by average market value during the
period, as is .done later, instead of by the initial market value.
     The ratios of the other coefficients to a1 show how completely the market
value of the common stock reflects the various inflation adjustments of earnings.
When a1 is greater than unity, we may expect the other coefficients to be pro-
portionately higher on the argument that a magnified market valuation of net worth
reflects unexpected changes in ?Itrueu   rather   than reported earnings (though for
capital gain the argument is less clear). On any other interpretation, many of
the estimated adjustments, which turn out to be greater than unity though less
than a1, would be inconsistent with their hypothesized effects. A ratio to a1

of plus or minus unity would be a theoretically complete adjustr.rtt,     and zero
no adjustment. As the variables are defined, a2 and         should be negative (IVA
is measured as a positive quantity), and a4 and a5 positive.

                              Statistical Results
The full period 1966-76

     Table 1 presents regression results for 1966-76, the full period for which

the data were compiled. The dependent variable is the change in market value

(excluding new equity issues) from the beginning to the end of the period,1 and

the independent variables are the cumulated sum of earnings and adjustments

during the period. The period for each company is dated by the end of its fiscal

year, so the beginning and ending dates of the period differ among companies.2

     In equations 1 and 2 of Table 1, reported earnings are highly significant,

and the three adjustments of reported earnings are significant in the expected

direction. (The value of t at the .05 level of significance for a one-tail test

is 1.67.) The addition of industry dummy variables reduces the size and signi-
                                                         Table   1


                     Regression of percentage change in company market value çexclusive of equity issues)
                             on independent variables as percentage of initial market value,
                                                      1966—76

          Reported
      •   retained                   Inventory       1eal value                                    18 indus.
          ordinary    Depreciation   valuation       of net fin.     Capital                       dummies     Constant
No.       earnings     Adj ustment   adjustment        liab.           gain                        included?     term      R2
                                                  485 manufacturing companies
 1          1.71          —0.29        —0.86           +0.61                                          no        —35       .47
           (19.0)         (3.1)        (3.6)           (2.9)                                                     (3.3)

 2          1.68          —0.17        —0.95           +0.60                                        yes         —48       .51
           (18.6)         (1.9)        (3.7)           (2.9)                            .
                                                                                                                 (2.3)

 3          1.86          —0.06        —1.20          +1.34           —0.53                          no         —18       .48
           (18.4)         (0.5)        (4.6)           (4.4)          (3.2)                                      (1.6)

 4          1.79          —0.02        —1.16          +1.10           —0.37                         yes         —35       .52
           (17.3)         (0.2)        (4.2)           (3.5)          (2.1)                                      (1.7)


                                          246 manufacturing companies         nct   using   lifo

5          1.79          —0.32        —1.77           +1.58                                          no         —11       .38
           (11.5)         (2.3)        (3.9)          (4.0)                                                     (0.6)

           1.89          —0.20        —1.90           +2.01          —0.36                                      —  2      .38
6                                                                                                    no
           (10.4)         (1.1)        (4.0)          (3.7)           (1.1)                                     (0.1)

7          1.84          —0.24        —1.85           +1.63          —0.001                         yes         —28       .44
          (9.7)           (1.2)        (3.5)          (2.8)           (0.0)                                     (0.8)

          Note: t values of regression coefficients are in parentheses; signs have been omitted.
                                           -8-



ficance of the depreciation adjustment and leaves the other coefficients essen-

tially the same. The constant term gives the average percentage change in market

value after allowing for the adjusted change in earnings. The regressions explain

about half of the variation in the change in market value among the companies.

       Reported retained earnings have a coefficient greater than unity, which

overstates their contribution to current net worth. As suggested above, a coef-

ficient above unity can be attributed to the effect of unexpected changes in

earnings on the market value of net worth. Compared with the coefficient for re-

ported earnings, the other coefficients are smaller, which implies that the ad-

justments of earnings for inflation are incomplete. In equations 1 and 2 the

market's recognition of the depreciation adjustment is only about a tenth to

a fifth of being complete,3 that of IVA is about a half, and of the decline in

real debt is about a third. The implication is that part of the market does not

make these adjustments or discounts their importance. Certainly such adjustments

are subject to considerable measurement error, and investors know it.

       The coefficient of capital gain in equations 3 and 4 is statistically sig-

nificant but has a negative sign, which makes no sense because capital gain

should increase the dollar net worth of the companies. Its inclusion affects
                                                   the
the other coefficients as well, reducing that of/depreciation adjustment prac-

tically to zero and doubling that of the decline in real debt. There is consider-

able multicollinearity between capital gain and these variables (see Appendix

Table D).

       It is not inconceivable that the market ignores capital gain in valutng

company equity, but that does not explain a negative coeffici:ënt. Capital gain

appears to be proxying for other extraneous influences. Other variables were

added to the regressions to capture these influences and are reported later.

None was_successful in reducing the significance of the negative coefficient

of   capital gain for the full period. As shown below, however, capital gain is
insignificant in   regressions excluding lifo companies and for the earlier and
                                       -9-


later subperiods (Table 2, below). This is consistent with a possible explanation

suggested to me by William Brainard. The increase in the rate of inflation from
the earlier to the later years produced a rising capital gain and also indicated
a rising level of corporate taxes, not all of which yet affected current-period

retained earnings. Hence capital gain may have correlated inversely with a depres-
sing effect of the rising level of taxes (and perhaps other inflation effects) on

market value. Since most of the effect of inflation on corporate taxes probably

became fully evident by the beginning of the later subperiod, the negative effect

of capital gain could have been significant between the subperiods, yet could have
been cancelled by its positive effect on net worth and therefore insignificant
within the subperiods.4

        However capital gain should be interpreted, its questionable role in these

regressions and its multicollinearity with the other variables suggest that

the effects of the latter should be judged from the regressions omitting capital

gain.

        In equations 5-7 the companies that used the lifo accounting method for

inventories in any year (for which the IVA is zero by definition except when

inventories are declining) have been omitted. The cofficient of capital gain

becomes insignificant and, with the industry dummies, practically zero. The

coefficients of IVA and decline in real debt are larger for the non-lifo sample

and are comparable in size to the coefficient for reported earnings, indicating

a more or less complete adjustment in the market to these two effects of infla-

tion. The enhanced effect of IVA in these regressions seems to suggest that the

market viewed the lifo IVA of zero as too small (error in the IVA variable could

have reduced the estimated coefficient). This is possible, because many com-

panies using lifo as principal accounting method did not apply it to all inven-

tories, though it was assumed here that they did. But the large number of com-

panies excluded (almost half the full sample) may also affect the results, so

that less confidence can be placed in the estimates for the non-lifo comDanies

compared with those for the full sample.
                                           -10-



      In summary, so far as the results in Table 1 for the full period are con-

cerned, the adjustments for IVA and decline in real debt are large and that for

the depreciation adjustment is small. Capital gain does not show the hypothesized

positive effect on market value, and it may be proxying for other influences.

Subperiods

     The two subperiods in Table 2 present surprising differences.

     The results for the earlier period 1966-71 are consistent with those for

the full period in Table 1 and even closer to what might be expected. In par-

ticular, the coefficient of the depreciation adjustment is significant in all

the equations and that of capital gain, though of the wràng sign, is uniformly

insignificant. Relative to the size of the coefficient for reported earnings,

the adjustment for depreciation is a quarter, and those for IVA and decline in

real debt are a half, of being complete.

     The results for the later period 1972-76, in which we might expect the

effects of adjustments for inflation to be stronger, are practically the oppo-

site; most of the coefficients have the wrong sign and are insignificant. The

coefficient for the depredation adjustment is practTcally zero, that for IVA

is (incorrectly) positive though insignificant, and that for decline in real

debt is (incorrectly) negative yet significant. The coefficient for capital

gain, though (correctly) positive, is practically zero. Based on these results,

the adjustments did not occur in the later period 1972-76.

     Multicollinearity among the independent variables does not explain the dif-

ferent results for the two subperiods. As shown in Table 3, the intercorrelations

for the two periods are very similar. In particular, the high positive correlation

between capital gain and the depreciation and debt variables occurs in both sub-

periods.

     It was noted above that unexpected changes in earnings could correlate posi-

tively with market revaluations of net worth to give a coefficient greater than
                                                          Table 2
                     Regression of percentage change in     company market value (exclusive of equity issues)
                                on independent   variables as percentage of initial market value,
                                                     1966-71 and 1972-76

          Reported                                       Decline in
    '     retained                        Inventory      real   value                    18 indus.
          ordinary         Depreciation   valuation      of net fin.       Capital        dummies       Constant
                                                                                                                    2
No.       earnings          adjustment    adjustment         liab.          gain         included?        term     R
                       -
-                                                —           --                            ---      -
                                              485 manufacturing companies 1966-71

            2.91               -0.83        -1.05          +1.13                               no          +2      .42
           (18.0)              (3.9)        (1.8)           (2.1)                                         (0.3)

    2       2.94               -0.61        -1.50          +1.60                     .    yes              ÷4      .45
           (18.0)              (2.8)        (2.3)           (2.9)                                         (0.2)

    3       2.94               -0.69        -1.24          +1.65            -0.36              no         +6       .42
           (17.8)              (2.6)        (2.0)           (2.2)           (0.9)                         (0.7)

    4       2.95               -0.57        -1.53          +1.72            -0.09         yes             +5
           (17.7)              (2.1)        (2.3)           (2.2)           (0.2)                         (0.3)

                                              485 manufacturing companies 1972-76

    5       1.23              +0.05        +0.31           -0.31                               no        -37       .33
           (13.8)              (0.8)        (1.9)          (2.4)                                          (7.8)
    6       1.18              +0.06        ÷0.31           -0.37                          yes            -44       .38
           (13.2)              (1.0)        (1.7)          (2.9)                                          (4.4)

    7       1.23              +0.05        ÷0.30           -0.30           -0.01               no        -36       .33
           (12.8)              (0.5)        (1.5)          (1.6)            (0.1)                         (7.2)
    8       1.17              ÷0.05        +0.33           -0.40           +0.02          yes            -44       .38
           (12.0)              (0.5)        (1.6)          (2.1)            (0.2)                         (4.3)

        Note: t values of regression coefficients are in parentheses; signs have been omitted.
                                  Table    3


                                                             f   subperiods
                                                   Decline in
                                  Inventory        real value
                   Depreciation   valuation        of net fin.     Capital
__________
_______             adjustment    adjustment          liab.          gain     —
Depreciation
                                                     -           -
 adjustment            1.00          .36               .56            .7.5


Inventory valua-
 tion adjustment                    1.00               .50            .31

Decline in real
 value of net
 fin. liab.                                           1.00            .79

                                           1972-76

Depreciation
 adjustment           1.00           .46               .69            .87
                              -


Inventory valua-
 tion adjustment                   1.00                .61            .32

Decline in real
 value of net
 fin.   liab.                                         1.00            .80

   Note: Variables and sample same as Table    2
                                           -13-


unity   for retained earnings. A related problem is that the market reportedly

paid more attention to the dangers of large debt outstanding in the later period.

If so, a negative correlation could be created between. the decline in real debt

and the change in market value, reversing the positive effect of the decline in

real debt as an inflation adjustment. In this case, given the high intercorrela-

tion between the adjustment for real debt decline and those for depreciation

and IVA, the latters' coefficients could be affected by a major change in the

coefficient for real debt decline.

     Table 4 presents evidence that this indeed is the explanation for the

sign reversals in the later .period and part of the explanation for a1 being

greater than unity. In Table 4 the variables are all divided by the average

market value during the period instead of the initial value, as in the other

tables. The rationale for using average market value is that it will include

changes that reflect unexpected developments after the period begins, which are

then partly or fully cancelled out of the dependent variable. The dependent

variable thus tends to reflect mainly continuing changes over the period (such

as retained earnings produce) and less once-and-for-all changes (such as un-

expected developments produce).

     In Table 4 the coefficient of retained earnings is essentially unity for

the full period and closer to unity though still above in the earlier period

(significantly) and below in the later period (not significantly). Coeffici:ënt

signs in the later period (as well as earlier) are correct as inflation adjust-

ments except for capital gain.

     Based on the regressions omitting capital gain, the market's recognition

of IVA is complete in the earlier period and half complete in the later period,

of decline in real debt is two-thirds complete in the earlier period and half

in the later, and of depreciation adjustment is two-thirds complete in the ear-

lier period but only one-seventh in the later. Table 4 gives the most sensible

results obtained in this study, and they show (as do the other regressions) in-
                                                      Table   4

                 Regression of change in company market value (exclusive of equity issues)
              on independent variables, all expressed as percentage of average market value
                                  for the period,a 1966-76 and subperiods

         Reported                                        Decline in
         retained                        Inventory       real value
         ordinary         Depreciation   valuation       of net fin.   Capital   Constant
                                                                                               2
 No.     earnings          adjustment    adjustment           liab.     gain       term       R

                                      485 manufacturing companies 1966-76

  1           1.04            -0.33         -0.99             +0.55                  -1       .31
          (12.0)              (6.4)         (6.3)             (4.3)                 (0.2)

  2           1.14            -0.04         -1.34             +1.15     -0.46        +8       .35
          (13.2)              (0.5)         (8.0)             (6.7)     (5.1)       (1.2)

                                      485 manufacturing companies 1966 -71

  3           1.49            -0.99         -1.41             +1.09                 +24       .25
              (8.9)           (8.2)         (3.6)             (3.2)                 (4.7)

  4           1.58            -0.33         -2.18             +2.69     -1.20       +32       .29
              (9.7)           (2.0)         (5.4)             (6.1)     (5.5)       (6.2)

                                      485 manufacturing companies 1972-76

  5           0.88            -0.13         -0.51.            +0.46                 -35       .14
              (7.8)           (1.8)         (2.7)             (2.9)                 (3.   )


  6           0.94            +0.14        -0.83              +0.91    -0.39        -26       .16
              (8.3)           (1.2)         (3.9)             (4.2)     (3.1)       (3.7)

      Note:    t   values of regression coeffic ients are in parentheses; signs have been omitted.


    aAverage market value is average of three months preceding each end of fiscal year in
the period.
                                          -15-


complete and weaker effects for the inflation adjustments in the later period.

An interpretation of these results is presented in the final section.

Reported replacement cost data for 1976

     Further evidence on the depreciation adjustment is provided by the re-

placement cost data separately reported by many companies for the first time

for 1976 in accordance with new SEC regulations. About half the companies in

our sample reported such data for net plant and equipment and its depreciation.

For these companies we can compare the reported depreciation on a replacement

cost basis with our estimates of depreciation based on current-value net capi-

tal stock according to a general price index and multiplied by the reported

depreciation rate (that is, the ratio of historical cost depreciation to net

plant and equipment).

     The correlations are shown in Table 5. The correlation is high, but the

regression coefficients and constant terms indicate considerable difference

in magnitudes. For depreciation the constant term is negligible so that market

value in the denominator on both sides of the equation cancels, implying that

our estimates are on average 21 percent greater than the company estimates.

For capital stock, multiplying through the equation by market value, our estim-

ates of capital are 119 percent of company estimates plus 70 percent of market

value. This points to nonlinearity in the relationship. The differences are pre-

sumably attributable to the fact that the companies reported the current cost

of the same capacity output, allowing for the benefit of quality improvements

in equipment and technology. Such current-value costs of the same capacity •are

notoriously subject to inaccuracies. It is not clear which estimates of real

depreciation the market relies on. Since estimates based on a general price in-

dex are not a bad proxy for the reported replacement cost depreciation as indi-

cated by the correlation coefficient, but may be high as indicated by the re-

gression coefficient, this would suggest that our estimates of the depreciation
                                        -16-


                                   Table 5

                    Correlation between our estimates and company estimates,
             capital stock and depreciation as percentage of initial market value
                             243 manufacturing companies 1976
       -                           -
                                   Regression coefficient of       Constant
           Dependent variable         compapy estimates              term
                                                                                 2
                                Capital stock   Depreciation        (percent)   R

           Our estimates of:

           Capital stock               1.19                           71        .85

                                                      1.21              6       .78
           Depreciation




                                               -
adjustment are too low.

      A comparison of the effect of the two estimates for 1976 is given in

Table 6. Capital gain here is          based on    our estimate of the capital stock,

since most companies did not report a replacement cost figure for 1975 on which

we   could   derive the capital gain. Equations 1 and 2 show that both depreciation

adjustments have an incorrect positive coefficient. Icith capital gain included

in equations 3 and 4, howeVer, the adjustment based on company estimates has

the correct negative coefficient, .      though it is not significant, whereas the
adjustment based on our estimates is essentially zero. Also, in equation 4

capital gain has a large positive and significant coefficient. Consequently,

the company estimates of depreciation can be said to give slightly more rea-

sonable results for 1976. (Although the coefficient of decline in real debt

is about twice that for reported earnings, which is unreasonable, this is

true for both sets of these regressions in 1976 and is unrelated to the de-

preciation adjustment.) Data for subsequent years will help to clarify the

effect of company depreciation estimates. In particular, no account was taken

here of the date n which corrpany estiiates hecanie available to inyestors,
                                                 Table   6

         Regression of percentage change in company market value exciusive of equity
                                                                                             issues1)
                  on independent variables as percentaae of initial market value,
                              i
                   our est mates versus company estimates of.cIeprecia    1976
                                                                             tion,
       Reported        Depreciation                            Decline in
       retained         adjustment                Inventory    real value
       ordinary         iur          company     valuation     of net fin.     Capital   Constant
No.    earnings     estimates       estimates     adjustment      liab.         gain       term         R2

                                  243 manufacturing companies reporting replacement cost

 1       0.72           +0.29                       —1.31         +1.76                    +14          .29
        (6.5)           (2.5)                       (2.5)          (4.1)                   (5.0)

 2       0.76                          +0.24       —1.09          +1.94                    +16          .28
        (6.9)                           (1.4)       (2.0)          (4.3)                   (6.1)

3        0.71           +0.09                      —0.96          +1.28        +0.40       +11          .30
        (6.4)           (0.5)                       (1.6)          (2,3)        (1.4)      (3.6)
4        0.69                          —0.25       —0.83          +1.16        +0.70       +10          .30
        (6.1)                           (1.0)       (1.5)         (2.2)         (2.6)      (3.1)

      Note:   t values of regression coefficients are in parentheses; signs have been omitted.
                                        —18-



     If we accept the company estimates as correct, they imply a downward

bias in the regression coefficients of the depreciation adjustment. The com-

pany estimates for the 243 companies averaged 9 percent of initial market value
                                                 (not shown in table).
for 1976, compared with 20 percent for our estimates! If this comparison ap-

plied to all years, the depreciation coefficient should be over twice as large.

For the full period in Table 4, for example, it would be two-thirds of a1,

falling between the values for IVA and decline in real debt.


IVA based on specific price indexes

     To check whether the IVA would be more accurate if calculated with speci-

fic commodity prices rather than a general price index, a second IVA was cal-

culated by the same method but with a set of price indexes specific to each in-

dustry that had been compiled for another purpose. In an earlier study5 I con-

structed input and output price indexes for 54 manufacturing industries from

seven-digit BLS wholesale product prices, weighting each index according to

industry data on the commodity composition of inputs and outputs. These series

covered 1967-74. They were used for the present study by   assigning   each company
to one of the 54 industries.

     It was assumed that raw materials were best approximated by the input price

index, and finished products by the output price index. The Compustat tape pro-
                                           19-


vides data on inventories classified into raw materials, goods in process, and

finished products. The dollar amount of goods in process was apportioned between

the other two inventories according to their reported dollar magnitudes. When the

Compustat inventory data were missing for earlier years, the proportions of the

latest year available were used.

     Regressions comparing the two estimates of IVA are presented in Table 7.

In general, the IVA coefficient for the specific price indexes is smaller and

less significant. This seems to confirm that such specific adjustments are

fraught with inaccuracy and to suggest that they are generally not used by the

market to adjust for inflation. An alternative interpretation is that, while the

market uses such specific price indexes, the adjustment of market values is in

fact incomplete (the regression coefficient is low only in part because of bias due
                      figures)
to errors in these I'VA I and the statistical significance of the variable is

lower only because our estimate of the specific-price IVA is an inaccurate re-

flection of the one used by the market. No doubt the truth is somewhere inbetween.

Other variables added to the regressions

     Several other variables were tried to see whether the results would be

materially affected. By and large they were not, either for the full period

(see Appendix Table C) or for the two subperiods (not shown).

     Equity ratio is the ratio of common equity to total invested capital.

It is a measure of leverage and allows for risk to the common stock. It has a

positive effect on the increase in market value, but is not significant except

in combination with capital gain. It increases the coefficient of the decline

in real debt, when accompanied by capital gain, and increases the magnitude

of the negative constant term. In the later subperiod, when equity ratio might

be expected to have been more important, it had virtually no effect (not shown).

    Age of the capital stock is the average age of the current-value capital

stock in 'ears multiplied by the capital stock as a percentage of initial market

value. It is a measure of capital obsolescence to supplement the adjusted depre-
                                               Table 7

           Regression of percentage change in cmpany market value exc1usive of equity issue9)
                    on independent variables as percentage of initial market value,
                      general purchasing power versus s.pecificprice IVA, 1967-74
                                       Inventory                     •
         Reported                                                Decline  in
         retained
                                     .y1tiUauSJJUellt_
                                       general                   real value
                                                    specific
         ordinary     Depreciation   purchasing                  of net fin.       Capital   Constant
                                                      price                                               2
No.      earnings      adjustment      power        indexes         liab.           gain       term     R

                                      510 manufacturing companies

 1         0.92          —0.25         —0.90                      +0.45                         —13     .19
          (10.7)         (3.0)         (4.0)                       (2.5)                        (1.7)
 2         0.90          —0.23                           —0.54    +0.36                         —17     .18
          (10.4)         (2.7)                           (3.2)     (2.0)       •                (2.4)
 3         1.01          -0.07         —1.08                      +0.88             —0.34       —   7   .20
          (10.7)         (0.6)         (4.6)                       (3.4)            (2.3)       (0.8)
                                                                                                              tJ
 4         0.94          -0.15                           —0.61    +0.56             -0.14       —15     .18   Q
          (10.0)         (1.4)                           (3.4)     (2.3)            (1.2)       (2.0)
                             281 manufacturing companies not using lifo

 5         1.02          —0.35         —1.28                     +0.80                          +   5   .17
           (7.5)         (2.8)         (3.5)                       (2.5)                        (0.4)
 6         0.99          —0.33                           —0.84    +0.67                         + 1     .16
           (7.2)         (2.7)                           (2.9)     (2.1)                        (0.1)
        Note:t values of regression coefficients are in parentheses; signs have been omitted.
     Number of companies exceeds that of other tables because of inclusion of companies with data
     missing for years other than 1967-74.
                                             -21—



ciation. The derivation of the latter assumed that capital lost no value until

retired Age of capital has the expected negative coefficient, is significant

when included in regressions without capital gain, and raises the coefficient

of the decline in real debt. It is highly correlated with capital gain (R =     .93),
however, and is insignificant when the latter is included.

      Dividend payout ratio is the ratio of dividends to total ordinary earnings.

It tests the hypothesis that paid-out earnings may be of more value to stock-

holders than retained earnings are. It is insignificant and has virtually no

effect on the -inflation adjustments.

      Change in earnings is the change in reported retained ordinary earnings,

as in the first column, from the earlier subperiod 1966-71 to the later sub-

period 1972-76, expressed as a percentage of initial market value. It is in-

tended as a proxy for prospective changes during the period in future net

worth to account for a coefficient of earnings a1 greater than unity. (Ideally        -




for   this purpose, the change in earnings should take the difference between

periods before and after 1966 rather than 1971, but the pre-1966 data were not

compi•1ed. )   It   is positive and significant, and the estimate Qf a1

is reduced part of the way toward unity. The estimate of a1               neverthe-

less remains significantly above unity; its tendency to incorporate prospective

increases in future net worth is not fully reflected in the change in earnings.

Another proxy that was tried in an attempt to capture this tendency was the

change in sales (not shown), which gave similar though less significant results.


                              Interpretation and Concluding Remarks

Taking the statistical results as a whole, we find that market prices reflect a

major adjustment of reported earnings for IVA and decline in real debt. The re-

gressions in Table 4 using average market value as a divisor and excluding cap-
                                                     in Thie 4,
ital gaifi seem the most reliable. For the full period/the adjustment for IVA

is 100 percent complete and for decline in real debt is half complete. The
                                           22-


adjustment for the understatement of depreciation, on the other hand, is weaker --

a third of being complete. This is certainly surprising, because the recent dis-

cussions of reforming accounting practices focus on the understatement of depre-

ciation and view the decline in real debt as somewhat hypothetical and as less

important, perhaps to be disregarded. Our results suggest that the decline in

real debt cannot be viewed as unimportant in affecting the market value of

manufacturing companies.

     The partial effect of the depreciation adjustment is puzzling and may be

due to mismeasurement. Although it is highly correlated with capital gain, the

effect of the depreciation adjustment is still small when capital gain is omit-

ted from the regressions. Our adjustment of depreciation may be too high. Com-

parison with the replacement cost depreciation reported by 243 companies for

1976 suggests a 21 percent overestimate. In terms of the depreciation adjustment,
         would be
our estimate ,P over twice as high. This implies a doubling of the regression

coefficient of the adjustment, which is more plausible but still far from com-

plete. The uneasy implication here of disequilibrium and market inefficiency may

elicit the contrary conjecture that investors did make complete adjustments but

used different estimates. It is not clear whether this conjecture is justified.

     The capital gain variable has a negative coefficient inconsistent with

its hypothesized effect, and appears to beproxying for extraneous influences of

high inflation rates. Because of high multicollinearity it also interferes

with estimates of the other adjustments.

    All the inflation adjustments of earnings are considerably weaker for the

later period 1972-76 than the earlier period 1966-71. Based on Table 4 with cap-

ital gain omitted, the adjustment for IVA is 100 percent complete in the earlier

period and less than 60 percent in the later period, that for decline in real debt

two-thirds in the earlier and half in the later, and that for depreciation two-

thirds in the earlier and only 15 percent in the later. The latter would be 30

percent if we applied the correction noted above to the later period. We might have
                                   -23—


expected the adjustments to be stronger, however, n the period of higher

inflation.

     Possibly the later period did experience stronger effects which were ob-

scured in our statistical results because of greater inaccuracies of measure-

ment under high inflation rates. But if, as our results suggest, the adjust-

ments are in fact weaker for periods of high inflation, the implication is

that adjustments become more difficult to make or that more noise is intro-

duced into the data. In response to less accurate information, the market

tends either to pay less attention to the adjustments or, more likely, to

produce a wider range of estimates of the adjustments. It remains to be seen

whether the publication of replacement cost data will alter this effect of

high inflation rates.
                                        -24-



                                    Appendix A

                        Notes on the Data and Derivation of
                            the Inflation Adjustments

1. Companies excluded

     The Compustat tape for fiscal year 1976 covers the history of about

2500 companies for up to 20 years. In the present study this sample was re-

duced to    485
                    manufacturing companies because of certain incompara-

abilities or, primarily, because of incomplete data. Nonmanufacturing compan-

ies were too disparate to deal with on a cormnon basis and were not covered.

     Manufacturing companies were excluded for the following reasons:

     (1) Foreign charters. (U.S. corporations with foreign subsidiaries,

however, were not for that reason excluded.)

     (ii) Substantial holdings of natural resources which present special

problems of valuation. The exclusions were mining companies (SIC classes be-V

low 20), paper companies owning timberlands, and integrated oil companies

owning petroleum reserves (nonintegrated companies producing oil and gas from

wells are classified as mining companies and hence were excluded already).

Other companies with subsidiaries owning natural resources were not excluded.

     (iii) Major mergers or changes in accounting practices, as indicated by

the Compustat "special treatment" list (its Appendix E of published material
                                           in several cases
for the tape file), or other peculiarities which/resulted in a negative value

for the capital stock after adjustment.

     (iv) Unavailability of data for fiscal year 1964 or any later year. (Data

for earlier years back to 1957 were used to the extent available in deriving

the real capital stock.)

     (v) Substantial acquisitions of capital other than through capital ex-

penditures. The cutoff was based on mergers or advances to, or purchases of,

other companies, less sales of capital, that averaged (without regard to sign)
                                       -25-


10 percent or more of gross property, plant, and equipment for the period

1965-76. This removed companies not excluded by item (iii) above.

2. General purchasing power of the dollar
                                all
     The price index used for/the inflation adjustments was the implicit

deflator for gross domestic product: annual index 1940 to 1946, quarterly in-

dex 1947 to 1957, and fixed-weight quarterly index from 1958 to 1976. The

quarterly index was interpolated to a monthly series.
                             indexes
     Industry-specific price/ were used for a supplementary calculation of

IVA as described in the text.

3. Derivation of current-dollar value of tangible capital, depreciation, and
   capital gain

     The current value of the capital stock was derived by revaluing the exis-

ting stock each year by the increase in agenera1 price index and adding annual

capital expenditures and acquisitions net of retirements and sales. The start-

ing point was the earliest year between 1957 and 1964 for which net plant and

equipment was reported on the tape. (The stock includes land used in operations,

which cannot be treated separately.) No attempt was made to link up with ear-

her years from other sources, which would be a very difficult task. Conse-

quently, the initial capital stock was assumed to have been accumulated evenly

over an 18-year period and was revalued by the increase in prices over the pre-

ceding 9 years.

     Retirement of capital at historical cost is reported on the tape for most

.'ompanies beginning in the early 1970s and was used when available. (Retirements

include sales. Sales are reported separately but at current-dollar receipts;

this item was revalued to historical cost before being deducted from retirements

including sales.) For earlier years, all retirements were assumed to occur at

the end of 18 years, the average life of capital used in the national income

estimate of the Bureau of Economic Analysis. This was accomplished by keeping
                                          -26-


track of the age of each year's addition to capital. The initial capital stock

for the first reported year of data was assigned an age distribution based on

annual net investment of the private nonfarm sector. For each year net acquisi-

tions as derived below were assumed to occur at the beginning of the year and

retirements at the end of the year.

     Net acquisitions of capital through purchases of companies or mergers

were derived from the identity (all items valued at historical cost):

     net acquisitions (purchases net of sales) = change in gross capital

               -
                   capital   expenditures +   retirements.
To incorporate these acquisitions into the age distribution of the existing

capital stock, purchases and sales of capital were assumed to have the same

age distribution as the existing stock in the company.6 (As noted in Section 1,

companies for which the average absolute value of the annual ratio of derived

net acquisitions and advances to other companies to beginning-of-year reported

gross property, plant, and equipment for the period 1965-76 was 10 percent or

more were excluded from the sample.)

     When gross property, plant, and equipment was not reported on the tape,
the figure was taken from Moody's Industrial Manual or, if not available there,
was interpolated from adjacent years (straight-line between log values). When
capital expenditures for any year were missing, they were estimated by the change
in gross capital (thus including net acquisitions which cannot be treated separ-
ately in this case and were assumed to be all new capital).

     The annual rate of depreciation of        -
                                                   capital   was the reported annual ratio
of depreciation to net plant and equipment for each company. The depreciation ad-
justment is therefore the product of this ratio and the difference between our

estimate of the curent value of capital and the reported figure for net plant
and equipment. The use of the reported depreciation ratio here could produce some
error. For example, if companies followed straight-line depreciation and net capital

declined, the ratio would rise, whereas the "true" rate of depreciation might be
constant. No attempt was made to refine these estimates.
     Capital gain was the rise over the year in the current-dollar value of the
capital stock at the beginning of the year net of retirements during the year
                                         -27-


 and of capital expenditures (assumed to be acquired as of midyear) over the

 second half of the year. If any reporting period did not cover 12 months, the

 capital gain was adjusted to a 12-month year. The adjustment was based on the

 assumption that capital gain in the 12-month period bore the same proportion to

 the gain in the observed period as the comparable proportion for the price index.

 4. Derivation of inventory adjustment and capital gain on inventory

      The standard inventory valuation adjustment (IVA) for a given period is

 based on the accounting identity:

      cost of goods sold =   inputs purchased + goods   removed from inventory
                                          (or, - goods added).

 Since the value of goods in inventory can depart from current values, the

 change in inventory requires adjustment. The adjustment derives the change in

 inventory in constant dollars, revalues it in dollars of the middle of the

 accounting period, and subtracts the reported dollar change in inventory. This

 difference is IVA. When prices are rising, the reported change is never less

than the revalued change, and the resulting IVA of zero or a negative amount
                                           eliminate
serves as a reduction of reported profits to         any "inventory profits"
                                                  ed
owing to inflation. If any reporting period differ! from 12 months, the IVA

was converted to a 12—month year, by the same procedure as used for the capital

gain on capital.

      In the regressions, IVA was treated as a positive number, so that the

theoretically correct sign of its coefficient is negative.

     The deflation of the reported inventory to constant dollars requires the

identification of thee valuation method by which goods in inventory are carried

•on a company's books. Three methods were allowed for here: fifo, lifo, and

average cost. The Compustat tape indicates all the methods used by each corn-

pany in each year.   It was not feasible to identify the different inventories

that were carried on the books by different methods; consequently,the entire

inventory was assumed to be carried by the primary method indicated for each
                                         -28-


company in each year. (Where the accounting method was not indicated, the meth-

od for the subsequent year was assumed to apply. Where not indicated for any

years, the method was assumed to be fifo.) No distinction was made for raw,

working, or finished inventories, except as indicated in the text for the

supplementary calculation using industry price data.

        The adjustments of the reported values of inventory were made as fol-

lows:

        Fifo. In this accounting method goods are valued at purchase price when

they enter the inventory stock and are removed in order of entry. That is,

goods removed for use are al.ways those with the earliest date of purchase.

The reported value of the inventory at any time can be approximated by the

purchase price of goods which have moved half way through the inventory. For

example, if the inventory turns over completely in 3 months (the ratio of in-

ventory to average monthly sales is 3),    the average age of the inventory is

1½   months. The inventory is then deflated by the price index of 1½ months
  earlier. Turnover periods were assigned for each year according to the ratio

of inventory to sales of each four-digit SIC manufac1uring industry from the

Annual Survey of Manufactures. The IVA for inventories valued by fifo is substan-

tial in a period of rapidly rising prices.

        Lifo. In this accounting method goods are valued at purchase price when

they enter the inventory stock and are removed in reverse order of entry. That

is, goods removed for use are the most recent additions. Consequently, the re-

ported value of goods removed from inventory for use are current prices, and

IVA is generally zero.
                                         -29-




     Complications arise under lifo when the inventory is depleted and goods

are removed that were purchased in earlier periods. Since the goods are re-

moved in the reverse order of entry, the inventory is built up in layers. De-

pletion of the inventory peels away the layers; goods are removed which were

purchased in successively earlier periods. It is necessary to keep track of the

successive layers and to revalue each one appropriately. The computer program

written for IVA allowed up to four annual layers of inventory to be removed

(that is, inventory reductions could reach goods purchased from one up to four

years earlier); cases in which inventory depletions went beyond four layers

were calculated by hand.

     Average Cost. In this accounting method goods are valued at purchase price

when they enter the inventory stock, and goods removed are priced at the aver-

age value of the goods in the inventory at the time of removal. The current

value of the inventory can be derived by a continual update; each month the val-

ue of goods added, as based on the turnover rate, is averaged with the average

value of the goods remaining. This method is a cross between fifo and lifo,

since the value of the goods removed is in effect an average of the earliest

and latest additions to the inventory.

     The capital gain of the inventory is the change in current-dollar value

of the beginning-of-period stock over the year and of the stock added or de-

pleted (assumed evenly) during the year. It wasadjusted to a 12-month year if

any reporting period did not cover 12 months, by the same procedure as used

for the capital gain on capital.

5. Derivation of decline in real value of net financial liabilities

     The' gain or loss in real terms from changes in the purchasing power of

claims fixed in dollar terms is the product of monetary liabilities minus mone-
                                              -30--



tary assets and the rate of change in prices. The rate of change of prices is

based on monthly interpolations of the deflator for gross domestic product used

above. Net monetary liabilities are

     +    total   long-term debt (over 1 year)

     +    current   liabilities (up to 1 year)

     +    pieferred   stock at liquidating value

     -    cash and short-term investments
     -    receivables.
This figure was interpolated to the middle of the accounting period and mul-

tiplied    by the price change;for 12 months preceding the end   of the accounting
period.
5. Market value

              Market value is the nurnber of shares outstanding times the   market
price per share. The Cornpustat tapes provide market prices for end-of-calendar

years only, and it was desirable to collect monthly market prices. These prices
were derived largely from the University of Chicago CRISP tapes and in certain
cases from newspaper files. For some companies the tapes available to me provided

monthly rates of return including dividends, from which prices could be derived

from a starting point after dividends were deducted. The dividend data used were

for fiscal years on the Compustat tape, and it was assumed that the payments were

made in equal quarterly installments. This assumption introduced some inaccuracy
into the calculation of some of the prices..
     Prices in the dependent variable of the regressions is an average of the
three end-of-month prices preceding the end of the fiscal year. Price averages of
the six months surrounding the end of the fiscal year, three months after, and

the twelve months preceding were also derived arid tried in the regressions (see
footnote 1).

     The number of shares outstanding from the Compustat tape is available only
for the end of the calendar year, which differs in dating from the price data

for non-December fiscal years. The error in measuring market value will not be

major, however, unless a large change in shares outstanding occurred in the in-

terim. No adjustment was made for such cases.
                                          -31—

                                    Appendix Table A

                       Distribution of Companies by Industrya
                         in Full-Period Sample of Table 1

SIC                                  Average Change     Std. Dev. Number with Change
Code      Industry           Number in Mkt. Valueb     Mkt.Valueb in Ending Month of
                                        (percent)       (percent)    Fiscal Year

20      Foods -                45         49.9          180.3             4
21    Tobacco                   7        193.4          351.2             0
22-23 Textiles    Apparel      27        -27.0           54.3             3
•24   Forest products           4        254.1          151.1             0
25    Furnishings               6        -18.0           23.7             0
26    Paper and products       12         29.1           64.5             0
27    Publishing               13        -24.8           62.6             1
28    Chemicals                69        106.4          217.5             0
29    Petroleum                 8         71.3          117.8             0
30    Rubber and products      19         41.9          134.6             0
31    Leather and products      9         59.5          259.3             3
32    Glass and products       29         29.8           73.9             0
33    Metals                   31         37.8          145.8             0
34    Metal products           20        157.2          282.1             1
35    Machinery                63        101.1          237.3             5
36    Electrical equipment     52         67.1          13.0              4
37    Automobiles F Parts      48        592             97.6             4
38    Instruments              18        44.3           130.2             0
39    Miscellaneous             5        75.1            26.4             0

       All companies          485        66.2           180.6            25



       aCompanies classified by major activity.
     bExcluding change in equity issues; same as dependent variable in
 regressions.
                                                  Appendix Table B

                     Effect of excluding 25 companies with reporting gaps or overlaps:
      Regression of percentage change in company market value (exclusive of equity issues) on independent
             variables as percentage of initial market value, 1966-76

       Reported                                    Decline in
       retained                      Inventory     real value
       ordinary     Depreciation     valuation     of net fin.   Capital     Constant          .
                                                                                           2
No.    earnings      adjustment,     adjustment      liab.        gain         term       R

                                                                                         —-——-—___
1         1.71            -0.29        -0.86
                                                   ingcômpi
                                                     +0.61                      -35      .47
                   '
         (19.0)           (3.1)        (3.6)         (2.9)                      (3.3)

2         1.86            -0.06        -1.20         +1.34           -0.53      -18      .48
         (18.4)           (0.5)        (4.6)         (4.4)           (3.2)      (1.6)

                       460 manufacturing companies with no change in ending month of fiscal year

3         1.89            -0.30        -0.65         +0.45                      -45      .51
         (20.4)           (3.4)        (2.7)         (2.2)                      (4.3)

4         2.02            -0.10        -0.96         +1.11           -0.47      -30      .52

         (19.7)           (0.9)        (3.6)         (3.6)           (2.8)      (2.6)
                                                    Appendix Table C

                                      Effect of including additional variables:
                 Regression     of Jercentagc change in company market value (exclusive of equity issues)
                         oii    independent variables as percentage      of initial market value,
                                                      1966-76

      Reported                                        Decline in
      retained                       Inventory        real value
      ordinary    Depreciation       valuation        of net fin.   Capital      Additional                               Constant
                                                                                                                                      2
No.   earnings     adjustment        adjustment         liab.        gain        variables                                  term     R

                                                 485 manufacturing companies (eqs.       1   and   2    from Table   1)


 1      1.71           -0.29            -0.86           +0.61                                                               -35      .47
       (19.0)          (3.1)            (3.6)           (2.9)                                                               (3.3)

                                                                                    .
 2      1.86           -0.0()           -1.2()          +1.34        -0.53                                                  -18      .48
       (18.4)          (0.5)            (4.6)           (4.4)          (3.2)                                                (1.6)

 3      1.70           -0.29            -0.88           +0.76                   equity ratioa 0.49 (1.0)                    -72      .47
       (18.6)          (3.2)            (3.6)           (3.0)                                                               (1.9)

 4      1.74           -0.11            -1.12           +1.04                   age capita1' -0.004(3.0)                    -24      .48
       (19.4)          (1.0)            (4.4)           (4.2)                                                               (2.2)

 5      1.86           -0.07            -1.20           +1.33        -0.51      payout       ratioc_0.07 (0.9)              —15      .48
       (18.3)          (0.6)            (4.6)           (4.3)          (3.1)                                                (1.3)

 6      1.47           -0.02           -0.83            +1.04        -0.48     change in       earningsd 1.14 (6.9)-22               .52
       (13.0)          (0.2)            (3.3)           (3.5)          (3.0)                                                (2.0)

 7     1.85           +0.01            -1.38           +1.95        -0.57      equity ratio 1.33 (2.5)                    —113       .48
      (16.1)          (0.1)            (5.1)            (4.7)       (1.9)      age capital             —0.001(0.6)         (2.8)

 8     1.81           +0.05            -1.31           +1.75        -(1.59     equity ratio 1.25 (2.3)                    —124       .52
      (15.4)          (0.4)            (4.6)            (4.1)       (1.9)      age cq i ta I 0.0003(0.1)                   (2.8)
                                                                               18   industry       dummies
                                      -34-


                             Notes to Table C

     aEquity ratio is an average for the years covered of the book value of
common equity divided by total capital invested. A positive regression coeffi-
cient indicates that companies with a higher ratio (lower leverage) tended to
increase more in market value.


     bAge of capital is an average for years covered of the average age of the
capital stock multiplied by the ratio of the capital stock to the initial mar-
ket value. A negative regression coefficient indicates that companies with an
older capital stock tended to increase less in market value.


     cpayout ratio is an average for the years covered of dividends divided by
total ordinary earnings. A negative regression coefficient indicates that corn-
panies which pay out a higher fraction of earnings tended to increase less in
market value.


     dChange in earnings is the change in retained earnings as in the first
column from 1966-71 to 1972-76, as a percentage of initial 1965 market value.
                                        Appendix Table 0
                         Correlation matrix of independent variables
                            485 manufacturing companies 1966-76

                        Reported   Depreci-                Decline in
                        retained    ation     Inventory    real value                              Age    Change
                        ordinary   adjust-    valuation    of net fin.   Capital Equity   Payout   of       in
                        earnings    ment      adjustment      liab.       gain   ratio     ratio capital earnings

Reported retained
 ordinary earnings         1.00     .46           .36         .23         .49     -.00     -.05    .31      .54
Depreciation ad-
             -

 justment                          1.00           .32         .58         .80     -.33     -.04    .74      .22
Inventory valua-
 tion adjustment                                 1.00         .52         .32     -.26     -.03    .21      .08
Decline in real val-                -


 ue of net fin. liab.                                        1.00         :78     -.67     -.00    .70      .16
Capital gain                                                             1.00     -.37      .01    .93      .29
Equity ratio                                                                      1.00     -.02   -.33     -.06
Payout ratio                                                                               1.00    .04     -.05
Age of capital                                                                                    1.00      .24
                                                                                                                        a
Change in earnings                                                                                         1.00
                                                                                                                    —
                                             -36-


*1 am indebted to Robert F. Lipsey for advice at all stages of the study and

to Susan Tebbetts for research assistance. Helpful comnents were received dur-

ing the presentation of preliminary results in seminars at Cambridge, Stanford,

and New York divisions of NBER, the Federal Reserve Board, and Columbia University

Business School. I   particularly   want to acknowledge the use of specific sugges-

tions made by William Brainard and Peter Lloyd-Davies.




1/ Prices per share in the derivation of market value     are an average of the
three   end-of-month market prices preceding the beginning and the end of the

period. Other regressions were run using an average of the three end-of-month

prices following these dates, an average of the twelve months preceding, and

the single end-of-month price The alternatives gave similar though slightly

less significant fits


2/ The earnings data and adjustment variables are for twelve month fiscal

years. If the ending month of fiscal years changes during the period, the annual

data have a gap or overlap in the year of change. No allowance was made for this

in cumulating the earnings and the adjustments over the period To check the

importance of this source of error, the regressions were rerun for a sample

excluding 25 companies with a change in the ending month of one or more fiscal

years (see Appendix Table A for industry distribution) These reruns, presented

in Appendix Table B, give similar results.
                                        -37-


3/ Historical depreciation costs can be accelerated for tax purposes, but as

noted the amounts reported to stockholders and used here are generally not.

Therefore, acceleration for tax purposes is no reason for the depreciation

coefficient to be biased downwards.



4/ To measure this effect, the change in the depreciation adjustment in the last

two years of the periods covered was added to the regressions, as an indication

of future increases. The result (not shown) did not affect the coefficient of

capital gain. While this was not a conclusive test of the importance of this

effect, no other test with he data available appeared feasible.


5/ Phillip Cagan, "Imported Inflation 1973-74 and the Accommodation Issue,"

Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, February 1980.


6/ There is a problem if capital expenditures are reported net of retirements.

See James B. Thies and Lawrence Revsine, "Capital Expenditures Data for Infla-

tion Accounting Studies," The Accounting Review vol. LII, No. 1 (January 1977),

216-221. This problem is largely avoided by using Compustat item 128 which is

gross capital expenditures rather than item 30 which is sometimes reported net.

When item 128 was not reported, item 30 was used but,in that case in our sample

of companies, was seldom reported net of retirements.
