NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CAPITALIZATION OF INCOME STREAMS
AND THE EFFECTS OF OPEN—MARKE POLICY
UNDER FIXED EXCHANGE RATES

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 528

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Caithridge MA 02138

August 1980

I am grateful for helpful discussions with Guillermo Calvo and
Robert Mundell and for comments from Robert Cumby. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #528
August, 1980

The Capitalization of Income Streams
and the Effects of Open-Market Policy
under Fixed Exchange Rates

ABS TRACT

This paper investigates the long- and short-run neutrality of openmarket monetary policy in a world of fixed exchange rates and imperfect
substitutability between bonds denominated in different currencies.

Using an illustrative portfolio-balance model, it shows that when the
public discounts the future tax liabilities associated with the national
debt and the central bank

supports

the exchange rate by trading non-

interest—bearing foreign assets, open-market policy has a short-run effect,
but no long—run effect, on the domestic price level and interest rate.
When the foreign-exchange intervention assets earn interest that is
rebated to and capitalized by the public, open-market policy loses even its
short-run efficacy--the capital-account offset to monetary policy is
complete.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
(212) 280—5510

Introduction

1.

This paper exauhines the efficacy of open—market monetary policy in

a world of fixed exchange rates and imperfect substitutability between

bonds denominated in different currencies. While portfolio balance
models postulating limited international asset substitutability have
received considerable attention in the literature,' it is not generally
recognized that their predictions about both the short- and long-run
effects of central—bank operations in domestic debt rest on a crucial

pair of assumptions. These concern the degree to which the public
capiLali
OebL,

zes the

and Lhe

stream of tax liabilities associated

with the qoVernThntT

degree to which it capitalizes the stream of interest eirn—

incJs associated

with

the central bank's foreign exchanqe reserves.

To demonstrate the importance of these assumptions, we arque,
using a standard open—economy model, that the following two propositions
are valid even in a setting of imperfect asset substitutability:

the

(i) When

domestic public fully anticipates and discounts the future tax lia-

bilities connected with the government debt and the central bank supports
the exchange rate through operations in non—interest—bearing foreign assets,
open—market operations have a short—run effect on the domestic price level,

interest rate, and current account, but no long—run effect. The cumulative
current—account imbalance gives a long—run change in tangible or marketable

The papers of Hoyer (1975, 1979) , Branson (1976) , Doribusch (1977)
Girton and 1-lenderson (1976), and Kouri and Porter (1974) emphasize the
short-run efficacy of open-market policy when home and foreign bonds are
imperfect substitutes, while those of Henderson (1977) snci Obstfeld (1980)
draw attention to the possible long-run non-neutriiitv or motEy.
2

to 'kman ( 1979) has also addre:::ed these qucLioin;, deriving

section

the re:u It,: ci
4. below, in a manner different from ours. He employs a stochastic

2

wealth just equal to the change in the capitalized value of future tax liabilities to the government, so that total wealth, inclusive of non-marketable
liabilities, returns asymptotically to its initial level.

(ii) When, in ad-

dition, the central bank's foreign—exchange intervention assets earn interest
that is distributed to and capitalized by the domestic public, open-market

policy has no effect even in the short run. An open-market purchase of domestic bonds, say, is offset completely and instntaneously by a transfer of
foreign bonds from the central bank to the public, just as it would be
in the world of perfect capital mobility studied by Mundell (1963).
The argument that government bonds need not represent net wealth
goes back, of course, to Ricardo, and has been formalized recently by

Earro (1974). Mundell (1960) has emphasized that the macroeconomic effects
of open-market operations depend on the public's ability to capitalize or
internalize the concomitant change in the government's future revenue

requirements. This paper extends these considerations to the open economy,
illustrating their relevance for the capital-account offset to monetary policy
ard stressing the important role of central-bank wealth.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a brief
description of the basic illustrative model. Section 3

discusses the

effects of an open—market purchase of domestic debt when government bonds

are not net wealth and the

central bank's medium of intervention

earns no interest. Section 4 shows how monetary policy can lose its
short-run potency when the central bank intervenes with interestearfling

foreign assets. Section 5 presents some concluding remarks.

model in which agents maximize utility over a tbree-periO lifetime. FrehkeL
and Rodriguez (1975)touch on capitalization issues in a setting of perfect
asset substitutability. The issues, of course, are those raised by 1etzler's
(i5l) celebrated discussion of financial policies in closed economies.

3

2. An illustrative model
We illustrate the importance of capitalization effects in the open

economy with an aggregative, dynamic, fixed—exchange—rate model.3 The
real output of the economy, y, is constant, and domestically-produced goods
are imperfect substitutes in consumption for goods produced abroad. The money

price of foreign output is a fixed parameter from the standpoint of the

home country, and is taken to equal 1. All goods are perishable, but
domestic residents may hold wealth in the form of three financial assets.
The first two are domestic— and foreign—currency bonds, which are imperfect
substitutes in portfolios and need not offer the same rate of return in

equilibrium.

4

The third is domestic money, consisting entirely of central-

bank liabilities backed by domestic government bonds and foreign assets.
To simplify our discussion of the consolidated budget constraint of the

government and monetary authority, we assume that the government does not
pay interest on domestic securities in the central-bank portfolio. The
central bank's foreign assets may earn interest, however.
The model is described by the following equations:

L(r,r*,Py/W)W = M,

B(r,r*,Py/W)W

=

B*,

H(r,r*,Py/W)W

+

F(r) =

0, L > 0,

(1)

B1,B3 < 0, B2 > 0,

(2)

L1,L2 <

D,

H11F' > 0,

(3)

H,H3 < 0,

MC+R,

(4)

c(P)E( d, r —
= y - T

i) + X(P) = y,

c',X',E2 < 0,

1>

+ (rH(.. .)W + r*B*)/P,

> 0,

(5)
(6)

A more detailed exposition will be found in Obstfeld (1980).
4

substitutability is assumed to arise from devaluation risk,
political risk, or both.

Imperfect

4

rB + r*R — rF(r),

Pc =

(c(P)

W = px(P) +
PT = rD —

—

l)PE(

1 >

d

r

-

> 0,

¶) + PG,

(7)
(8)
(9)

r*yR,

where

L =

share of money in domestic private wealth

r =

nominal interest rate on domestic bonds

foreign-bond

r* =

interest rate, taken to be fixed

P = money price of domestic goods
W = domestic nominal wealth, assumed positive
M =

nominal stock of high-powered money

B =

share of foreign bonds in domestic private wealth
domestic holdings of foreign bonds, measured in domestic
currency units

private

B* =

H = share of home bonds in domestic private wealth
demand for bonds denominated in domestic currency

F =

foreign

D =

stock

of government bonds held by the non_central-bank public

C =

stock

of government bonds held by the central bank

R =

foreign

exchange reserves of the central bank, measured in domestic

currency units

share of domestic expenditure falling on domestic goods

=

of domestic goods
E = aggregate domestic expenditure, expressed in terms
=

disposable

income, expressed in terms of domestic goods

= expected rate of domestic price inflation
x =

foreign

T =

in tes of home goods
gross lump—sum taxes, expressed

demand for domestic goods

5

= net jnterest inflow, measured in home goods
=

fraction

of central—bank foreign assets held in interest—bearing

farm.

Both types of bond carry a fixed nominal face value.
Equations (1) and (2) stipulate that the domestic public willingly
holds the stocks of money and domestically-owned foreign assets, while
equation (3) is the equilibrium condition for the home bond market. 5Equation
(4) asserts that central-bank liabilities equal central-bank assets, and
describes the division of the asset side of the bank's balance sheet between

domestic credit and foreign reserves. Equation (5) ensures that the domestic
goods market clears; we assume that demand for domestic output is positively
related to home disposable income and negatively related to the home real
interest rate and price level. 6The service account, decribed by (7), encompasses both private and official interest earnings, and equation (8) links
the rate of increase of domestic marketable wealth to the current-account
surplus, on the assumption that there is no government borrowing and rio

investment. Finally, (9) gives the consolidated public-sector budget constraint
when there is no government spending. Since the government does not borrow, taxes
must be levied to finance any interest payments on the public debt not covered
by interest earnings on foreign—exchange reserves. Using (3) and (9) ,

disposable

income yd may be written as the sum of output and the real service account,

yd = y

+

a(r,P,W).

It is worth noting that the functions B, H, and F are net demand functions,
and may assume negative values. Thus, B < 0 means domestic residents are net
borrowers in foreign currency.
6

The expenditure function could be made more general by allowing wealth to
influence spending, and by altering the definition of disposable income to include
expected realcapital losses on wealth due to price-level inflation. Neither
extension would affect the paper's conclusions.

6

clarification is in order at this point.

n important

variable w appearing in thenodelis

base and

the sum of the monetarY

domestic

—

interprete& for the moment, as

defined by W M + B* + D -

tangible wealth,

all

F.

liabilities to the government

future f0eigfl_eXChange
cationS necessary when

W is thuS

marketable net claims owned by

residents: it does not encompass either

of future tax

The wealth

or that of the central bank's

earningS. We postpone

individuals discount

the capitalized value

until section 3 the modif iency

their future domestic-CU

Section 4 shows how

the model must be

liabilities to the government.

changed when residents also capitalize the

ments associated

-

with the central bank's reserves.

When condition (3) holds, conditions

any portfolio

stream of foreign_currency pay-

ialance can be eliminated

bank, and so, requires no change

(1) and (2) are redundant,

f or

through trades with the central

in the home interest rate or

domestic interest
price level. We may solve (3) to obtain the nominal
thi,s formula
rate p(P,W,D) that clears the asset markets; substitUting

for r in (5), we express r as a

function of P and W:

=(P,W;D).

assumption that P/P =

yields

the first

Imposition of the perfect_foresight
differential equation of the system,

(10)

p/P = ¶(P,W;D),

which describes the motion of the price

level.7 The second differefltil

depends on the extent to which the central bank
The precise form of (10)
non_interest bearing reserVes.
intervenes in the foreign exchange market with
behavior is indePendert of
of the economy's dynamic
But the qualitative nature
chosen by the central bank.

rii1

7

equation, describing the evolution of domestic wealth, is derived by
substituting (10) for ir and p(P,W,D) for r in (8) to obtain:

(11)

W/P = w(P,W;D).

Figure 1 depicts the dynamic system described by equations (10) and
(11). Under mild assumptions, one can show that

> 0. Thus, the locus along which P/P = 0

arid

>

the

0,

<
Try

0

< 0, and

locus along which W/P =

the assumption that the
0 both have positive slope. Figure 1 is drawn on
than the W/P = 0 or exterP/P = 0 or internal balance schedule is steeper

nal balance schedule. This assumption guarantees that the system has the
saddlepoint property of a unique path

converging to (W,P), the long-run or

stationary equilibrium.

3. Future taxes and the government debt
and (11) is one in which the
The system consisting of equations (10)

real equilibrium of the economy is affected byopen market operations, for
these alter the parameter D.

In this section we ask how the previous model

must be modified when the public debt D does not represent net wealth because individuals anticipate the

associated stream of taxes that they or

their descendants must pay to the government.

until section 4 that y =

0,

For simplicity, it is assumed

so that the central bank must intervene in the

foreign exchange market with reserves that bear no interest.

When anticipated tax liabilities to the government are capitalized
at market value, total nominal wealth, which inc1ues the value of non-marketable assets and liabilities, can be expressed as tangible wealth, W,
minus the value of the stock of government debt in private portfolios; D.
Residents flOW

allocate

their net wealth W-D among the three assets, taking

8

into consideration their domestic—currency indebtedness to the government.
Equation (3) describing bond-market equilibrium becomes

(12)

H(r,r*,Py/(W_D),D/(W_D))(W_D) + F(r) =

which differs from (3) in that the share of total wealth allocated to
holdings of marketable domestic bonds depends on the ratio of capitalized
future tax liabilities to total wealth.

When government bonds are not net wealth, the experiment of a
"helicopter drop" of government bonds to the public can have no effect
on the price level or the domestic bond rate, r, for total wealth, W —

and the public's net position in domestic currency are unaffected.8 From
(12), this implies that H must have the form

f(r,r*,Py/(W_D)) + D/(W-D).

ui(r,r*,Py/(W_D)) (W-D) can be interpreted as the domestic public's desired

net claims denominated in domestic currency vis—-vis both foreigners and
the domestic government.

Using the definition of f,

the

condition that the domestic bond

market clear is just

fi(r,r*,Py/(W_D)) (W—D) + F(r) = 0,

(13)

and it is evident that the unique interest rate r satisfying (13) can be
written in the form p(P,W-D) .

8

Noting

that domestic demand for foreig:

This is the experiment considered by Barro (1974)

9

bonds (equation (2)) is now written as B(r,r*,Py/(W_D))(W_D),9 we may
proceed as before to derive differential equations in P and W, this
time of the form

P/P = rr(P,W-D),

(14)

W/P = w(P,W-D).

(15)

The dynamic system can again be portrayed by figure 1. The important difference now is that the system's endogenous variables are r, P, and W-D
rather than r, P, and W. This means that in the long run, any change in D

must be offset exactly by an equal change in W, with the nominal interest
rate and domestic price level returning to their original levels.
The adjustment process following an open—market purchase of domestic

government debt is depicted in figure 2. The monetary expansion leaves
tangible wealth W intact, for the decline, D, in bonds held by the public

is financed by an equivalent issue of central—bank money. However, the
government's discounted future revenue requirements also decline by D,

and thus total wealth——tangible plus intangible--increases. Looking at
(14) and (15), we see that the change in D shifts both schedules horizontally

by the amount LD, as shown in figure 2. Thus, the open—market purchase
has no long—run effect on total domestic wealth (inclusive of capital-

ized future taxes), the price level, or the interest rate. A long-run
decline in tangible wealth just offsets the fall in the public's anticipated,
discounted tax liabilities.

This eventual decline in tangible wealth is a consequence of the
current—account deficit oäcasioned by the open-market purchase. In fig. 2,
This also follows from the "helicopter" experiment. When government bonds
are not net wealth, an increase in D has no effect on the public's demand
for foreign bonds, for it involves no change in total wealth or portfolio
composition.

10

the economy, on impact1 jumps vertically to the stable arm of th system

associated with the lower level of D. The nominal and real interest rates
fall, inducing an increase in spending, a rise in the home price level, and

a current-account deficit. The fall in the bond rate and rise in the price
level are necessary because the increase in total wealth associated with
the cut in future taxes would otherwise result in excess demand for domestic

debt. An outflow of capital--and so, a fall in central-bank reserves-—
accompanies the monetary expansion, but does not offset it completely in the

short run. It is important to note that because reserves earn no interest,
the transfer of foreign assets from the central bank to the public entails

a net increase in the stream of foreign—currency interest earnings reaching domestic residents.

Over time, however, the initial capital outflow is reversed, and the
domestic-goods price, the interest rate, and total wealth return to their

original levels. Since the money stock must do the same, the long-run offset
to monetary policy is complete, and provides the mechanism through which the

required fall in tangible wealth is accommodated. The initial increase in
the central bank's domestic assets is eventually matched by a decline in its

foreign assets. Part of this decline occurs at the moment the central bank
intervenes to support the currency when the interest rate first falls.

The

balance of the reserve loss occurs during the adjustment to long—run equilibrium, for the capital inflow accompanying the current-account defict is
not sufficient to finance it.

To summarize, when government bonds are not net wealth and the central
bank intervenes in the foreign exchange market with non-interest-bearing
assets, expansionary monetary policy has a short-run effect on the economy.
This short—run effect involves a current deficit that returns the economy to
a stationary position characterized by an unaltered interest rate and price
level but a lower level of tangible wealth. The decline in tangible wealth

11

liabilities.

jus,t equals the decline in discounted future tax

Private holdings

of money and foreign assets are unchanged in the long run.

4. The role of interest—bearing reserve assets
The previous section's finding that open-market policy can affect the
short—run equilibrium of the economy when government bonds are not net wealth
depends on the assumption that the monetary authority's intervention medium

earns no interest. We now argue that when the central bank intervenes with
foreign bonds earning interest at the market rate r*, this short-run effect
of monetary policy disappears if the public capitalizes the stream of centralbank foreign—exchange earnings at market value.
To show this, we write total wealth, inclusive of the discounted
value of future tax payments to the government and payments in foreign
currency from the central bank, as W - D + yR, where yR, again, is the

stock of interest—bearing foreign exchange reserves. yR of course equals
the present value of the stream of central-bank interest payments, dis-

counted at rate r*. As before, we assume that residents allocate their
total wealth W - D + yR among the three available assets, taking into account
the capitalized value of anticipated central-bank foreign-exchange payments,
which are regarded as perfectly substitutable for interest earnings on
privately-held foreign bonds.
10
With this modification, equation (2) takes the form

B(r,r*,Py/(W_D+IR) ,yR/(W-D+yR)) (W—D+yR) =

B*.

(16)

A conceptual experiment similar to the one performed in the previous

section allows us to derive the form of B(....). Suppose that the central

13

See note 9 for the justification.

12

bank confiscates a portion of the stock of privately-owned foreign

bonds, adding these to its own interest-bearing reserves and continuing
If the public capitalizes the

to distribute all earnings to the public.

monetary authority's foreign exchange

disbursements, the confiscation

leaves both total (capitalized) wealth and the net foreign asset position
D +
of the public unchanged. Thus, B simply falls by (yR)/(W -

yR),

implying that

B(r,r*,Py/(W_D+YR),IR/(W+YR)) =

B(r,r*,PY/(W_DR))

-

R/(W-D+iR).

As a consequence, (16) assumes the form

(17)

B(r,r*,Py/(W_D+'(R)) (W—D+R) = B* + yR,

showing that B(r,r*,PY/(W_DYR)) (W-D+yR)

can be interpreted as the public's

total demand for claims on future payments denominated in foreign currency.
Under the present assumptionS, (13) becomes

(r,r*,Py/(W_D+yR)) (W-D+yR) +

F(r)

=

(18)

0,

which yields the reduced-form interest rate r

= p(P,W-D+YR).

The conceptual

experiment of a central bank confiscation of foreign assets again shows that
no

term of form yR/(W -

D

+ yR) can be an argument of H(...).

We can now consider the effect of an open-market purchase of domestic
debt when the central bank supports the exchange rate through operations

in interest-bearing reserves. Total

discounted wealth rises momentarily thanks

113

to

the fall in future tax

liabilities

to the government. This leads to

an incipient excess demand for foreign exchange and domestic debt, and, by

(18), to downward pressure on the domestic bond rate. The excess demand
for foreign exchange can be accommodated with no change in the exchange

rate only through official intervention. As in section 3, the central
bank's interest—earning reserves decline and the money supply shrinks as
capital flows abroad.

However, the reserve loss is now matched by an equal fall in interest

payments from the central bank to the public and a corresponding decline in

total capitalized wealth. Because the increase in the public's foreign
bond holdings can be no greater than the reserve loss of the central bank,
the aggregate stream of foreign currency payments to the public cannot in-

crease. This is the crucial point for our analysis, for it implies that
residents can never succeed in extending their net foreign—exchange position
by trading newly—created money for central-bank reserves.

What happens? As (17) and (18) show, asset—market equilibrium will be
re—established only after the fall in interest-bearing reserves just equals
the fall in D, so that domestic wealth, inclusive of capitalized transfer

payments, is at its initial level. This leaves the domestic bond rate, and
so the national stock of foreign-currency bonds (B* + yR), unaltered. The
end result of the open-market purchase is a transfer of foreign bonds from
the monetary authority to the public that exactly offsets the initial in-

crease in the money supply. It must be emphasized that the central bank
is forced to buy back instantaneously all the money it has created in spite
of the fact that it has no formal obligation to peg the home interest rate.

We see that when the central bank intervenes with interest-bearing
foreign securities and all income streams are capitalized by the public,

14

open_market policy has no

effect even in ths short run, for it leaves

unchanged. Only

total wealth and the perceived portfolio composition
bank's balance sheet is
asset side of the central
the composition of the
transfer of reserves
say, causes an equal
affected. An open—market purchase,
with no net increase
to private portfoliosr
from the centra1-b1k portfolio
bank's domestic assets is thus
increase in the central
in the money supply. The
instantaneously, by a fall in its foreign assets. The
offset, fully and
reserve loss entails a decrease in total
perceived by the public, a

discounted wealth as

decrease that just offsets

the increase in

the government. This
wealth due to the fall in future tax liabilities to
in equilibrium at the
mechanism, which allows the asset markets to remain
level, is absent when the central bank
initial interest rate and price
in foreign assets that earn no
rate
through
transactions
pegs the exchange
interest. For a fall in reserves, in that case, involves
the stream of foreign currency

A transfer f foreign

no fall in

payments from the government to the public.

the
assets from the central bank to the public enables

latter to escape the tax

that the central bank imposes by holding official

reserves in an unproductive form.

The analysis, SO

far,

has assumed that the home country is small,

exert no influence
in the sense that shifts in its behavioral relations
assumption may be relaxed
on the world interest rate or price level. The
the effects of opensection's conclusions regarding
with no change in this
above sense, open_market
market policy. Even when a country is large in the

monetary expansion leads

the
only to a transfer of foreign securities from

central bank to the domestic
home and foreign bond

markets undisturbed. The

Mundell'S (1964) finding
the

level

public; and this leaves the equilibrium of
conclusion is at variance with

that the central bank of a large country will

of economic activity at

alter

home and abroad through its open-market policy.

15

5. Conclusion
This paper has studied the conduct of open-market policy in a world

in which individualsfullY capitalize or internalize all income streams.
We have found that even when assets denominated in different currencies
are imperfect substitutes in portfolios, open-market monetary policy
has no long—run effect and possibly no short—run effect when the central

bank holds the exchange rate fixed. Under these circumstances, the
neutrality propositions of the portfolio-balance model of international
asset markets are much stronger than those of the "capital-flow function"
model it has supplanted.
The results have implications for a world of managed floating as

well as for a world of rigidly fixed rates. An extension of our arguments
shows how sterilized intervention in the foreign exchange market will be
a self—defeating policy when intervention assets bear interest. A sterilized purchase of foreign exchange, for example, entails a transfer of

interest—earning foreign assets from the public to the central bank, a
rise in domestic holdings of government debt, and an equal increase in the
present value of future taxes-—an operation that leaves the asset markets

unperturbed because all central—bank interest earnings are returned to,

and capitalized by, the public. Only when the public fails to capitalize
the relevant income streams, or when the government taxes its citizens by
holding the intervention medium in barren form, is it possible to attain
independent exchange—rate and money—stock targets in the short run through
domestic debt management.

16

References

Barro, R.J., 1974, Are government bonds net
Economy, 82, 1095—1117.

wealth? journal of Political

Boyer, R.S., 1975, Commodity markets and bond markets in a small, fixedexchange—rate economy, Canadian Journal of Economics, 8, 1—23.
Boyer, R.S., 1979, Sterilization and the monetary approach to balance of
payments analysis, Journal of Monetary Economics, 5, 295-300.
Branson, W.H., 1976, portfolio equilibrium and monetary policy with
foreign and non—traded assets, in: E. Claassen and P. Salin, eds.,
Recent issues in international economics (North-Holland, imsterdam).

portfolio balance, in: R.Z.
Dornbusch, R., 1977, Capital mobility and
of monetary reform (Macmillan,
Aliber, ed., The political economy
London).
Frenkel, J.A., and C.A. Rodriguez, 1975, portfolio equilibrium and the
American Economic Review,
balance of payments: A monetary approach,
65, 674—688.
Girton, L., and D.W. Henderson, 1976, Financial capital movements and
central bank behavior in a two country, short-run portfolio balance
model, Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, 33-61.
Henderson, D.W., 1977, Modeling the interdependence of national money
and capital markets, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
67, 190—199.
Kouri, P.J.K., and M.G. Porter, 1974, International capital flows and
portfolio equilibrium, Journal of Political Economy, 82, 443-467.
Metzler, L.A., 1951, Wealth, saving and the rate of interest, Journal
of Political Economy, 59, 93—116.
Mundell, R.A., 1960, The public debt, corporate income taxes and the rate
of interest, Journal of Political Economy, 68, 622-626.

under
Mundell, R.A., 1963, Capital mobility and stabilization policy
of
Economics
fixed and flexible exchange rates, Canadian Journal
and Political Science, 29, 475—485.
Mundell, R.A., 1964, A reply: Capital mobility and size, Canadian
Journal of Economics and Political Science, 30, 421-431.
Obstfeld, M., 1980, Imperfect asset substitutability and monetary policy
under fixed exchange rates, Journal of International EconomicS, 10,
177—200.

Stockman, A.C., 1979, Monetary control and sterilization under pegged
exchange rates, unpublished paper, University of Rochester.

P

.
P/P O

/

W/PO
Figure 2
P

w

W+tD

P

P/P

w/Po
Figure 1
P

I

w

—w

