                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE TAX ADVANTAGES OF PENSION
                   FUND INVESTMENTS IN BONDS



                         Fischer Black



                     Working Paper No. 533




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           August 1980




This paper 'was presented at the National Bureau of Economic
Research's Suxmner Institute Program on Private and Public Pensions,
July 21, 1980. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research project in Pensions. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper 1t533
                                                                       August, 1980




          The Tax Advantages of Pension Fund Investments in Bonds


                                 ABSTRACT



     I believe that every tax—paying firm's defined benefit pension fund
portfolio should be invested entirely in bonds (or insurance contracts).
     Although the firm's pension funds are legally distinct from the firm,
there is a close tie between the performance of the pension fund Investments
and the firm's cash flows. Sooner or later, gains or losses In pension fund
portfolios will mean changes in the firm's pension contributions.
     Shifting from stocks to bonds in the pension funds will increase the firm's
debt capacity, because it will reduce the volatility of the firm's future cash
flows. Shifting from stocks to bonds in the pension funds will give an Indirect
tax benefit equal to the firm's marginal tax rate times the interest on the
bonds. There is no indirect tax benefit if the pension funds are invested
in stocks.
     Fully implementing the plan will mean shifting all of the stocks in the
pension fund to fixed income investments, and putting all new contributions into
fixed income investments. Shifting $2 million from stocks to bonds has a present
value for the firm's stockholders of about $1 million.
     Shifting from stocks to bonds in the pension funds will reduce the firm's
leverage. To offset this, the firm can issue more debt than it otherwise would
have issued. The money raised can be invested in the firm or used to buy back
the firm's stock.
     This version of the plan, with more bonds in the pension fund and more debt
on the firm's balance sheet, is equivalent to the following transactions: (1)
sell a portfolio of stocks on which no taxes are paid, and buy the firm's stock
on which no taxes are paid; and (2) issue the firm's bonds at an after—tax
interest rate, and buy other firm's bonds at a before—tax Interest rate.




                                            Professor Fischer Black
                                            Sloan School
                                            Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                             50   Memorial Drive
                                             Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
                                             (617) 253—6691
                                       3

BACKGROUND


Legally, a    firm's pension fund is separate from the     firm. The fund's
trustees act first in    the interest of the fund's    beneficiaries.


Still, the performance of the pension fund         investments    affects the
firm    more than   it. affects the fund's beneficiaries.        If the fund's

performance is good,    the firm's contributions will sooner or later be
lower    than they would have been. If the fund's performance is bad,
the    firm's contributions will sooner or later be higher than they
would have been.

Thus pension fund     performance affects the firm's cash        flows, earn-
ings, and    stock price. The effects of changes in the          value of the
fund's investn-nts will, probably show up fairly       quickly   in the firm's
stock price, especially en these changes are due to overall market
movements. But earnings figures generally won't be affected for some
time,   because of the smoothing proceedures used in figuring contri—
buti.ons to the pension fund.


?'n extra dollar earned on the pension fund      investments    means a dollar
that the firm won't have         contribute.     The   extra   dollar may grow
over time, too, so if ii:         is   used to reduce a distant future
contribution,   that contrihti ci will     probably be reduced by    more than
a dollar.


In fact, the chare in the value of the pension fund investments is
the present value of the change in the future contributions, no
matter how long the firm waits to che:e its centribucions, so long
as    the pension benefits are not affected by the value of the         pension
fd.
Thus greater volatility in the pension fund investments will mean
greater   volatility in the present value of the firm's         contributions,
                                       4


and greater      volatility in the value of the firm.         Stocks   in   the
pension fund rican more uncertainty about the firm's future cash flows
than bonds in the pension fund.

In some    firms, gcxxl   returns   on the pension fund investments    means
pressure for     greater pension benefits, while bad returns do not make
reductions in benefits possible.        In those firms, the   beneficiaries
have a kind of opt ion on the fund.          If the fund does well, the
beneficiaries     share in   the gains, whi].e if the fund does badly, the
firm bears all the losses.


Normally, thoug'i, the pension benefits are independent of      the pension
fund performance.       Gains and losses in the pension fund are borne
entirely by the firm.


In sum, there is a close tie between the performance of the pension
fund investments and the finn.         It's alnost as if the pension fund
investments were assets of the firm.           Changing the risk of the
pension fund's investments is like changing the risk of the firm's
assets.



LEVERAGE


Leverage, as I define it, is the sensitivity of a finn's performance
to economic conditions. A firm with high leverage will do very well
when conditions are good, and very badly when conditions are poor.


Financial    leverage comes from a high debt—equiy ratio. In defining
the   debt—equity   ratio,   it makes sense to measure debt as fixed dollar
liabilities minu fixed dollar assets.


Operating leverage, comes from fixed costs other than interest costs.
Costs     that   are fixed in the short run contribute to operating
leverage, even if    they are variable in the long run.
                                      5



 Pension costs can be worse than fixed costs. If pension liabilities
 are independent of economic conditions, while pension fund assets are
 worth mare when times are good and less when times are bad, pension
 costs will be lower when times are good and higher when times are bad.


 Often this effect will be offset by the Ee:sitivity of pension
 liabilities to economic conditions.         Still, the effect .of cariron
 stocks in the pension fund is to add to thc r:.'s leverage.


 Bonds in the pension fund work like bonds h?i directly by the firm.
 In figiring the debt-equity ratio for a firm,      it uld be   sensible to
 subtract something from the firm's debt if its pension fund contains
 an unusually large investment in bands, and to add to the firm' s debt
 if   its pension fund contains an unusually   srrall investment in bonds.

 Shifting from sLock to bonds in the pension fund will reduce the
firm's    leverage. It will reduce the variability in the firm's
earnings, the risk of the stock, and the risk of default on the
firm's bonds. The bond interest rate will fall, and if the shift is
substantial,    the firm's bond ratings should ultimately go up.


DEBT CAPACI'F


There are many measures of debt capacity.         I like to think of debt
capacity in market value terms.       I use the market value of a firm's
equity cushion and the variability of thac market value to define the
firm's debt capacity.


Other   measures make use   of   the back debt—equity ratio.    The firm's
holdings of bands can be subtracted from its liabilities in figuring
the debt-equity ratio.


Another important measure of debt capacity is the earnings coverage
of interest charges. A more variable earnings stream will mean less
effective coverage.
                                         6

Shifting from stocks to bonds in the pension fund will increase the
firm's debt capacity,        sooner or   later.        It will reduce the varia-
bility of the market value; it will reduce the ratio of net debt to
equity; and     it will   reduce the variability of earnings.


With stocks in the pension fund, if tines are ad for the econc*ny and
the firm               tine, required contribotions to the pension fund
             at the same
may be high just when the firm can least afford to pay them. Bonds
in the pension fund will rrake it easier for the firm to avoid default
on its own bun-is when tirres are bad all over.

Thus a firm that is expending by investing more than its retained
earnings can create debt capacity, no matter how it is defined, by
selling stocks and having bonds in the pension fund. The more the
pension fund lends, the rcore the firm can borrow.



BENEFIT_SECURITY


Shifting      from stocks to bonds in the pension fund will make the
benefits mare secure (ass.uidng that insurance has not already made
them perfectly secure), even though stocks are expected to return
more than bonds.

For example,      suppose that the plan is fully      funded, and that the
assets are sufficient to       pay the benefits if the assets are ir bonds.
If the assets are in stocks, there will         some chance that they will
                                                  be
not   be   worth enough to pay the benefits when due.

Having the assets in stocks will reduce the expected contributions by
the firm, but can only make the pension beneficiaries less secure. It
reduces the present value of any defined set of benefits.
                                    7


The same is true when the plan is not fully funded. Just as an
increase in the risk of a firm's assets that doesn't
                                                           change the
firm's value will make the
                            bondholders less secure, so an increase in
the risk of the pension fund
                               assets that doesn't change the fund's
value will make the beneficiaries less secure.


Since investing pension fund assets in bonds    makes the   beneficiaries
more
       secure than investing in stocks, it    should make   the trustees
more   secure too.


 PENSION FUND ALGEBRA


 Pension    fund contributions are deductible for both federal and state
       taxes. A higher contribution nans a lower tax, and a lower
 inccxi'e

contribution rreans a higher tax.

 If the marginal   rate is 494, it costs the firr only $.51 to make
                     tax
an extra $1.00 contribution to the pension fund. The other $.49
canes from reduced taxes.


Similarly,    a reduction of $1.00 in the pension fund contribution
gives the    firm only $.51 after taxes. The other $.49 goes to higher
taxes.

Thus   we can imagine that assets can be swapped   between the   fund and
the firm on a $1.00/$.51 basis. $1.00 in the fund is equivalent to
$.51 in the firm.

Thus a gain of $1.00 in the value of the peISiOn fund is worth only
$.51 to the firm after taxes, while a loss of i .03 in the fund costs
the firm only $.51 after taxes.
                                         8


Even the increased debt
                        capacity brought by                  in the pension fund
is ndified by taxes. An extra $1.00 of              n:js in     the pension fund
will    mean only about $.51    in   extra debt cacity in the firm. The
risk   brought by stocks in the pension fund translates to a smaller
risk, after taxes, in the firm.


ThE BASIC_PlAN


The simplest form of my plan involves selling stocks in the pension
fund and buying bonds with the n'riey received, plus issuing the
firm's debt and buying      back    the firm's stock with the roney received.
There    is no   change in the current pension fund contribution.


If the marginal inccm tax rate is 49'L, then every $1.00 switched
f'rorn stock to bonds in the fund is matched with $.51 of the firm's
bonds issued arid $.51 of the firm's stock bought back.


Interest    inccrr in the fund     is   tax exeript, while   interest   expense for
the     firm is tax deductible.          Tne firm    borrows directly at the
after—tax rate, and lends through the fund at the before—tax rate.


Neither dividends nor changes in the value of the pension fund stock
portfolio have any direct tax consequences.                  Transactions in the
firm's own stock don't have any direct tax consequences either. There
isn't any tax arbitrage when the firm has stock outstanding and owns
stocks in the pension fund.


In effect, the plan involves (1) selling the stocks in the pension
fund    and xitting      the rrney in the firm's own stock; plus (2)
borrowing by the firm to           finance tax—free
                                              lending by the pension
fund.     The firm gains if its o stock does better than the pension
fund stocks sold, and it gains by the spread between the before—tax
and after—tax interest rates.
                                     9


Suppose the interest rate on the firm's bonds and on the bonds held
by the pension fund is R, while the firm's    rr'arginal   tax   rate is T. If
$X of stocks in the pension fund are sold and replaced by bonds,
$X(1—T) of the firm's debt will be issued and the same anount of the
firm's stock will be bought back.


The added deduction will      be
                            $X(1—T)R, so the taxes saved each year
will be $X(1—T)RT. This tax saving is nearly certain, so long as the
firm stays healthy enough to pay incocr taxes in n-os years. So it
should be discounted at the after—tax interest rate (1—T)R. If the
tax saving lasts indefinitely, its present value will be $XT.


As   the pension     fund grows, through inccee and added contributions,
there   will be    added amounts that ay be put into bands rather than
stocks.    The    present value of the tax
                                       saving including these added
asunts is nuch greater than the present value assuming the firm and
the pension fund rerrin at their current size.


On the other hand, it is possible that the firm will eventually have
troubles that eliminate its inccxne taxes, or that the tax laws          will
be   changed to eliminate the benefits of the plan.         These possibil-
ities reduce the present value of the tax saving from the plan.


Assuming that the plan's benefits contirnie, the present value of the
tax saving at the firm's current size is thus $XT, where T, including
both federal and state taxes, is close to 50%. The ancunt of debt
issued by the firm is $X(1--T), which is approxirrte1y equal to the
present value of the tax saving. Thus it's as if the firm issued the
debt at close to a zero interest rate, arid without having to repay
it. It's as if the debt issued by the. firm were free.
                                      10

 A YEAR AT A TINE

 One way to see how the plan works is to assume that all pension
 benefits will be paid at the end of the next year. If the assets of
 the plan are mare than sufficient to
                                      pay the benefits, the difference
 will go to the       firm.     If the assets are not sufficient, the firm will
 nike up    the   difference.

 Assume that the interest rate on one year hoids is 107, and that the
 firm's marginal tax rate is 50'L. Assume that the stocks the pension
 fund might hold will do exactly as well over the next year as the
 firm's stock.

 Suppose that the benefits to be paid total $220 millicn, hile the
funds assets are initially invested in stocks worth $200 million. The
firm's stock starts the year at $100 er share, aid ends the year at
$Y per share.


If the pension fund is invested entirely in stocks that do exactly as
well as the firm's stock, then the value of the pension fund
portfolio at the end of the year will be 2Y mi11Jc. The fi.uid will
return   to the firm $2Y — 220 million. fr            this wjll be
worth $Y — 110 million.


If   my plan is used instead, the $200 millicn in stocks will be sold
and $200 mu lion will be put into one year bonds.               The firm will
issue $100 million in one year         bonds and   buy beck one million shares
of stock.


At the ed of the year, the bonds in the fund           will be just   sufficient
to   pay the pension benefits. The firm can sell the million shares of
stock again arid can pay off its bonds for $100 million plus interest.
The net gain to the firm will be $Y — 110 million plus the tax saving
from $10 million of interest deductions.
                                        11

With my plan, the firm ends up exactly as it would have, except that
it earns an extra $5 million after taxes for the year. The capital
structure change has been reversed, and the pension benefits have
been paid.

Except for the fact that      the   firm's stock may do better or worse than
the stocks in the pension fun1 portfolio, it's a çire arbitrage. We
are adding a tax saving to a stream of cash flows for the firm and
the pension fund together without changing those cash flows in any
other way.

An actual pension plan that lasts many years works like this in each
of its years. We can just take the initial invesTent in the pension
fund each year to be the ending investment for the last year pl.us the
current year's contribution.

The analysis also works if          we imagine that the     pension fund per—
forinance has no effect on contributions to the fund until pension
benefits are paid many years later. This would         be   like the one year
analysis with   a   higher interest rate.


DIVERSIFICATION


In effect, my plan substitutes investments in the firm's stock for a
diversified portfolio of stocks, and investments in a portfolio, of
bonds   for the firm's bonds.


If the firm issues bonds like the bonds bought in the pension fund,
the   bond substitution is probably of little consequcnce.            But the
firm's stock may do much better or much worse than a diversified
portfolio, so we should     look at   the stock substitution nre   closely.

When my plan is implemented, the firm's stock will follow nore
closely the firm's operations. It will not depend as uch on the
performance of other firms.
                                     12



The firm's stock will be less well diversified. Investors who bold
the firm's stock in large portfolios will not be sensitive to this,
since their portfolios provide diversification. A stockholder with a
large concentrated holding riy be nore sensitive to diversification
within the firm.


Keep in mind, though, that when the interest rate is 1O7, the
after—tax gain is 57 per year of the arrunt of the firm's stock
bought   back. I doubt tiat n'any investors would pay 5' per year       for
diversification within their holdns of a single firm' s stock.


If   the diversification is imprtant, another version of the plan can
be   used. The firm   can   issue   bonds and invest the proceeds in shares
of a mutual fund   that converts capital gains to dividends.

Such a mutual fid tries to realize its capital gains while they are
still short term gains. The mutual ftrid' s dividends are the div-
idends on the shares it holds plus interest inccme plus short term
capital gains.

A corporation will pay a tax on 15% of the mutual ftnc1' s dividends,
so its tax i-ate on that incore will normally be around 7.57g. That
rate is higher than the zero tax the firm pays if it boys back its
own shares, bit it is still much lower than the potential gains from
my basic plan of around 5O7 of the incce.
                                      13

DEBT RtTINC



The rating agencies do not yet pay nich attention to the                mix of
investments in a firm's pension fund.


They give sane weight to a firm's unfunded liabilities, but will
rarely consider, at least on their own, the way the pension fund is
invested.      In a marginal case, though, the firm is likely to be in
close touch with the agencies. A firm using my plan will be able to
point out to the agencies the stabilizing effects of having bords in
the pension fund.


The. plan will also have indirect effects on the firm's debt rating.
Over time, these effects should be beneficial even without any
suggestions to the rating agencies.


The nest important of these effects will be the added profitability
of the firm. This will mean both higher earnings and a higher value
for the firm.


Also, having bonds in the pension find        t.;ili give   stability to the
firm's    pension contributions and   earnins ih.i:    11 offset, at     least
in part, the instability that      would other.:e     cce   from   an increase
in the    debt/equity ratio.


I expect that using my plan is unlikely to hurt the firm's debt
rating,    even though   one part. of the plan involves higher debt than
the firm uld   otherwise have. If it were to hurt the debt rating, I
expect that the firm's interest rate would not go up rruch, because
the market would recognize the        stability   brought by bonds in     the

pension    fund.


Even if the firm is forced to pay a higher interest rate on sane
future issue of bonds because of this plan, it' s likely that the tax
                                        14

 saving from the plan will be far greater than            the   added interest
 expense it causes.


 If the new bond issue is large, the plan won't have a material effect
 on its interest rate; tiile if the new bond issue is about the same
 size    as the debt issued   uider   my plan, the   tax saving   (5 percentage
 points then the interest rate is 1O7) will be far greater than any
 conceivable effect it might     have   on the interest rate on the new bond
 issue.

IHE SOURCE OF flj GAIN


The simplest version of my plan has two     parts: a change from stocks
to bonds    in the pension fud, and a change from stock to bonds in the
firm's capital structure. t'nich part of the plan gives the bulk of
the saving?

On the surface, it seems that the tax saving comes from the firm' s
added debt, so the benefit mist come from the capital structure
change, nether or not the pension firtd investments are changed. But
a capital. structure change alone has disadvantages that at least
partly offset the saving in corporate taxes.

More debt alone means a greater chance that the firm will someday
find     its fixed charges hirdensorre, and that its         flexibility in
raising    wore capital by issuing debt will be impaired.           More debt
alone will increase the risk of the firm's outstanding debt, the
volatility of its stock, aid the variability of its earnings.


If the benefits of greater debt outweigh the costs, then the firm
should    issue more debt than my plan calls for.       It should. move   to   an
optinl debt/equity ratio whether or not it adopts my plan.


Suppose,   then, that    firm is at an optimal debt/equity ratio when
                        the
it considers my plan. That n'eans it will be indifferent to one more
dollar of debt or one less dollar of debt. The benefits aid the
costs of an added dollar of debt are equal.
                                         15



After     implementing the simple      version   of my plan, the     firm   will   still
be at a roughly optimal debt/equity ratio.                The added    binds in the
pension fd will support the added birrowing by the firm.

This means      that the firm    can   reverse the capital structure part of
the   plan witbiut changing the benefits significantly.               At the optimal

capital structure, a small change in the capital structure makes no
difference.


But the plan without the          capital structure change is simply the
change in the pension find investments.                 The benefits of the plan
come from earning the before—tax interest rate after taxes on the
bonds   in   the pension fund.



FULL FUNDING


Buying bonds in     the pension plan gives the firm after—tax interest at
a before—tax rate. This suggests that             the   firm   r.ay want   to keep its
contributions to the plan at the rraxirr&xn               level     allowed by the
Internal Revenue Service.


Higher contributions may reduce reported earnings, bit this can be
offset by showing higher contributions for tax purposes than for
financial     statcont purposes.         Higher contributions means          an added
drain on the finn's cash flows, bit it             should be possible to raise
noney to make invesbnents as profitable as added contributions to the

pension plan.


Note, though, that full friding of the pension plan gives tax
benefits only to the extent that the fund is invested in 1xnds. The
benefits of added contributions are lost if they are invested in
stocks.
                                         16

This    seems    odd, because added      contributions (up to the IRS rnaximni)
do mean added deductions.             But higher contributions now mean lower
contributions      later, and thus     higher taxes later.


When the fund  is invested in burds, there's a saving from deferring
these taxes equal to interest on the taxes.         When the fund is
invested in stocks, there is no saving. Assining the firm's stock
does as well as the pension fund stocks, an investment in the firm's
stock would be just as good as an investment in stocks through the
pens icn fund.

Thus the benefits of full            funding are being wasted unless the added
contributions      to the pension     fixd are invested in lxntls.


ACCOUNTING_FACTORS


When    buth parts of my plan are implemented, and tien the firm's stock
does    as well as the stocks that might be held in the pension fuid,
the firm's cash flows will be higher in almost every state of the
world than they would be if the plan were not implemented. To me,
that is the nost important consideration.


That's    the    argument used hen firms switch from FIR) to LIFO for
inventory accounting. So long as the firm is paying taxes and the
prices of the items used in inventory are rising, LIFU will give
lower    taxes   and   thus higher   cash flows than FIR).

Since a    firm that switches to LIFD for tax purposes rrust also switch
in its financial statements, a firm that switches to LIFU will reduce
its reported earnings in the short run.              In the long run, the tax
saving will give the firm        higher   earnings than it would have   had with
FIR).
                                        17

A change in the pension fund investments only will have no short nri
effect on reported earnings. A shift from stocks to horxis in the
pension Lu-id will make future earnings mere stable. If stocks do
very    well, the shift will rrake   future     earnings lower than they would
have been; while if stocks do very           badly, the   shift will rrake   future
earnings     higher than they would have h'en.

A change in      the   pension fund i    estrnts    combined with a change in
the firm's capital structure will increase reported earnings per
share whenever the initial earnings—price ratio is greater than the
after—tax interest rate.


For example, a before—tax interest rate of 12% means an after—tax
interest rate of about 67g. A price—earnings ratio of 9 means an
earnings—price ratio of about 11%. When the firm is in this
situation, imp1emerting the plan will increase earnings per share.
The lower the price—earnings ratio, the larger the increase in
earnings per share will be.

When the      earnings—price ratio is equal        to the before—tax interest
rate, the earnings increase tirres the price—earnings ratio will equal
the present value of the tax saving at the firm's current size. In
the    example above,    a price—earnings ratio around 8 will do it.              In
this case, the full value o the tax              saving comes in the      form    of
higher   earnings.

In other cases, some of      the value of the     tax saving will come in        the
form    of   even higher future   earnings per    share, so there will be an
increase in the price—earnings ratio, now or when            the effects     become
known, as well as an increase in earnings per share. The            two    effects
combined will give the present value of the tax saving.


While some of the benefits of my plan come in the form of a higher
price—earnings ratio, some of the benefits norilly come in the form
of higher earnings per share. Thus my plan rri.v be easier to accept
than   a switch from FIFO to LIFO.
                                       18

The plan is not as likely, though, to inor:.             'n:ck equity   per share;
Issuing debt to buy back stock will incre::o             bo'k equity per share
only when the stock is bought balow book va1uE.. And issuing               debt to
buy back stock will always reduce total book equity.


Finally,  the plan increases cash flows in the sense that it nkes
n-ore cash available for dividends, repurchase of the firm' s liabil-
ities, or invcstrrents. If we look at the firm without including the
pension plan, and if we think of dividends as fixed in the short run,
then    the plan ny reduce short run cash flows.
 Cash flows defined this        way will    go. up in the short n-i only if the
 dividend yield is higher than          the after—tax     interest rate on the
 firm'sbonds. If the yield is 47 and the after—tax interest rate is
 67, short run cash flows will go down. Even in this case, though,
 the    plan will improve long nri cash flows.             It rry cause    a high
growth rate    in   dividends, for example.



BUNT) INDFTJRE..S



The firm     can change its
                         capital structure only in ways that are
consistent with its bond indentures.   Bond indentures generally
restrict   the amount   of   added debt: a firm can   take on.

The benefits of the plan are great enough, though, that a firm
                                                               nay
want to   look beyond the limits imposed by its bond indentures when
those   limits seem binding.  One solution to this problem can be to
issue junior debt that is      not restricted by the indentures.

The interest rate differential between junior            and     senior debt will
rarely be as large as the differential between                    before—tax and
after—tax interest rates. And the differential will be offset if the
pension   fund invests in debt securities like those issued          by the firm.
                                          19


 Moreover, a junior       debt   iSsue will    not   have niich impact on the
 ratings for the firm's senior debt.            It is a way around a rating
 constraint, if one is felt to exist.


 Another way to deal with restrictive indentures is to 'refinance,
 buying    back   the existing debt and    issuing   ne' debt with nore appro-
 priate restrictions.        The new restrictions might take the firm's
 pension   f-uncl investjnt policy into account, at      least implicitly.


 The   simplest solution to the prcble:: of a restrictive bDnd indenture
 is not to make the capital structure charie at all. The expected
 benefits of the plan cane mostly from the change in the pension ftnid
 investments.


SHARES OUTSTANDING


Sellingstocks and buying bonds in the pension plan increases the
optimal amount of debt in the firm's capital structure. If the firm
canpietes the plan by issuing its own            bonds   and buying back its
stock, the number of conmn       shares   outstanding will be reduced.

Reducing the ni.ther of shares outstanding without changing the risk
of the, shares may have advantages beyond the tax—saving benefits of
the plan. In fact, empirical studies suggest that buying hack stock
increases   a firm's stock price significantly even when it does change
the risk of the shares.

Buying back stock may push      up the price     even when there is no tax
saving because the firm                    people who arc willing to
                              is buying from
sell. These people are either neutral about the canpany or think it
is a poor investment.     In this sense, stock is being renDved from
uifrieridly hands. Having rrore of the stock remain in friendly hands
rry increase the price, at least temporarily.
                                        20


Buying back stock may also increase the ffrri's                hrgaining power     in
case    of a tender offer. Having a larger p::rc:L                of the stock in
friendly   herds should increase the prerniu                   cuid be needed to
make the tender offer successful.


VARIATIONS ON ThE PLAN


If the capital structure of the firm is changed, at's important is
that the firm have mare debt outstanding and less stock outstanding
than it would have had.

If the firm is issuing securities, it can use mare debt and less
coaiir'n stock than it would have used. If the firm is retiring
securities, it can retire mare CUaDfl                stock   and less debt than it
would have retired.

Issuing debt to       make an      investnent can be as effective a way            to
            the   plan as issuing    debt    to by beck ccrrrron   stock.
implement


The firm can even issue debt to boy shares of a nutual fund that
converts capital gains to dividend incai. The firm will owe taxes
                                                              tratch
on 15% of the mutual fund's dividends, bet this strategy will
mare closely the performance of the stocks sold in the pension fund.

Moreover, as noted above, the change            in   the firm's capital structure

is not the important        part    of the plan. The change in the pension
fund investment strategy is the important part.


If     the only change is selling stoks in the pension fiad and Luying
bonds with    the ircney,   the    present   value of   the plan will   be   about the

same.      The tax    savir; will be inlirect, in            the form of a tax    free
                     bands, rather than direct,
                                                             in the form of added
 investrrent in
 interest deductions.
                                            21
While the present value of the plan depends mainly on the change                    in
pension fund investments, the firm that o-nits              the capital structure
change may regret it. If stocks are switched to londs in the pension
fund, and the stock market takes off, the firm may wish it had waited
to make the change.

PUBLISHED PAPERS


Several published papers present ideas related to my plan.


Irwin Teppar and Robert Paul have a paper in the November—December,
1978 Harvard Pusiness Review called "How Much Funding for Your
Company' s Pension Plan?" They argue that speeding up contributions
to a pension plan saves taxes. They use examples in which the added
contributions are invested in bonds.


Myron Scholes has a paper in the Proceedinczs of the May, 1979 Scr.inar
on the Analysis of Security Prices called "Executive Compensation,
Pension Funding, Signalling and         Taxation." He sho's that a firm does
not gain from issuing its on stock to make contributions to a
pension plan that invests the ricney in other firms' stock.


Ronald Masulis has a forthcoming paper in the Journal of Financial
Economics called "The Effects of Capital Structure Change on Security
Prices: A Study of Exchange Offers." He finds that when firms offer
to exchange debt for stock, the stock price goes up an average of 1O7
when   the   offer is announced.


I have a paper in the Jarn..ia-ry/February, 1976 Financial Analysts
Journal      called "The Investment Policy Spectrum." It emphasizes the
fact that rrost of the risk in          a   defined benefit   plan's   pension fund
portfolio is borne by        the   stockholders of   the   sponsoring firm,   not   by
the beneficiaries.


William Sharpe has       a paper     in the June, 1976 Journal of Financial
Economics     called   "Corporate Pension Funding Policy." He points out
that if we      ignore tax   factors,   a firm's stockholders may not care how
the   pension fund investments are divided between bonds and stocks.
