                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TAXATION, PORTFOLIO CHOICE AND DEBT—EQUITY
              RATIOS: A GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL


                        Alan J. Auerbach

                         Mervyn A. King

                      Working Paper No. 546




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           August 1980




This paper was presented at the NBER's 1980 Summer Institute in
Taxation. This study was funded by NSF Grant No. SES 7914209. The
views expressed here are those of the authors and not necessarily
of the NSF or the NBER. We thank Fischer Black, Roger Cordon and
other participants in the NBER Summer Institute for helpful com-
ments and suggestions. None of them should be held responsible for
any errors that remain. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Taxation and project in Capital Formation.




                                                                 4
                                                          NBER Working Paper #546
                                                                  September, 1980




                 Taxation, Portfolio Choice and Debt—Equity Ratios:

                           A General Equilibrium Model




                                     ABSTRACT




     This paper explores the portfolio behavior of investors differing with

respect to both tax rates and risk—aversion, emphasizing the role of constraints

on individual and firm behavior in ensuring the existence of and characterizing

portfolio equilibrium.

     Under certain conditions on the securities available in the market, which

also are required for shareholders to be unanimous in supporting firm value

maximization, investors will be segmented by tax rate into two groups, one

specialized in equity and the other in debt. Though the relative wealths of

the two groups determines the aggregate debt—equity ratio, each firm will be

indifferent to its financial policy.




Alan .3. Auerbach                                    Mervyn A. King
National Bureau of Economic Research                 University of Birmingham
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                            Department of Economics
Cambridge, Massachusetts 01238                       P.O. Box 363
                                                     Birmingham, B15 2TT
(617) 868—3927                                       England

                                                     021.472 1301 x3427
                        Taxation, Portfolio Choice and Debt-Equity Ratios:

                                   A General Equilibrium Model+



                                  A.J. Auerbach* and M.A. King**



       1. Introduction


               Our aim in this paper is to determine under what conditions there exists

       an equilibrium aggregate debt-equity ratio, and, if such exists, to examine

       its dependence on the risk preferences and tax rates of the investors in the

      market. Miller (1977) has conjectured that even if no optimal debt-equity

      ratio exists for an individual firm, there will be an equilibrium aggregate

      debt-equity ratio which will equal the relative wealth levels of those with tat

      preferences for debt as opposed to equity. This is true, however, only in

      special cases, and we examine a more general model below. In particular, we

      shall highlight the critical role which constraints (on, for example, personal

      borrowing or short sales) play in the determination of the market equilibriumJ

      The role of constraints when the tax sysem is non—neutral has been discussed

      by Black (1971, 1973), King (1974,1977) and Auerbach (1979).


           *
            Assistant Professor of Economics, Harvard University and Research Associate,
      National Bureau of Economic Research.
          **
            Esmee Fairbairn Professor of Investment, University of Birmingham and
      Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research.

     'In a footnote in his paper, Miller (.      cit.)
                                                    alludes to the need for
some constraints but is not explicit about which consftaints are necessary, and
his argument relies more on the capitalization of tax differentials than the
role of constraints. In contrast, we shall argue that constraints are crucial.
                                  —2—




   The behaviour of the aggregate debt—equity ratio is important for the

incidence of a corporation tax because the effects of such a tax depend on

firms' financial policies, and on the change in the capital structure of

the corporate sector resulting from a change in the tax. There appear to

be very few econometric studies relating the aggregate debt-equity ratio to

personal and corporate tax rates. In a study for the U.K., King (1977,

chapter 7) found that an increase of one percentage point in the rate of

corporation tax would lead to an increase of 1.5 points in the debt-equity

ratio for the nonfinancial corporate sector. For the U.S., Gordon (1980)

found that an increase in the rate of corporate income tax of one point

would lead to a rise in the debt—equity ratio of 0.97 points. The results

presented here provide a theoretical rationale for this relationship.

     In Section 2 we present the basic model which adopts a simple mean—

variance framework. This allows us to compare our      results   with those of

the standard capital asset pricing model without taxes, and affords an

explicit solution for market value which illuminates the role of taxes in

the model. The importance of the assumption is that we are considering a

model in which, in the absence of taxes, a firm   is   unable by altering its

debt—equity ratio to affect the implicit prices of contingent commodities

faced by its owners. Hence when there are no taxes the Modigliani —Miller

theorem will hold.2 We then investigate the introduction of taxes into such

a world. If a firm may influence the implicit prices faced by its owners

even when there are no taxes, then the capital structure of individual firms




     2See the discussion in King (1977, chapter 5).
                                  —3—



will not be a matter of indifference and, in general, stockholders will

disagree over the choice of debt-equity ratio. In other words, the aim

here is to examine a model in which, if there were not taxes, both individual

and the aggregate debt-equity ratios would be a matter of complete indifference,

and we ask whether the existence of taxes leads to an equilibrium for either

the individual or aggregate debt-equity ratio.

     Taxes were introduced into the capital asset pricing model by Brennan

(1970) and Gordon and Bradford (1979). Our contribution is to model the

supply of corporate securities and to examine the interaction between demand

and supply in a general equilibrium framework in which the interest rate

is endogenous.

     Section 3 discusses the conditions under which an equilibrium debt-equity

ratio exists, and the optimal portfolios of different investors are examined

in Section 4. In Section 5 we show that, provided there exist constraints

of the appropriate type and there is a sufficiently large number of firms,

value maximization is an objective which would command the unanimous

support of the stockholders, and each firm would be indifferent as to

its debt—equity ratio. The Modigliani-Miller Theorem would hold even in a

world of distortionary taxes, but only if investors faced constraints.

Finally, we examine the optimal degree of specialization in portfolios by

pension funds and individual investors on their own account.
                                            —4—


2. The Model


          We shall consider a two—period model with M investors and N firms.

Each investor has an intial endowment of shares in firms, denoted by

  1
      •    We normalize such that


                                                     Vj                   (1)




          Firms are assumed to have made production and financial decisions

before trading in financial assets takes place. The value (V) of each

 firm is the sum of the debt (D) and equity CE) which it issues


          V.   = D.   +   E.                                              (2)
           1      1        1


          We   shall ignore the possibility of bankruptcy.3 The debt of all

firms is, therefore, riskless, and investors are indifferent as to which

firms' debt they hold. There are no bonds in the initial state, and the

proceeds of bond issues are returned to the initial stockholders. We

may write the budget constraint of investors as


          Dm +E' =         wm   =    m=l.   .   .M
                                                                          (3)



where Dm is investor m's holdings of debt, E'' is investor m's holding

of the equity of firm i =             and wm is investor's wealth.

          Investor preferences will be assumed to be characterized by a

utility function defined over the mean and variance of the terminal value

of his portfolio,



      3Eankruptcy is modelled in Auerbach and King (1979)and Strebel (1980); since
the probability of bankruptcy is endogenous it is very difficult to analyze
models of this type when there are many firms because the returns to each
 security are a truncated distribution.
                                              —5—



           =     U(m       (Gm)2)                                                     (4)



        If we denote by R the second—period return to corporate debt and by

 c tP ,
t ,        and t e, the tax rates on corporate income, personal interest income

and personal equity income respectively, the mean and variance of investor

portfolios are given by



         m =                             +
                 [Wm
                       —
                           E']R(l—tm)           'J(l—t)(l—t)                          (5)




        (111)2   =I         EE      cJ (l_t)2(l_tm)2                                  (6)




where          is the mean pre—tax return to firm      i   and C. .
                                                                 1J
                                                                      is   the covariance

of the returns to firms i and j.

      We have assumed here that investors face given tax rates which are

not a function of the level of income, and we shall discuss this further

in section 3. The tax on equity income represents an effective tax rate

based on the tax treatment of dividends and capital gains, and we shall

assume that


                                                                                      (7)



      In the absence of a satisfactory theory of dividend behavior it seems pre—

ferable to regard all equity income as being taxed at the rate te•

      As we shall see below, constraints on investors play an important

role in determining whether or not an equilibrium exists.                   There are two

sets of constraints which must be considered, those on investors and those

on firms.
                                   -6—



In turn, there are two sources of arbitrage which give rise to the need

for constraints. First, investors face different tax rates and have

different marginal rates of substitution between assets, Secondly, firms

and individuals have different tax rates producing an indentive to engage

in financial transactions to exploit this difference. The constraints

which we shall model will be the following. The first is a constraint on

personal borrowing, and for simplicity, we assume that investors may not

borrow at all.4


     m —              0                     Ym                          (8)




     Secondly, we shall suppose that investors are unable   to   sell equity

short, and we will apply this constraint to an investor's total holdings

of equity and not to holdings in individual firms.


     ET)0                                   Vm                          (9)




     Finally, we shall impose a constraint on firms such that they may not

sell either their own or other firms' equity short, nor may they hold

negative amounts of debt


     0     D.    V.                         Vi                          (10)
            1.    1


     If   we attach multipliers AT and A to the constraints (8) and (9)

respectively, then we may   form the Lagrangian



     4it is trivial to include a fixed positive borrowing limit for each
investor.
                                                                 —7—



              =   u(m              (cm)2) +
                                                   X(Wm_E) ÷ A                                      (11)




     Substituting (5) and (6) into (11), and assuming investors to be price-

takers, thea first—order conditiohs for utility maximization obtained by

differentiating with respect to each investor's holdings of equity in
                                                        5
each firm may be written as


        (u.RDJAm
         1
                 -
                      1
                                            3m
                                             1
                                               =                ) C..             V.
                                                                                    i,m
                                                                                                    (12)
                                                            E      1J



where
                               1

                  yinTIfl(1_t)



                  I       1+
     B
         in       I                R(l—t      m)
                                             p
                  I       mm2
                           (T           )
                                                   m2
                  L1                        (1—tn


                          U
         m=       —2                         where U, is the derivative of U with respect to the
                           1
                                             i argument.

                  (1tc) (1—t m)
     Tm =                                    e
                                                                which measures an investor's tax
                           (1—tm)
                                        p                       preference for equity rather than

                                                                debt (indifference implies Tm   1) -


        Am        A m -             A                       -
                      1                 2




     5me second—order conditions are satisfied provided U is a concave
function of the equity holdings and a suitable constraint qualification
is satisfied.
                                                —8—




If we sum    the   first order conditions over individual investors we obtain


     (p.—RDJA — RE.B           =   C.                                             (13)
       1  1       1                 1                       1


    where           A = yAm



                       =



                    C. =
                     1      .c..,
                            •J 1J
                                        the covariance of the returns to firm i with

                                        the   total returns in the economy.



If we now sum      over    firms we have


     (p—RD)A — REB = C                                                             (14)



              where


     p =


     D   =    D.


     E =


     C   =



This gives the market interest rate as


                     p-s
                       A                                                               (15)
                   1—fl (14)

The equilibrium interest rate is a function of the aggregate debt-equity

ratio unl?ss A =       8, a condition to which we return below.
                                               —9—



    From (13) we may solve for the equilibrium market value of each firm



    V.   = D.   + E
     1      1


          Alr
         =[
                r

                        R
                                C.
                                          A
                                     +D (l-)                            (16)




    Equation (16) is the capital asset pricing model adjusted for taxes

and heterogeneous investors. If A = B we obtain the usual valuation result

for a mean—variance model in that the value of the finn is simply the risk-

adjusted discounted flow of profits and is independent of its capital

structure. The necessary and sufficient condition for the value of a firm

to be independent of its debt-equity ratio is that A = B.6   This is also

the necessary and sufficient condition for the riskless interest rate to

be independent of the amount of debt in the economy. An examination of the

conditions under which A = B leads us into a discussion of the existence

of a market equilibrium.




     6                      .                        .            A
                                                                     which
                    .


      The derivative of market value with respect to debt is 1 —
reduces to the results of Modigliafli and Miller (1963) and Brennan (1970)
when there are no constraints and given their respective assumptions about
tax rates.
                                 —10—



3. Market Equilibrium


     Before trading takes place we suppose that firms announce both their

production plans and the amount of debt which they will issue.    Under what

conditions will an equilibrium exist, and when will there be unique market

values for firms which are independent of their debt-equity ratios?

     Consider, first, the case of perfect certainty (when C.. = 0   v.). It is

clear from (12) that in the absence of constraints individual excess demands for

securities are unbounded, and hence no equilibrium exists, except in the

special case where all investors have values of unity for the tax preference

variable Tm. This will occur with either a comprehensive income tax or

a comprehensive expenditure tax, but will not be true of any tax system

that discriminates between different types of income from capital. Even

if investors have identical values for Tm but these differ from unity, no

equilibrium is possible unless constraints are placed on firms to prevent

tax arbitrage between the personal and corporate sectors. In this case

the equilibrium would be for the corporate sector to be all debt or all

equity depending on whether T1 was less than or greater than unity,

respectively. One route by which values of Tm might be equalized would

be for individuals with above—average values of Tm   to   borrow from investors

with below—average values and, provided interest payments were tax—deductible,

to continue this process until marginal tax rates were equalized.7




     7When equity income is viewed more realistically as a combination
of dividends and capital gains then in a multi—period model the individual
who borrows from other individuals is not necessarily the investor with
the highest personal tax rate (this is analyzed in King, 1977, chapter 6).
                                 —11—



     There are, however, several objectives to this way of modelling

the equilibrium. First, it is rare for the marginal personal tax rate

to be a continuous function of taxable income, a property which is required

for the previous argument to hold. Secondly, some investors are "endowed"

with tax rates that are independent of the level of income; the obvious

example here is the existence of tax—exempt institutions. Thirdly, the

tax authorities will probably impose constraints to prevent the tax

avoidance which results from the creation of these personal loans.8 But

even if personal tax rates were to be equalized, only by chance would

this be at a value for the common Tm of unity. In general, the resulting

equilibrium would be one in which the corporate sector was all debt or

all equity.

     An interior equilibrium aggregate debt—equity ratio for the corporate

sector can be obtained only by imposing constraints on individual investors.

If short sale constraints are imposed on both debt and equity (i.e. lending

between individuals is prohibited) then those investors who wish to hold

debt will have to hold corporate debt. In equilibrium the aggregate cor-

porate sector debt-equity ratio will equal the ratio of the wealth of those

investors with a tax preference for debt (Tm C 1) to the wealth of those

with a tax preference for equity (T" >   1).   Note, however, that this re-

quires constraints to rule out personal borrowing. Where personal borrowing

is feasible it will in general be more profitable for highly taxed investors

to issue debt than for this to be done by corporations.




     8See King (1974, 1977)
                                           — 12 —



       Exactly      the same considerations carry over to a world of uncertainty.

We shall assume that each firm        is   "small" relative to the market so that

a firm is unable to affect the implicit prices (i.e. the individual valua-

tions) of consumption in each state of the world. With this assumption

investors will wish firms to maximize market value. From (16) it is clear

that   the optimal debt—equity ratio for a "small" firm is given by the
solution         to the equation


       —=
        dv.

        dD
                       )
                   (1— B                                                         (17)


       When there are no constraints on investors, each firm will be either
                                                       >
all    debt or all equity according to whether B < A, a condition which we

may interpret in terms of a "market" preference for debt or equity.9 As

in the case of certainty, the absence of constraints on investors leads

to an all debt or all equity equilibrium for the corporate sector.

        If we now impose constraints on investors then the value of B becomes

a function             of the endogenous multipliers corresponding to the con-

straints. when the constraints are binding an interior equilibrium will

exist in which A = B (provided the market contains some investors who have a

tax preference for equity and some with a tax preference for

debt). At this point there is an equilibrium aggregate

debt-equity ratio for the corporate sector, but each firm is indifferent

as to its own debt—equity ratio and market values are independent of debt—

equity ratios. The important point to note here is that two conditions are

required for the result. First, each firm must be small relative to the

market, and, secondly, constraints on individual investors are necessary

to produce an interior equilibrium for the corporate sector.




        9
            We   assume here constraints on firms to ensure existence of an equilibrium.
                                            —13—



4. Optimal Investor Portfolios


    Given the existence of a market equilibrium, we may use the individual

first—order conditions for utility maximization (12) to solve for the

optimal portfolio of each investor. The results may be seen as a general-

ization of the special case in which there are no taxes and a separation

theorem dictates that each investor holds the same "market" portfolio

of equities. When individuals possess different "tax preferences" for

debt and equity, just as when their expectations differ, optimal port-

folios will vary, but in a way which may be explained intuitively.

     Substituting (13) into (12), and using the fact that                =

we obtain


        n'!'C.. =   3m[Cl         —
                                      RD)(—        .)]
                                                                                 (18)



Stacking these conditions for each individual m yields:



            =
                Bm[r.4
                           +   - RID) (—.   - )]           V                     (19)



where

                  . .C1N                                                  Dl
          [c11.                             [nT          [ti1                            r1
                                 0m=               ;            ;   D=       :
                                                                                    1=
                                                                                    —
          CN1. .    .C                      [n
                                                                          D



Assuming the variance—covariance matrix r is of full rank, we can multiply
both sides of (19) by F1 to obtain the vector of individual m's demands

for equity:
                                              —14—




      n
       m=Bml
           f-+
                                       ,in
                      I'—l (ii— RD)(—.-—-—)]                                           (20)
               B                    B" B
                                  m
In the absence of taxes,
                                 Bm
                                      E 1 E
                                              B , so that individual m holds the same
fraction of each firm's equity, !_                   this   is the separation theorem alluded

to above.

      With taxes present, patterns of equity holdings will normally vary

across investors, although there are some special situations when the

separation theorem will still obtain. For example, if the ratio of mean

return received by equity, i — RD, relative to covariance with the

market, C, is some constant a for all firms, (20) reduces to



      nm =   Bm[! +
               B
                             -   A)].1                                                 (21)
                        Bm



It is interesting how (21) combines the results for investor equity demands

which derive from the simpler models in which either taxation or uncertainty

is ignored. The relative influence of the two terms in brackets on the

right—hand side of (21) depends on a, which measures how risky the market

is.   If the amount of undiversifiable risk is large, and                    small, then

demands approximately resemble those derived in the absence of taxes.

On the other hand, when risk is slight and a large, investors approach the

certainty outcome of being specialized in either equity or debt, according
                                                                10
to whether Tm is greater than or less than




                                      m
       To see this, recall that Tm = A except where investor in
      10                                                                          is   specialized
in one type of security.
                                         —15—




     The reason why individual portfolios will differ in the presence

of taxes may be understood by considering first the special case where

firm returns are independent (I' is diagonal), and (20) becomes:



     n=B[!+
      1  B                    i)(_)]
                                  B" B
                                                            V
                                                             i,m
                                                                                   (22)




Consider an individual who holds both debt and equity in equilibrium and

is therefore not constrained. For this investor, T1 = —Am , and
                                                                (22) says
                                                       Bm
that taxes will lead him to concentrate his holdings more in those equities
                 1'       -                         A
                      1
which are safe                1 is large) if Tm >       ,   or   those which are risky

(-        is small) if Tm <          .   Those with a tax preference for equity

wish to hold as much equity as possible for tax purposes. To do so

without incurring e]tcessive risk, they will tend to hold more of their

portfolio in low risk stocks. The opposite is true of individuals for

whom debt is superior for tax reasons. These investors will want to hold

as little equity as possible to obtain the "desired degree" of risk, and

will do so by holding small amounts of risky firms.

     This result carries over to the general case where firm returns are

not independent. Figure 1 depicts the opportunity set of a typical

investor in terms of available combinations of mean m and standard

deviation, 0m The position of the efficient frontier of equity combina-

tions, labelled 2., depends on the equity tax rate tern.              The available

riskless return is RWm(l_tm), and the corresponding optimal equity

portfolio is at point x. The investor will hold some combination of

this portfolio and riskless debt. An increase in the tax rate on interest
                                 —16—




                              Figure 1



           The Effect of Taxes on the Individual Portfolio




                                  x



                          y




RWm(l_m)
      p



 m    m'
Rw (1-t
      p
                                  2.




                                                     m
                                                 a
                                         —17—



income to tm changes the composition of the optimal portfolio to

at point y, where both mean and standard deviation are lower, but .k_
                 m                                                        a
and hence    u
                     ,   is   higher than at point x. The shift of the investor's
            (a2)m
tax preference toward equity caused by the increase in             leads to a

safer equity portfolio. It is important to note that this alone does

not imply that the investor will bear less risk, because it says nothing

about the effect of the change in m on the allocation of wealth between

debt and equity.

     One final observation to be made concerns the question of which

investors will be constrained in their portfolio decisions by the short-

sale and borrowing restrictions we have assumed to exist. As is evident

from (20), whether an individual is constrained in equity or debt depends

not only on his tax preference, but also on his degree of risk aversion,

as measured by y. Investors might be observed specialized in equity,

for example, who prefer debt for tax purposes but are nearly risk-neutral.

Thus, the knowledge of tax preferences alone will be insufficient to identify

the groups               of investors who will specialize in either form of

security, and hence to determine the equilibrium aggregate debt-equity

ratio.
                                    —18—




5. objectives of the Fin


     Thus far, we have concentrated on the behavior of individual investors

and the detenination of market equilibrium, taking as given the real and

financial decisions of fins. This section considers the question of how

fins should behave in their choice of financial policy.

     In the absence of taxes, the ModiglianS-Miller Theorem dictates that

fin financial policy is irrelevant, having no effect on investor utilities

at all. This will not generally be true with taxes present, but there

may still exist conditions under which a fin's stockholders are unanimous

in their agreement that the fin should choose its debt-equity ratio to

maximize its total market value.

     To explore this issue, we consider the effect on the utility of a

typical investor of an increase in the debt issued by firm k. First,

note that the expression for the mean return m, in (5), may be rewritten
                         m      m
using the definitions of T and n. as


      m =                                        -
                         ÷   nT((p. -
                                         Rn)Tm                             (23)
            (l_tm)[RWm


Using (3), the definition of wm, and (13), we obtain



      m =
          (l—tm)   [R         +         nTc. +   (rn   -   1)R   '   Et]   (24)




Differentiation of Um(Pm, (am)2) with respect to Dk under the assumption

that fin k is too small to influence the market parameters R, A and B,

yields (from the expressions for (Cm)2, V, and pm; (6), (16) and (24),

respectively)
                                                                          —19—




                                                                                                                              m
                                                                      m        dflm                                  d('E)
     dutm
             =
                          m           -m A                                     _J:c                 ('-1)R
                 uT(lt [Rnk(l))
                                                           +A
                                                                           j
                                                                               dD i k
                                                                                               +
                                                                                                     A                   dD
                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                                   I




                                                                                              m
                                                                                                       m
                          + U[(Tm)2(l_m)2.2 —                                                                                                                (25)
                                                                  P                                    jij

                                                                                          d(ET)                            dn
                                                                                                                               m                       m
                                                                                                                                                      dn
             =
                      uc1-t;){R[c14                               +       (!Tm_1)                          }   + Tm[      C_2_                             nTc]}
                                                                                              dDk                         i k A ij


By combining conditions (12) and (13), we are able to rewrite (25) as


                                                                                    d(Em)                                                  m
                                                                                        i                                 m            dn.
     dUm =
    a—
                           m
                 uR(l—t) {nk(l—-)
                                      -fl            A
                                                              +       (Tm_1)            d -
                                                                                    ______                       B - B
                                                                                                               Tm(       )EaH            1
                                                                                                                                                             (26)




But, since

                      m d(Em)
                           •i                            dE
                 dn
                      1       i
                                            -r Uk "im =                             i                          Am
     1
          i dD
              k
                          dD
                                  k              i
                                                                                   d.Dk
                                                                                                   +
                                                                                                           (g)n                                              (27)




equation     (26) simplifies to




         m                                                    m                                    d(YET)                      m               m
     dU      =
               m
                                      [     (1       - A)+(TmE—                           -         1
                                                                                               1) ______             +   TflB(AA)rflJ                        (28)
                  u1Rcl-t;)                                                        Am                  dDk                 Am B Em k

                                                                                                                                       m
From the definition of T , A
                                            m m                   and B ,
                                                                               m
                                                                                    it is clear that (Tm B                                 -   1) =
                                                                                                                                  Am
unless individual m is constrained. Moreover, if the constraint on short
                                                                   m
sales of equity is in force, E. = 0.                                                    Thus, the second term in brackets
                                                                      1
                                                              i
                                   —20—




in (28) is non—zero only if 'E. = wm, and we may thus combine the first two

terms in (28) to obtain




        =
            UTRU_t)Tm
                        —[(l -           +
                                             ( - )nJ                                (29)




Note that with no taxes or binding constraints, this expression is uniformly

zero, in accordance with the Modigliani—Miller Theorem.

     Expression (29) says that a firm's financial policy affects individual

utility in two ways. The first represents the wealth effect of a change
                    dvk
in firm value (since — = 1   -
                                 ). Were this the only term, all shareholders
                     dDk
would agree, on the objective of value maximization. As the following

argument demonstrates, the second term represents the effect of the firm's

debt policy on the opportunity set available to the investor. Suppose that

individual m plans to purchase a certain amount of equity in firm k, and

the firm increases its issuance of debt. To undo the effect of this decision,

the investor can purchase some of this debt, in the same proportion to his

equity in the firm as the total issue of debt has to the firm's equity. This

has two effects on the individual's welfare (aside from the wealth effect

discussed above). First, it raises the total cost of his holdings in the
                                 dv,..
firm at a rate proportional to — m = (1         -   Am        Second, it changes the
                                nk                  )nk   .



form in which the firm's returns flow to the investor, switching a fraction

from debt to equity. In the absence of constraints, this would increase

taxes ata rate proportional to (Tml)n. With constraints, the "preference"

for equity is    (see (12)), and this expression becomes (i           - 1)n   .   Thus,

the loss to the investor involved in undoing the firm's leverage change in
                                          —21—




the way described is proportional to (1 -
                                                 -)n + (1- - l)n =   (— — -)n
which is the second term in brackets in expression (29). This term will

uniformly disappear only if the constraints Am on each investor m take on

values which make        =
                             B
                    B
     Suppose that this condition were satisfied, and that value maximization

would therefore be optimal. As we showed in section 3, value maximization

would lead to an interior equilibrium in which A=B. Hence Am=Bm. In turn,

this implies that investors who have a tax preference for equity (Tm>l) must

have xm<o and hence be specialized in equity, and investors with a tax prefer-

ence for debt (Tm<l) must have Am>O and be specialized in debt. This outcome

would lead to the equilibrium characterized by Miller (1977), in which all

investors are specialized in either debt or equity according to their tax

rates, each firm would be indifferent to its own debt-equity ratio, and the

corporate sector debt—equity ratio would equal the ratio of the wealth of

those investors with a tax preference for debt to the wealth of those investors

with a tax preference for equity.
                                                           Am A
     The next step is to discover the conditions under which — = — .         From
                                                             m   B
                                                           B
equation (19) we know that this can occur only if


either (1)   F is of full rank; hence, F1 exists and investors hold the market

             portfolio, with individual m holding a fraction         of each firm's

             equity,

    or (2)   F is not of full rank; there exists one firm which is perfectly

             correlated in its underlying returns with some linear combination

             of other firms.


It is easy to see that outcome (1) is impossible for the market as a whole.

It implies that         = 0 for individuals specialized in debt, and since
                                     —22—



—
Em =Am
B
    — by assumption, it follows that Am = 0 for all such individuals.
     A
This will be true only if 1m =       coincidentally.
     Thus, the segmented equilibrium in which value-maximization is

necessarily optimal can occur only if firms are small and there is a

redundant firm. Moreover, the existence of such a firm is also a sufficient

condition for such an equilibrium to obtain. This can be shown by examining

condition (18).   It is easiest to imagine that there are two firms with

identical returns, although this is in no way restrictive. In this case,

the left—hand side of (18) is the same for each firm. For the right-hand
                                    Am A
sides to be equal also requires that — = —, assuming the debt levels of
                                         B
                                            Em
the firms to be different. This has a straightforward explanation. Without

the existence of constraints, these firms would present the opportunity for

riskless tax arbitrage. By buying equity in the firm which is less highly

levered, and selling short the other firm's equity, each investor can create

a safe composite asset which is taxed at equity rates and costs 4)          times
the cost of debt yielding the same gross return. Thus! by borrowing one

unit of debt and purchasing       units of this safe equity, investor m can

generate a safe return after—tax of R(l_tc) (1_tern) —                =
                                                            R(1_tm)       R(1_tm) (Tm_l).
Thus, if Tm >     , investor   m would engage in positive arnounts of this trans-

action; conversely, for Tm <       , the    arbitrage could be accomplished by

selling the safe equity short to purchase debt. The presence of constraints

prevents these transactions from occurring without bound, but all investors

will engage in them until a constraint is reached, unless Tm =            and they

are indifferent. This is because any interior position can be improved upon
                                  —23—



by simply trading one safe asset for another without in any way affecting

 the portfolio's risk characteristics. Further, because this arbitrage

 incurs no other costs, the shadow price of the constraint which prevents

 it must fully offset its arbitrage value; that is,        must equal B
                                                      Bm
     The "Miller Equilibrium" thus requires that there exist a perfect

 equity substitute for debt. In a more general model, with debt being risky

 due to bankruptcy or other causes, the corresponding requirement would be

 that there exist an equity substitute for each form of debt. This makes

 clearer why the segmented equilibrium so resembles the outcome when there

 is no risk at all or individuals are risk—neutral: each investor's decision

 is now decomposable into two parts-—first, decide on the optimal portfolio,

 then decide how it shall be taxed.

     One final point to be made here concerns the exact form of the constraints

 chosen. It is essential to recognize the importance of the symmetry between

 the restrictions on borrowing and those on short sales. Had we instead

 imposed restrictions on short sales of individual firms, as might seem more

plausible, it is clear that even a singular variance—covariance matrix for the

 underlying returns is not sufficient to ensure that value maximization (and

hence a segmented equilibrium) is optimal. This is because the argument we used

above to show sufficiency required the investors to engage in short sales of

the equity of some firms.11 When the constraints are imposed on short sales of

individual firms' equity, the conditions for value maximization become more

stringent. The basic condition is that investors must be able to obtain their



       Problems would arise also if the tax treatment of short sales were not
the mirror image of the treatment of positive holdings.
                                       — 24 —




desired   pattern of returns across states of the world in whichever form is

preferred for tax purposes, debt or equity. If holdings of each security must

be nonnegative, then in general we require not just that the set of underlying

returns to firms span all states of the world (and that each firm is small),

but that the returns to equity and the returns to debt both span all possible

states. Essentially, this means that for each "real" firm there are two firms

identical in all respects, except that one is all equity and the other all

debt.

        Since this is a stringent requirement, it is clear that the plausibility

both of the equilibrium described by Miller and of the assumption of value

maximization depends a great deal on which constraints are thought to be relevant.
                                      —25—




6. portfolio Behavior of Pension Funds


     In the model explored above the factor which determined whether or not an

equilibrium existed for an interior value of the corporate sector debt-equity

ratio was the absolute tax advantage of different securities for different

investors. In this model if all investors have an absolute tax preference for

debt, say, the aggregate debt—equity ratio is infinite. We may now extend the

model to the case where an investor's overall portfolio consists of two separate

funds taxed at different rates. In this case the equilibrium depends upon

comparative tax advantages. The obvious example here is an investor who holds

a certain fraction of his wealth directly on his own account, and the remainder

is invested on his behalf in a pension fund which is tax-exempt. Even if the

investor has an absolute tax preference for debt, if his personal tax rate is

positive he will have a comparative advantage in equity.

     Consider, first, the case of a defined contribution pension plan so that

the prospective pension depends entirely on the performance of the fund. Then

the investor will be concerned solely with the performance of the total portfolio

consisting of the securities owned on his own account and those owned by the

pension fund. Suppose, further, that the relative sizes of the two accounts

are fixed exogenously (by law, say, which limits the size of contributions to a

tax-exempt fund). There exists the possibility of infinite arbitrage between the

two accounts to exploit the comparative tax advantages of the two accounts. No

equilibrium exists unless constraints are imposed. Assume that constraints are

imposed on short sales (of both equity and debt) as in our previous model.

Then it is trivial to show that the optimal portfolio is to let the pension

fund own the debt which the investor wishes to hold and to purchase equity on
                                      —26—




his own account.12 If the relative amounts of debt and equity which he wishes

to own are exactly equal to the fixed relative wealths of the two accounts,

then both investors on their own account and pension funds will be completely

specialized. In general, however, one of the accounts will be specialized and

the other will contain both debt and equity)3 If there are no constraints on

borrowing, but only on short sales of equity then pension funds will always be

all—debt. This is because if a pension fund contained some equity, the indivi-

dual investor would prefer to switch the equity from the fund to his own account,

borrowing to finance the purchase. His liability on the loan would be offset

by the extra holding of debt which the fund would purchase out of the proceeds

of selling the equity. The capital structure of the total portfolio would be

unaffected by the switch but the tax burden on the returns would be less. Again

we see the critical role played by constraints. Some constraints are necessary

for existence; constraints only on short sales of equity lead to pension funds

being completely specialized in debt; constraints on short sales of both debt

and equity result in one of the accounts being specialized but, in general,

this may be either the pension fund (in debt) or the investor's own-account (in

equity). It is clear that if individuals do not face borrowing constraints we

would expect to find all investments in defined contribution pension plans



     12The reader may easily see this from the appropriately revised formula-
tions of the budget set and first—order conditions in (5) , (6), and (12).

           the conditions required for firms to seek value maximization are
satisfied, then it is clear that pension and personal accounts will each
specialize in debt or equity according to their own absolute tax preferences.
Thus, the pension fund will always specialize in deb, and the individual will
hold only equity or only debt according to whether T is greater than or less
than one. This result is thus a special case of the general findings just
discussed.
                                      —27—




(such as TIAA-CREF, Keogh Plans or IRA's) in debt.14 Since discussion with our

colleagues suggests this is not the case, there is an interesting puzzle to

resolve about the investment strategy of pension funds.

     So far we have assumed that the proportions of total wealth held directly

and in pension funds were given exogenously. If individuals are free to allocate

their wealth between the two accounts then, assuming that sufficient constraints

exist to ensure the existence of equilibrium, they will exploit the absolute

tax advantage of tax-exempt funds and put all their wealth in pension funds.

In practice, of course, our two—period model does not capture the fact that pen-

sion wealth is tied up until retirement and there will be an upper limit on the

proportion of wealth investors choose to put into such funds.

    The above argument refers to tax—exempt funds from which the investor will

benefit directly. But many pension plans are defined benefit plans, and the

performance of the fund affects not prospective pension recipients but the

owners of the liability to pay future pensions, usually stockholders of the

company offering the pension plan. In this case, the analogue with our previous

model is that the company decides how much to put into its pension fund (the

degree of funding) and the portfolio strategy of the fund and on its own account

(i.e., its own debt-equity ratio). Exactly the same arguments as we used before

apply here, the only difference being that the investor is now the company and

the portfolio consists of the assets of the company and its unfunded pension

liability (which is equal to gross pension liabilities less the assets of the

pension fund). This case has been discussed by Black (1980) and Tepper (1980).



     14Assuming that interest payments on personal borrowing are tax—deductible.
                                      —28—



The comparative tax advantage is that the company swuld hold equity while the

pension fund should hold debt. If the pension fund holds equity the company

would prefer the fund to sell the equity and purchase debt. This would reduce

the implicit riskiness of the unfunded liability thus allowing the company to

issue more debt on its own account leaving the capital structire of the company

(including unfunded liabilities) unchangtl. The tax saving from issuing more

debt is a pure arbitrage profit. Clearly, constraints on short sales of equity

by the pension fund are necessary for existence of an equilibrium and since

companies are allowed to borrow the resulting equilibrium is one in which pension

funds are completely specialized in debt. This result for defined benefit

plans is exactly analogous to the case of defined contribution plans discussed

above. The absolute tax advantage would suggest that, ceteris paribus, compan-

ies would choose to fully fund their pension schemes.
                                      —29—



7. conclusions


     We have shown that in a world in which investors face different tax rates,

no equilibrium exists unless constraints are imposed. The exact nature of those

constraints will have a critical bearing on the nature of the equilibrium and

should therefore be modelled explicitly. In section 5 we showed that, given

certain conditions on the securities available in the market, investors will

be unanimous in supporting value maximization and firms will be indifferent as

to their choice of debt—equity ratio. When this is the case the equilibrium

will be segmented, investors will be completely specialized, and the aggregate

debt-equity ratio will equal the ratio of the wealth of those who, for tax

reasons, prefer debt to the wealth of those who prefer equity. But when the

conditions do not hold, value maximization is no longer the unambiguous objec-

tive of the firm, and investors will in general hold both debt and equity. It

is difficult to reconcile value maximization with the existence of portfolios

which contain both debt and equity.

     Finally, we may note that for the Modigliani—Miller Theorem to hold in a

world without taxes, short sales of debt and equity must be allowed, whereas,

once we allow for taxes, constraints are essential for an equilibrium to exist

and indeed it is the constraints which enable an equilibrium to be reached in

which firms are indifferent as to their choice of debt-equity ratio.
                                     —30—


References


Auerbach, A.J., 1979, "wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quarterly

     Journal of Economics, August, pp. 433-446.

Auerbach, A.J. and M.A. King, 1979, "Corporate Financial Policy, Taxes and

     Uncertainty: An Integration," Harvard Institute of Economic Research

     Working Paper #690, March.

Black, F., 1971, "Taxes and Capital Market Equilibrium, "Sloan School of Man-

     agement, M.I.T., mimeo.

_________ 1973, "Taxes and Capital Market Equilibrium Under Uncertainty,"
     Sloan School of Management, M.I.T., mimeo.

_________ 1980, "Pension Funds and Capital Structure," Slaon School of Man-
     agement, M.I.T., mimeo.

Brennan, M.J., 1970, "Taxes, Market Valuation and Corporate Financial Policy,"

     National Tax Journal, December, pp. 417—427.

Gordon, R.H., 1980, "Investment, Inflation and Taxation," mimeo.

Gordon, R.H. and D. Bradford, 1979, "Taxation and the Stock Market Valuation

     of Capital Gains and Dividends: Theory and Empirical Results," NBER

     working Paper #409, November.

King, M.A., 1974, "Taxation and the Cost of Capital," Review of Economic Studies,

     January, pp. 21-35.

_________ 1977, Public Policy and the Corporation, Chapman and Hall, London.
Miller, N.H., 1977, "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance, May, pp. 261-275.

Modigliani, F. and N.H. Miller, 1963, "Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of

     Capital: A Correction," merican Economic eview, June, pp. 433-443.

Strebel, P., 1980, "Systematically Risky Debt, Taxes and Optimal Capital

     Structure," School of Management, SONY Binghampton, mimeo.
                                       —31—



Tepper, I., 1980, "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy," paper presented to

     the NEER Suxniner Institute, Cambridge, Ma.
</ref_section>
