NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION AND THE TAX TREATMENT
OF FIRM BEHAVIOR

Alan J. Auerbach

Working Paper No. 547

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 t4assachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
September 1980

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Capital Formation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #547
September, 1980

Inflation and the Tax Treatment of Firm Behavior

ABSTRACT

Because the tax system in the U.S. is not price-level indexed, the tax
treatment of the corporation depends on the inflation rate.

These effects of

inflation are particularly complicated because corporate and personal income
are taxed independently, and there are different ways of transferring income
from the corporation to the individual.
This paper analyzes the influence of inflation on the corporation's choice
of asset durability, asset holding period, debt-equity ratio and investment
scale, under a simplified version of the current U.S. tax law.

Alan J. Auerbach
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts
(617) 868-3927

In the past decade, economists have begun to realize that inflation, even
when fully anticipated, constitutes a great deal more than a tax on money
balances.

The primary reason for inflation's wider impact is the existence

of a tax system designed with stable prices in mind.

This paper offers a

br~ef

summary of the effects of inflation on the tax treatment of the firm, focusing
on four important decisions the firm makes:

the scale of investment, the

method of finance, the durability of assets used in production, and the holding
period of these assets.
There are a number of interesting and related issues which cannot be
covered in a paper of this length.

As we will be considering inflation that

is bqth uniform and fully anticipated, 'questions conCerning the behavior of the
firm in response to uncertainty about inflation, or to a concommitant change
in relative prices, will not arise.

I.

The Model
We consider a simple model of a corporation which uses a single type of

capital good in producing one type of output.
The firm seeks to maximize the wealth of its shareholders, who discount
after-tax cash flows at rate e

and are subject to personal taxes on dividends at

rate 8, and capital gains, at an accrual-equivalent rate c.
taxes at rate

T

The firm pays

on corporate profits, which are calculated by deducting interest

payments and depreciation allowances from gross cash flows.

The nominal

interest rate is i, and b is the fraction of capital structure that

the firm

chooses to devote to debt.
All capital goods are assumed to have service patterns which decline
exponentially; the rate of decay, 0, is indicative of how durable the asset

- 2 -

is.

The price, relative to that of output sold concurrently, of a unit of

capital of type a yielding a certain standard level of capital services is
q(a).

All prices inflate at rate rr.

As the purpose of this paper is to focus

on the specific impact of inflation, we shall consider the simple case in which
depreciation allowances accorded assets would reflect actual economic depreciation in the absence of inflation, but are based on historic cost.

This implies

that the nominal depreciation allowance received by an asset of age t and type
o is oe

-at

times

its original purchase price.

We also omit the investment tax

credit in the interest of simplicity.
Firms not only choose the durability of the assets used, but the length
of time, T, that they are held before being sold and replaced.

Upon such

resale, firms are taxed at rate Y<T on the difference between sale price and
basis (the nominal value of remaining depreciation deductions).
As shown in the appendix, the firm's optimal behavior may be viewed as a
two-stage process.

In the first stage, it chooses the decay rate, 0, the

holding period T, and the debt-value ratio, b, to minimize the "user cost ll
of capital, which is the shadow rental price of capital goods.

In the second

stage, the firm invests until the marginal product of capital goods equals this
minimized cost.

(1)

c

For given values of

o~

T and b, the user cost is

q(o)(p+a)
-rrT
e-(P+o)T
[(l-TZ) + (Y-TZ) (l-e
)(
-(P+o)T)]
(l-T)
l~e

= -

where

(2)

p

bi(l-T) (1-8)+(1-b)e
- rr
b(1-8)+(1-b) (l-c)

may be interpreted as the real after-tax cost of funds to the firm and

- 3 -

z

(3)

=

is the present value of depreciation allowances accruing to an initial investment of one dollar which is never resold (discounted at the nominal discount
rate p+TI because allowances are in nominal terms).

To get an intuitive sense

of what p represents, note that when b=l, p=i(l-T)-rr, the interest rate net of
e
tax deductions and inflation; when b=O, p =---rr.
l-c

Equation (1) differs from the standard formula for user cost because it
explicitly accounts for the tax treatment of the disposal of assets by resale.
It reduces to the basic formula when T =

II.

00.

The Effects of Inflation
A.

Asset Holding Period

In a more general model than that considered here, firms might find it
optimal to sell and replace assets of a certain vintage, rather than use them
until fully exhausted, even in a world without taxes.

In the current model,

all assets are identical in productive characteristics, so such behavior could
have no real consequences.
However, the introduction of taxes may cause assets identical in productive characteristics to differ in another sense.

If depreciation allowances

are accelerated, an asset declines in value faster than would be dictated by
its decline in productivity alone.
"assets":

one

This is because it is now really two

that produces capital services, and one that

"produces"

depreciation deductions, the second declining in value more rapidly than the
first.

However, if the asset is sold, under current

allowances

that remain are not transferred.

u.s.

law the depreciation

Rather, the sale price is used

- 4 -

as a new basis for depreciation deductions.

Thus, if the depreciation schedule

is accelerated, the asset transfer will increase the value of remaining deductions and generate an increase in the value of the asset.

This is countered

by the fact that the seller must pay a tax at rate y on the difference between
sale price and basis (the nominal value of remaining depreciation allowances).
The rate y simply equals L for equipment, but for structures is
actually a weighted average of the ordinary corporate rate and
the lower corporate capital gains rate; the ordinary rate is applied only to
the amount by which the asset's basis falls short of ,that which would have
obtained had straight-line tax depreciation been used.

(This practiCe is

technically referred to as the "recapture" of "excess" depreciation, though
such a designation is rather inappropriate.)

Imagining a firm selling the

asset to itself, we can see that it must weigh the increased value of depreciation allowances against the tax liability incurred on transfer.
When there is economic depreciation of assets, as we have assumed in our
analysis, such a distortion disappears; basis and sale price would be identical
and turnover would have no real impact on the firm.

However, inflation once

again introduces the same divergence caused by accelerated depreciation.
Historic cost depreciation implies that turnover provides a step-up in basis,
generating both an increase in the value of future depreciation deductions and
an immediate tax liability.
This effect is represented by the second term in brackets in the cost of
capital expression in equation (1).

This term increases or decreases with T

according to whether the turnover tax y is less than or greater than the present
value of tax deductions.
L,

Since,

for structures,

currently .46, for small values of T, and

Y is approximately equal to

approximately equal to the cor-

porate capital gains rate, currently .28, for T large (because the fraction of
sale price less basis "recaptured" declines over time), the optimal holding

- 5 -

period T, with positive inflation, will be zero, infinite, or somewhere in
<

>

between according to whether z - 1, z - .28/.46 or 1 > z > .28/.46.

The first

condition is never met, and the second requires that 0 < (p~)x(.28/.l8).

For a

nominal discount rate of .10, this critical value of 0 is .156, much higher than the
rate of depreciation for any general category of structures.

Since y=T for equip·-

ment, an optimal holding period less than infinity never obtains.

Thus, for

most assets, inflation will encourage holding assets, despite their inflationeroded depreciation allowances, rather than replacing them.

B.

Debt-Equity Ratio
As the Modigliani-Miller Theorem shows, the choice of debt-equity ratio is

of no consequence in a taxless world under a variety of circumstances, and debt
dominates equity with a corporate tax but no personal taxes.

However, in reality,

holders of debt and equity pay taxes, too, and because of the favorable tax
treatment of capital gains, the personal tax rate on debt income is higher for
any given individual than the tax on equity income.

Thus, the choice between

debt and equity depends on the relative magnitudes of the corporate tax rate, T,
the capital gains rate, c, and the personal tax rate, 6.

As discussed in an

earlier paper (author, 1979b), the debt-equity choice is knife-edged if all investors possess the same tax rates, even in the presence of short sale constraints
on individuals.

However, with progressive taxes, an interior solution is possi-

ble in which firms are indifferent between debt and equity and individuals are
specialized in clienteles.
To examine the effect of inflation on the debt-equity decision, we rewrite
equation (2) by replacing i and e with the real, after-tax returns to holders of
equity and debt, eN

= e-n, and iN

=

i(1-6')-n, where 6' is the personal tax rate

of those who hold debt, and not necessarily equal to 6.

(4)

P

=

[b(1-6)+(1-b)(1-c)]

-1

Equation (2) becomes:

1-6
1-6
{[biN(l-T) (1-6 ,)+(1-b)e ]+TI[b(1_6 ,) (6'-T)+(1-b)c]}

N

- 6 For given underlying real rates of return eN and iN' inflation influences
the real cost of funds

p

in three ways, depicted in the term multiplying

First, corporations can deduct at rate

T

in (4).

TI

the inflation premium component of the

nominal interest rate; second, bondholders must pay tax at rate

e' on the same amount.

Thus, for iN given, debt becomes cheaper to the firm as inflation increases if

T>e', and more expensive if T<e'.

Although T is directly observable, e' is not,

because individual tax rates differ; estimates of

e'

vary considerably.

From a

comparison of returns on tax-exempt and taxable long-term debt, Roger Gordon and
Burton Ma1kie1 estimate

e'

to have been approximately 22.5 percent in 1978.

flow of funds data to identify holders of debt and calculate

e'

Using

directly, Martin

Feldstein and Lawrence Summers arrive at a value of 42 percent for 1977.

It is

thus unclear to what extent inflation reduces the effective tax rate on debt, if
at all, though it seems likely that no appreciable additional tax burden is
introduced.
The final influence of inflation on
rather than real capital gains.

p

is through the taxation of nominal

Here, there is no question about the direction

of the effect; for eN given, equity becomes more expensive.

Estimates of c, like

those of e', are not very accurate, though c may very well be under 10 percent,
as suggested by Martin Bailey.

(Remember that c is the accrual-equivalent of

the tax rate on realizations.)

Thus, for given values of eN and iN' the likely

effect of inflation is to make debt a cheaper source of finance, and equity more
expensive, encouraging greater use of the former.

Of course, the general equil-

ibrium effect of inflation on b is more complicated, for it must also depend on
the behavior of eN and iN.
C.

Choice of Asset Life
Assuming the choice of asset durability to be among values of 0 in the

"normal" range where the optimal holding period T is infinite, the cost of capital

- 7 -

for given band 0 may be written more simply as

(5)

c

= q~~~;~+O)

(l-Tz)

= q(o) [1~T

+ 0 +

~:~]

Expression (5) shows that the user cost per dollar of capital consists of three
terms: the gross of tax real firm discount rate, the rate of asset decay, and the
rate of decline due to inflation in the value of the nominally denominated "asset"
representing the present value of the stream of depreciation allowances.
Perhaps a commonly-held belief is that this "inflation tax" on depreciation
allowances weighs more heavily on longer-lived assets which have to wait longer
to collect their depreciation allowances.

This view is incorrect (author, 1979a).

For any given value of P, the required internal rate 'of return before taxes on an
asset of type 0 is
(6)

\!

(0)

= c(o)
q(o)

_ 0

=

(P+T'ITz)

I

(1-T)

It is evident that while inflation raises

t~is

rate for all values of 0, the rate

of change increases monotonically with 0; the size of the inflation tax declines
with asset durability.
It is important to realize that just as the increase in the tax burden on
equity relative to debt does not necessarily imply that inflation will lead to
increased leverage in a full general equilibrium model, the heavier rate of tax
on short-lived assets needn't imply that a smaller value of 0 will result from
inflation.

The ultimate answer depends on the behavior of the real after-tax

return p.

If p is fixed, there are two offsetting effects which determine the

optimal o.

The relatively higher tax rate on

choice of a small value of o.

shor~-lived

assets will favor the

However, the general increase in all tax rates,

with the resulting higher before-tax rate of return, favors the choice of shortlived assets with large values of o.

As has been pointed out by Richard Kopcke,

the total effect on the choice of 0 is ambiguous, as can be seen from considering

- 8 -

the effect of

~

on the cost of capital.

On the other hand, if p decreases with

the increase in inflation, as Patric Hendershott has suggested, this second effect
favoring short-lived investment is lessened.
D.

Investment Scale
The scale of investment depends on the cost of capital.

If we hold constant

the underlying rates of return to investors, eN and iN' and the other decision
variables of the firm, b, 0 and T, then the likely effect of inflation, as discussed
by Feldstein and Summers, will be an increase in user cost and a drag on investment.

The effect on p will be ambiguous but small relative to the increase in

the inflation tax on depreciation allowances.

For example, for representative

values of the relevant parameters (8=.4, 8'=.3,T=.46, c=.l, T=oo, b=.3, 0=.1,
p=.04 and

~=.06)

while

increases by

T~Z

an increase in the rate of inflation of

/::;.~

raises p by

.036/::;'~"

.16l/::;.~.

However two important qualifications are necessary.

First, if the real

after-tax rates of return eN and iN fall as a result of inflation, as some theory
and evidence suggests, p will increase less (or decrease more) and so will user
cost, than has been proposed.

Moreover, to the extent that firms can alter their

debt-equity ratio and choice of asset durability, this must also diminish the
increase in user cost.

The answer to how inflation affects the scale of investment

thus depends in part on a number of empirical magnitudes about which more information should be acquired.

- 9 -

Appendix - The Firm's Optimizing Behavior
We assume the firm produces output with the concave production function
F(K), where K is the capital stock on hand.

The firm seeks to maximize the

wealth of its owners as represented by the present value of net cash flows, discounted at the equity rate e.

As demonstrated in an earlier paper (author, 1979b),

this is equivalent to choosing b to minimize P (as presented in equation (2) in
the text), and then maximizing the present value, calculated with discount rate
P+TI, of flows to the firm before interest payments and debt issues.

Letting It

be the physical investment in capital at time t, this present value is:

(AI)

v

where x is the present value of depreciation allowances times
tax payments per dollar of investment.

T

plus turnover

If each asset is turned over every T

years, the present value of depreciation deductions it receives per initial
dollar is

(A2)

T

Jo

e

-(P+TI)t~

ue

-ot d

+

t

e

-PTJ2T ~(P+TI)(t-T)~ -ot
+
d t .~.
T e
ue

=

l_e-(P+TI+o)T
z (l_e-(P+O)T )

which exceeds z because of the step-up in basis every T years.

The present value

of turnover tax payments is

(A3)

-(p+o)T
-pT -oT(l -e -TIT) + e -2pT e -2oT(1 -e-TIT) + • • . ] = y ( e _ (p+o)T ) (l_e- TIT )
l-e

y [e . e

Combining (A2) and (A3) yields

(A4)

X = TZ

+

(~ )(1- -TIT) (e-(p+o)T
TZ

Y

e

_( +o)T
l-e p

)

- 10 -

Insertion of this value of x into (AI) and differentiating v with respect to I
yields the requirement that the marginal product of capital F' equals c, as
represented in equation (1) in the text.

o

and

T yields

the conditions that

ac

~

and

Differentiation of v with respect to

ac
aT

should equal zero.

t

- 11 REFERENCES
Alan J. Auerbach, "Inflation and the Choice of Asset Life," J. Po1it. Econ.,
June 1979, 87, 621-638.
_______, "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quart.J. Econ,
August 1979, 93, 434-446.
Martin J. Bailey, "Capital Gains and Income Taxation," in A.C. Harberger and
M.J. Bailey, eds., The Taxation of Income from Capital, Washington
1969, 11-49.
Martin Feldstein and Lawrence Summers, "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital
Income in the Corporate Sector," Nat. Tax J., December 1979, 32, 445-470.
Roger H. Gordon and Burton G. Ma1kie1, "Taxation and Corporation Finance,"
Princeton U. Financial Research Center Memorandum no. 31, Princeton 1980.
Patrie H. Hendershott, "The Decline in Aggregate Share Values:

Inflation,

Taxation, Risk and Profitability," paper presented at NBER Conference on
Taxation, November 1979.
Richard W. Kopcke, "Inflation, Corporate Income Taxation, and the Demand for
Capital Assets," J. Po1it. Econ., forthcoming.

