                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE TIMING OF MONETARY AND PRICE
                  CHANGES AND THE INTERNATIONAL
                    TRANSMISSION OF INFLATION

                        Anthony Cassese
                        James R. Lothian

                     Working Paper No. 59




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                         September 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the,
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #549
                                                            September, 1980



                  The Timing of Monetary and Price Changes
            and   the International Transmission of Inflation



                                    ABSTRACT


     This paper presents a theoretical and empirical investigation into
timing relationships between variables within and across industrialized
countries. In the analysis we highlight the two polar cases of completely
closed and open economies and draw sone implications for timing between
monetary expansion and inflation, inter—country comparisons of inflation
rates and interest rates, and comparisons of central bank behavior. The
Granger-causality test is applied in a bivariate fashion to these groups
of variables.
     The main empirical results of our analysis are: (1) Domestic monetary
expansion appears to lead inflation in the sense that money Granger-causes
prices without feedback, contradicting an implication of the monetary
approach to the balance of payments. (2) 1{ardly any significant timing
relationship exists between domestic and foreign rates of inflation during
the fixed exchange rate period, providing no evidence for a generalized
"law of one price." (3) Some sterilization of official reserve inflows
was successfully performed by the non—reserve central banks, except for
Canada. (4) U.s. interest rates Granger—cause foreign rates, providing
evidence of some international transmission via asset markets.




Anthony Cassese                                James R. Lothian
Citibank N.A.                                  NBER
Economics Department,   2nd Floor              15—19 West 4th Street, 8th Fl.
399 Park Avenue                                New York, New York 10012
New York, New York 10043                       (212) 598—3162
(212) 559—6198                                         and
                                               Citibank N.A.
                                               (212) 559—7011
                                   I. INTRODUCTION


        Our object in this paper is to present evidence on the inflation process

in the United States and seven other industrial countries during the period

from the late l950s until the end of 1976. To do so we focus on two issues:

the    channels through which international factors operated to transmit infla—
tion    and the relative contributions to inflation      in each of these countries
of domestic and  international factors. Our method of statistical analysis
                     of

is the Granger—causality test. For each country, we apply these tests to a
number of relationships, some of which are between         purely domestic variables
and others      of which are between domestic and        variables.
                                                     foreign

        The flavor of our approach is inonetarist in nature but the    spirit in

which our study is        conducted differs from most studies of inflation. As a
rule,    other studies have tended to adopt one or the other of two simple monetary

models which can be characterized by an extreme degree of international integra-

tion or total lack thereof. In one case, what has come to be viewed as the

traditional quantity theoretic model, an economy is treated as if it were com-

pletely closed. The domestic monetary authorities determine the nominal stock

of money supplied and, given a stable demand function for money, ultimately

control the price level.

        the opposite polar case, the assumption is that a non—reserve currency
        In

(small) economy is fully open and subject to a fixed exchange rate convertible
into the reserve currency or a commodity such as gold. Differences between
one country's     price level and the price level in the rest of the world are
eliminated by arbitrage. The nominal quantity         of money supplied merely adjusts,
via the      balance—of—payments, to meet a stable demand for real cash balances. 1
                                         —2—

     In the closed economy model, the direction of causation is from domestic

money to domestic prices. In the open economy model both are endogenous and

the ultimate causative variable is the rest of the world's money or alterna-

tively the reserve currency. In its most extreme form, the open economy model

presumes price level differences are instantaneously resolved and the money

supply passively adjusts to the real level of cash balances mandated by the

rest of the world. Thus, the direction of causation appears to be from domestic

prices to domestic money.

     A number of problems arise in applying these models in the context of the

postwar period, however, because many         countries   appear to fit neither a fully

open nor a fully closed mold. Exchange rates in a number of important instances

during the Bretton Woods era underwent substantial changes. The domestic mone-

tary authorities in some cases seemed to pursue policies consistently at variance

with those of the world at large. And some governments delDnstrated a high pro-

pensity to tinker with markets for international goods and          capital.
     One   solution   that has   been   tried in order to circumvcat these problems

is to estimate slightly more general models that relax some of the limiting

assumptions of the polar cases. For the most part, though, the empirical appli-

cation of such models has been limited. Much of the empirical work is subject

to the objection that the emphasis is upon one, or at most a few, of a consider-

ably larger number of potential avenues for the international transmission of

inflation.2

    The merit in our approach is that it attacks the problem of structuring

the model in terms of the interrelationships among variables without a priori

limiting the range of investigation. Indeed, the tests we apply are intended

to provide evidence which will permit us to rule out some previous model—

identifying restrictions as being inconsistent with the data. Our method of
                                      —3—

analysis,    therefore, not only serves as a convenient point of departure for

constructing    and estimating more general models hit     provides a way of checking
models    that have been already estimated.3 A drawback of our approach, however,
is that the simple bivariate relationships underlying our tests may themselves
be subject to specification bias along the lines of a generalized omitted
variable error.

                        II.   THEORETICAL CONSIDERATIONS

        To begin our discussion, we review the model underlying the monetary

approach to the balance of payments (MABP).4 We derive expressions        for the
rates of inflation and of monetary growth in the small open economy and point
out the model's implications for the time paths of both. In so doing, we point
out what we believe is one of the popular misconceptions surrounding the MABP:
the belief on the part of at least some, if not many, researchers that in the
most basic model prices will lead rather than lag money. We end by relaxing
some of the simplifying assumptions of the model and state the
                                                               implications
these   changes have   for our study of timing.


The   Monetary Approach Model
      The simplest expositions of the monetary approach to the balance of payments
start with two behavioral equations and an equilibrium condition. The first
equation is a money demand function of the standard form, which, if we ignore
interest rates, we can write as
(1)     log (Md/P) k log
where M is the nominal stock of domestic money, P the domestic price level,

y permanent income, and k the income elasticity of demand. The second is a
simple purchasing power parity, or if the exchange rate is assumed perfectly
rigid, price arbitrage relationship
                                      —4-.

(2)     P=ltP
where P' is the rest—of--world price level and it     the (constant) exchange rate.
The third is an equilibrium condition relating the nominal stock of money

supplied to the nominal stock demanded,


(3)

Taking logarithms of (2) and (3), differencing the results along with equation

(1) and making the appropriate substitutions, we arrive at the standard expres-

sions for the domestic rate of inflation


(4) f'
and   for   monetary growth

(5) Mt+kvt
where   a dot over a variable indicates a rate of change.

      Equations      (4) and (5) are equilibrium relationships that describe the
long—run growth paths of domestic money and domestic prices. This is readily
apparent from the assumption of instantaneous      adjustment of money demand to

supply.     This framework avoids focusing on the importance of the role     of money

as a ihock absorber for transitory fluctuations generally expressed as tnovements

in velocity. In much of the literature, however, these dynamic relationships

are thought to do more: to have implications also for the time path of the

adjustment     to equilibrium. As the authors of one recent study using the simple
MABP model have put it, "there Is a clear presumption to (the] existence and

direction"    of the leads and lags   between domestic money, prices and   nominal
income in a small open economy under a fixed exchange rate regime (Putnam and
Wilford,    1978].
                                        —5—

    An Extension of the Basic Model

           The following is a typical example of the mechanics of the basic model.

    Consider a position of dynamic equilibrium in which the reserve—currency

    coufltrys money stock and prices and the domestic money stock and prices
-

    are growing at constant rates, for simplicity all assumed to be equal.

    Now let monetary growth in the reserve—currency country increase. Its rate of

    inflation will eventually follow suit. The increase in inflation will, via

    arbitrage, be transmitted as an instantaneous and equal increase in inflation

    in non—reserve currency countries. The new rate of inflation, in turn, will

    mean that domestic real cash balances are now      growing   more slowly than desired.
    Therate of hoarding, the inflow of foreign reserves, will increase as a result.
    Therefore, after the fact, so will the rate of growth of the domestic money
    supply.
           The problem is, however, that this   sequence of events does not, follow

    directly    from the model. In the model everything takes place within a single
    period. For the reserve inflow to lag price equalization, actual and desired
    nominal stocks of money would have to differ. That can be effected within the
    model fairly simply but It requires replacing equation (3) with some form of
    stock adjustment relationship like


    (6a)      log M — log   Mi (log       —
                                              log Mt_i)

    or equivalently,
    (6b)      log M = B(log M) + (1 — 8) log    Me_i

    Using (1), substituting successively for the lagged actual stock of        money and
    differencing   the result, we would then arrive at a new     equation   in which the
    current period's monetary growth would be a distributed lag, with geometrically
    declining weights, of inflation in the reserve currency country and of growth
    in permanent income:
                                               —6—


               =   B    E (1 —             +
                       i=o          p

        Doing      that seems reasonable from an      empirical   standpoint.
        Most    demand for money studies suggest that lags in the adjustment of
actual to desired money balances exist for periods of at least one quarter
and perhaps a good deal longer. In a similar vein, other studies cast serious

doubt on an instantaneous equalization of price levels or their rates of change.

For a more elaborate model, why then should we postulate instantaneous agreement

of domestic and world inflation? Furthermore, for the sake of empirical realism,

more general rationales for divergence between actual and desired money balances

could also be incorporated such as departures from full employment. To derive

testable models to answer the questions of how inflation was transmitted inter-

nationally and to what extent it was a domestic phenomenon one might want to

relax these strong assumptions also.

        First let us consider the question of price arbitrage. Here the empirical

evidence to date is inconsistent with convergence of overall rates of inflation

within a quarter and perhaps even within the period of several years.5 One

reason may be the existence of sizeable non—tradeable goods sectors. In this

instance, even if traded goods prices adjust quickly those of non—tradeable

goods may adjust only with a substantial lag.                 And if that is the case, then

the domestic inflation equation, (4), and the domestic money growth equation,

(5)   or   (7),    would    both have to be rewritten to take account of the differences

in    speeds of adjustment of prices between tradeable and non—tradeable goods
across countries.6 The end              result   is that the timing relationship between
domestic monetary growth and overall inflation becomes less easy to determine.
Given a sufficiently slow adjustment of prices of non—tradeable goods, domestic

inflation might not be observed to lead domestic monetary growth.
                                     —7—

      The next logical step would be to relax the implicit assumption that

prices, in the reserve currency country, adjust fullyand instantaneously

to monetary changes. For example, consider the monetary transmission

mechanism Friedman and Schwartz (1963] outline for a closed economy. The

key element in their view Is the series of portfolio adjustments that an un-

anticipated change in monetary growth engenders.7

      For example, suppose monetary growth suddenly increases. Initially,

market yields on financial assets and equities, and then a whole host of

Implicit yields on consumer goods of every degree of durability, temporarily

fall as money holders desire to rid themselves of excess cash balances and

the adjustment proceeds from one sector to another. Spending in all of these

areas,    therefore, increases and   output prices begin to rise more rapidly.

Eventually   stock equilibrium   is reestablished; holdings of real cash balances

are   lower and inflation is higher.
      Suppose we now extend that model to the International realm. Consider, for
instance,       what happens abroad in a   world of fixed exchange rates when mone-

tary growth in the reserve currency country undergoes an      unanticipated in-
crease.8 Initially an     excess supply of money in the reserve currency country

reflects itself in an excess demand for alternative assets denominated in both

the   reserve currency and foreign currencies.    The prices of those assets rise

and   their yields fall. The fall in interest rates produces an excess demand
for money         which, in part, is satisfied by tI3e inflow of reserves as
             abroad

residents of the reserve currency country reduce their excess holdings of
money and then increase expenditures on bonds and equities. Eventually the
process spreads to the markets for consumption and hvestment goods in both
countries. As expenditures on these goods increase, their prices and the over-
all price    levels in both countries begin to rise more rapidly. At the same time,

interest    rates on bonds and on equities begin to rise and approach their initial
levels.
                                    —8—

        The final equilibrium position is one in which monetary growth, inflation

 and the nominal interest rate on bonds both in the reserve currency country

 and abroad are all higher; holdings of real cash balances are lower and inter-

 national payments positions are altered. The reserve currency country now has

 a greater balance of payments deficit and  foreign countries    have greater
 balances   of payments surpluses or smaller deficits.
      If the asset approach is a reasonable expression of the adjustment mechanism,
 then we have a further reason to suppose that domestic monetary changes in a
small open economy would not lag price changes.
        We could also relax the implicit assumption in the MABP of full employment,
then the transmission mechanism operating through portfolio adjustment provides
a further rationale for domestic money actually leading prices. For examp].e,
suppose   unanticipated increase in monetary growth induced the portfolio
           an

adjustments described above. This would be followed by increased expenditures
by reserve currency country residents   on foreign goods whichwould lead to a
balance of payments surplus and expansion of aggregate demand and output in
the small economy. At the same time, the accumulation of reserves by the small
economy's central bank would lead to an expansion of its high—powered money

and overall money supply. Initially     the bulk of the increase in the nominal
income of the small   economy would be reflected in output. Only after some time
had   elapsed would the effect be manifest upon prices alone.
       In conclusion, the lead or lag of money over prices, in   what appears to

be   an open economy, is an uncertain guide to settling questions of causation
and more importantly the international transmission of inflation. We would view
a lead of prices over money and to a lesser extent a coincidence in movements
as prima fade evidence of the importance of foreign influences. But a lag of
prices behind money is consistent with either domestic or foreign monetary forces
being   the causative factor.
                                   —9—

Other Implications of the Alternative Models
     Fortunately these modifications of the explanation of the international
transmission of inflation have other empirical implications that can help
us differentiate among the alternative models. One testable hypothesis, of

course, is derived from the presumed operation of price arbitrage. For a small

open economy, if arbitrage were not instantaneous we would expect prices in

the rest of the world to lead domestic prices.

     imilarly, if assets markets provide another linkage among countries we

would expect there to be a relationship among interest rates in one country

and those in the rest of the world during periods of fixed exchange rates.

Again, assuming that the effects are not instantaneously felt, we would expect

interest rates in the rest of the world, or in the reserve currency country,

to lead those in a small open economy. But the possibility that rates of infla-

tion or interest rates are equated across boundaries does not preclude the

possibility that those rates are simultaneously determined along with movements

in reserves. That is, the rate of inflation and/or interest rate may not be

exogenous   with respect to the balance of payments.
     Analyzing the timing relationships between high—powered money and its
counterparts   on the asset side of the central bank's balance sheet ——   foreign
reserves   and domestic assets (domestic   credit) —— and between those two asset
components themselves, may also help to clear up some of the ambiguities that

surround the timing relationship between money and prices. Let us consider

three cases: the reserve currency country, a completely open small economy

and an intermediate case.

     In the reserve currency country, e.g. the U.S., the increase in monetary

expansion underlying an increase in its inflation and ultimately that of the rest

of the world is the result of domestic credit expansion by the reserve country's

central bank. Accordingly, domestic assets will be positively related to, and
                                   — 10 —


 either   lead, or be coincident with high—powered money. Indeed, the foreign

 component of high—powered money is of minor importance for a reserve—currency

 country.    Changes in the balance of payments will be a result rather than a
 cause of variations in the growth of high—powered money. High—powered money,
 therefore, will be negatively related to, and either lead or be coincident with

 the balance of payments.

      In a completely open small economy, movements in domestic assets are unim-

 portant as an effective source of monetary change. An overexpansion of domestic

 assets of the central bank ultimately will be nullified by reserve outflows;

underexpansion by reserve inflows. Changes in foreign reserve holdings of

 the central bank are   the channel through   which   monetary expansion occurs.
Therefore,    foreign reserves will bear a positive and     either   coincident or

leading relationship to high—powered money. Domestic assets will be unrelated

to high—powered money but bear a negative and     either coincident or leading rela—
.tionship   to foreign reserves.

     The intermediate case is the most difficult to handle. Domestic assets and

foreign reserves are both potential sources of monetary changes. Some steriliza-

tion of balance of payments movements is likely and at the same time some feed-
                                                                                     -
back of domestic credit on foreign reserves will be observed. We would expect,

therefore, to see both foreign reserves and domestic assets to bear a leading,
or perhaps coincident positive relationship to high—powered money and a negative
and bi—directiona]. relationship to each other. Both foreign reserves and domes-
tic assets can influence high—powered money in the intermediate case.
                                        — 11 —


                         III.   Testing Timing Relationships

          Timing relationships, for example between money and prices, are a

crucial element of a ful'l discussion of the structure of an economic model.

We have already described two classes of models, i.e., open— and closed—

economy models, which postulate fundamentally different timing relationships

for some group of variables, and which imply (cross—model) differences in

behavioral relationships among other variables. Here we define a timing

relationship as a relationship among a group of variables which demonstrates

the temporal precedence of one (or more) variable(s) over another. In this

paper, we concentrate on bivariate timing relationships.

          To examine timing relationships, we use an incremental prediction

criterion introduced by Granger (1969) and developed by Sims           (1972)   for

testing      the temporal precedence of the money supply over nominal income
explicit in some monetarist models. Granger defines a causal relationship,
e.g., between X and Y, on the basis of the usefulness of information on
the characterization (probability laws) of one          stochastic process, say
for the description of the joint        stochastic process, {Y,    X}. This     is
usually stated as: series X       (Granger) causes series Y    if we
                                                              can better predict
Y   by utilizing past values of Y and X than by using merely past Y alone. The
criterion Cranger suggests for making this assessment is a comparison of
conditional mean        errors contingent upon the information sets inclusive
                     squared

and exclusive of series X. Thus, if X helps to predict Y, in the sense of
reducing the mean squared prediction error for Y, then X Granger—causes Y.
          Sims proves two theorems on   (stationary)   stochastic processes which are
relevant in this context. Sims' analysis begins          by recognizing that the

stationary     processes, Y and X, can    be represented as

(8)   -
               A(L)u +   B(L)c
                                         — 12   —




 (9)      X C(L)u + D(L)c
where u and           are uncorrelated stationary processes and A(L), B(L), C(L)
and D(L) are polynomials in the lag operator, L. The first theorem Sims

proves is that a necessary and sufficient condition for Y not causing X is

that either c(L) or D(L) be identically zero. For example, Y would not cause

X if, and only if, equation (9) could be written as

(10)      X = D(L)c.        The second theorem states that the failure of Y to

Granger—cause X is a necessary and sufficient condition for treating X as

strictly econometrically exogenous with respect to Y.

        The   import of these two theorems is that once we establish the existence
of a particular representation between two variables (or, more accurately,
that we cannot refute its existence) there is good reason to treat one variable
as exogenous. Of course, one        variable, which may be exogenous with respect to
another   variable in the framework of a bivariate system, may be endogenous with
respect    to a third variable. Nevertheless, the treatment of certain variables

as exogenous lends structure to our economic models. The implied structure

permits us to choose a better model from among classes of models each of which

has a structure with a particular set of exogenous variables.

       The causality tests are conducted by         performing regressions of the general
form:9
                       m             n
(11) Y=a0+ i—i
            £8Y + Ey
                  j=lj X 3.+U.
                             t
There   is, of course, a corollary regression to equation (11) which constrains

the yj's to be zero identically, namely,
                       in

(12)     Y=     a
                 0
                     + E 8        + U.
                      1=1
                                               — 13   —




By comparing the improvement in the explanation of Y obtained from (11) over

that derived from the             companion. regression       (12), we can determine whether

series X contains information useful               in explaining     series Y. Then, by reversing
the roles of X and             Y in    regressions (11) and (12), we can    establish whether
an    empirical representation of Y and X implies that one of the series is

exogenous. Thus, if we can demonstrate, within reasonable statistical limits,

that    the following representation is plausible,
                          in                  in
(13)      Yt =     a1 + E b1 Y_1
                                 + E C1
                         i=1                 j=1
and
                          in
(14)           =        + E d X1,
                   a2
                         i= 1

then,    according to          Sims'   theorems, Y does    not cause X, i.e. X is exogenous.

It    is important,      for the application of           Sims' theorems, that   both series be

stationary.

        This   is the regression test suggested by Granger; our interpretation of

it is, however, somewhat looser than the conventional, one. For the most part,

we    eschew using the word "cause" and instead               speak in terms of timing. The

reason,  which should be clear froin,the theoretical presentation in Section II,
is that in at least one of the areas in which we deal —— the money—price rela-
tionships —— leads         and lags are a poor guide to the question of causation in
economies that have an unknown degree of openness. In terms of the debate
over "measurement vs. theory" that has recently been rekindled (see Sims,
ed. [1977]) our approach can perhaps best be described as                  "measurement   with
some theory."
        A related point about methodology that bears mentioning is the potential
bias inherent in         this     type of testing procedure. Commonality of movements in
the    realizations of the processes analyzed may be captured in the autoregressive
                                      — 14 —


terms;   these   are   implicitly disregarded by this method. As several others

have pointed out (e.g., Zeilner [1977]) this can lead         to accepting the null
hypothesis   of no relationship between the two series      when, in fact, one
actually exists. In defense of the methodology, we should point out that

this bias can also be a blessing. The simple fact of the matter is that in

most industrial countries inflation and monetary growth over our sample period

rose dramatically and at much the same time. Analyzing innovations in the

tire   series may be the only way to separate the influence of one       factor from

another.

       In almost all instances we transform the data for the purpose of rendering
the series stationary. In general, we use        natural   logs of the levels which
mollify the heteroscedastic character inherent in most         aggregate economic

time series. We then difference the log levels usually once but we also

experiment   with second differences in some cases. This procedure is intended
to   eliminate the trend in the mean of a series which is typically encountered

in aggregate economic time series. This procedure has the advantage of simply

and symmetrically "pre—whitening" the data without the substantial time costs

and lost degrees of freedom one typically incurs when applying Box—Jenkins

techniques. Moreover, our procedure is not subject to the criticism that too

much has been removed since nearly all aggregate economic time series regression

analysis must consider the transformation we apply in order to come to terms

with the estimation—efficiency question. The one exception to the general

transformation    procedure was the (net) domestic asset versus (net) foreign
asset relationships for certain of the countries for which the net positions
took on a negative value. In these exceptional instances, we used arithmetic
values of the levels and      arithmetic   first differences scaled by high—powered
money.
                                          — 15   —




                                IV.   EMPIRICAL RESULTS

            Our discussion of empirical results is divided into several
                                                                        parts:
     domestic    money and prices, price and interest—rate arbitrage, asset com-
    ponents of high—powered money, and sources of monetary change. In our analysis,
-
    we cover periods beginning in 1958:2 and experiment with a variety of
                                                                          lag struc-
     tures.

    Domestic Money and Prices
          We summarize the money—price results in Tables 1 and 2. There we report
    the F statistics for the Cranger tests of the relationships between three mone-
    tary aggregates, high—powered money, Ml and M2 and two measures of prices, the
    GNP or GDP deflator (Table 1) and the consumer or other similar retail price
    index     (Table 2) for the eight countries in our sample. 10
                                                                              prices exists
          Except   for France and Italy, a significant effect of lagged money on /         for   at

    least one domestic monetary aggregate. In the case of France, monetary growth

    proved to have significant effects on consumer price inflation but no effects

    on   the French price deflator. In the case of Italy,        the significance of the
    money—price    relationship varied among the combinations of monetary and price
    variables from period to period. In most countries, however, we find a more
    pervasive influence than appears In either the French or Italian case; the
    majority    of the relationships prove significant for one and sometimes both

    definitions of the price level.

          The reverse influence, of prices on money, is considerably less visible.

    A significant effect of prices on money without feedback appears in Italy and

    the U.K. using high—powered money and      in    France using the broader (M2) monetary

    aggregate. I!xever, for     the remaining countries, for France using high—powered
    money, and for    the U.K using both Ml   and M2, whenever prices appear to influence

    money there also appears to be significant feedback. That is, there also appears
                                       — 16 —


to   be some   evidence   of bi—directional causality.1' These results can be

broadly interpreted as providing evidence that the rate of inflation is

not necessarily exogenous in monetary models regardless of the degree to
                                                12
which prices are equalized via arbitrage.

       One   problem with the results is that in several of the countries the
relationships differ markedly depending upon which price variable is used.
Britain is the prime example. Using the GDP deflator, we find no influence
from lagged high—powered money to prices in Britain and a significant influence,
in   two of    the three periods, running the other way. Using the retail price

index,   we find almost exactly the opposite. A similar inconsistency exists
using Ml and M2.13 In the regressions with the GDP deflator both monetary
variables     Cranger—cause prices with little relationship the other way; in

the regressions with the retail price index prices more often Granger—cause

money. For the other countries, the results are considerably more consistent.

       The data, therefore, establish a pattern that on the whole is consistent

with monetary explanations of the inflation process. They fail, however, to

corroborate the popular interpretation of the NABP, in which prices adjust

instantaneously but money supply adjusts only with a lag. Either domestic

monetary forces by themselves or international forces operating via some

combination of a reserve—flow mechanism and central bank reaction function

or perhaps both domestic and international forces were important.


Price    and Interest     Rate Arbitrage

       in   Table 3 we report the tests of the relationships between domestic
prices    and rest of world prices and for the seven non—reserve currency countries
between domestic irices and U.S. prices. These results are for the period through
1971:3, only, since after that most countries experienced substantial changes in
                                            — 17   —




     their    dollar exchange rate. In all instances, we       included   six lagged values
     of   the dependent variable in the equation and three of the independent variable.
             For the comparisons with the rest of world inflation, the results are
     mixed. We find some influence from lagged rest—of--world to domestic prices
-.
     for the period ending 1971:3 in three countries, France, Japan and the Netherlands.
     When we    included the contemporaneous value of the world price index in the        equa—
     tions    there was a significant relationship for Canada also. For the U.S., the

     relationship ran in the opposite direction. Somewhat anomalously, we uncovered

     a statistically significant reverse influence for France too.

             The US. versus individual foreign country price comparisons showed signi-

     ficant effects of lagged U1S. prices on German and British prices only and a

     borderline relationship for Canada, which again became significant when we

     included the contemporaneous value of U.S. prices. France, Japan and the

     Netherlands,    the countries that exhibited the strongest response to rest—of—
     world prices, showed no relationship      with the U.S.

           We   summarize the U.S. versus   foreign    interest rate relationships in Table 4.
     With the exception of Italy for which we could obtain only           a long—term rate,
     these   comparisons are for three—month U.S. Treasury bills and a similar short—
     term foreign rate. Of all of the arbitrage relationships, these show the most
     consistency among countries. For all the foreign countries other than Japan,
     lagged U.S. interest rates have a significant effect. And            in most instances ——

     Canada especially so —— both    the magnitude and significance of the effect
     increase   when we include the contemporaneous value of the U.S. rate along with

     the lagged. For Italy and Germany, however, we also uncovered a reverse in-

     fluence. For Japan our failure to find any relationship may be largely the

     result of the nature of the Japanese capital market over much of this period,

     the fact that the Japanese government exercised substantial direct control over

     interest rates.
                                             — 18   —




 Central      Bank Behavior and     the   Balance of Payments

         In Table 5, we report the results of the Cranger tests of the relation-

 ships between changes in foreign reserves and in domestic assets of the mone-

 tary authorities of the seven foreign reserves and in domestic assets of the

 monetary authorities of the seven foreign countrjes.14                For the U.S., since
 it is the      reserve   currency country we report results based on the relationship        -


between       the balance of payments on an official settlements basis, scaled by high—
powered money, and changes in total high—powered money.
        By far, the more consistent relationship for the foreign countries is
from    changes in foreign reserves to changes           in domestic   credit. France,
Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, the U.K. and, to a lesser extent, Italy all

show a significant and negative effect of foreign reserves on domestic assets.

In Canada, the sums of the coefficients are positive, but not statistically

significant at the lag lengths   reported in the table. However, when we extend
the lag to six periods for the independent variable, the coefficients became
significant      and their   sum remained positive.

        The   relationships running in       the   other direction, somewhat surprisingly,
are   less well defined. Among the foreign countries, Japan and the U.K. are

the only ones in which there is a significant and negative influence of domestic

on foreign assets. In the Netherlands, the
                                                        relationship is significantly
different from zero in two instances but the sum             of   the coefficients is posi-
tive.

        In   the U.S., in   two   of the periods, we find a significant relationship
running      from high—powered money to the official settlements balance and

no effect in the opposite direction.
                                           — 19 —


            In   all of the foreign countries, therefore, some type of central bank

     reaction function seems to have, existed over the sample period. The monetary

     authorities in countries other than Canada apparently tried to offset the

     effects of balance of payments movements on their domestic money stocks.
-.
     The Bank of Canada, in contrast, seems to have done the opposite. Desirous,

     perhaps, of maintaining a stable exchange rate with the U.S. dollar, the

     Canadians     appear to have reacted to balance of payments inflows by engaging
     in some monetary expansion of their own.
            The Federal Reserve's actions ——  the results are hardly at variance
                                               and

     with what one would expect for the central bank of a reserve—currency country ——
     appears     to have paid little attention to the balance of payments in conducting
     policy. That policy, however, seems to have been the source of the sometime
     sizeable U.S. balance of payments deficits during this period.

     Sources     of Monetary Change
            We ran two other series   of regressions and   performed the associated
     Granger tests to analyze the sources of monetary growth in the seven foreign
     countries in the sample from two slightly different perspectives.15 In one
     we compared movements in     the three domestic monetary aggregates in each of
     the countries —— with the movements of their counterparts in the U.S. In

     the other, we compared the movements in each of the domestic aggregates with
     movements in foreign and domestic assets o that country's monetary authorities.
            The first set of results was not terribly satisfactory. Only in the
     Canadian and the German regressions were there significant positive relation-
     ships between the lagged U.S.    aggregate and the comparable domestic aggregate.
     In   both countries, moreover, there were somewhat implausible significant reverse

     influences    in several instances.
                                     — 20   —




     The foreign asset and domestic asset versus domestic monetary aggregate

tests were slightly better. For all the non—reserve currency countries

except the U.K., movements in lagged foreign assets made a statistically

significant contribution to the explanation of movements in at least one

of the monetary aggregates. Domestic assets, however, were a mixed lot.

For three of the countries —— Canada, Italy and the U.K. ——   domestic assets
•had no perceptible influence on any of the three monetary aggregates. For

the others ——   France, Germany, Japan and the Netherlands —— domestic assets

had a statistically significant, but negative, effect.

     These latter results make nosense as relationships that explain central

bank behavior. Presumably they arise because of spurious correlation, which,

in turn, raises questions about the more acceptable results obtained with

foreign assets.


                      V.   SUMMARY   AND CONCLUSIONS

     Our   purpose in this paper has been to investigate the channels through
which inflation has been transmitted internationally. To do so we have focused
upon five areas that featured prominently in our theoretical discussion: the

relationship between domestic money and prices, the influence of foreign

prices on domestic prices, the influence of foreign interest rates on domestic

interest rates, the behavior of the central bank, and the relationships between

the components of high—powered money and the monetary aggregates.

     The results we have obtained have several major implications. One stems

from the money—price relationship. In all countries, our tests showed a signi-

ficant effect of lagged domestic money on domestic prices, which appears to be

fairly robust across the specifications we tried. The strength of these rela—

tionships suggests that one—shot and t•ransltory phenomena, e.g., money demand

shifts and fluctuations in velocity, are not likely to be the major causative
                                   — 21 —


factors    of the inflation experienced by these countries. That is, such short—

term movements have not dominated the fundamental long—run equilibrium rela—

tionship between money and prices. Similarly, given the absence of a con—

sistent reverse relationship, i.e., from prices to money, for most countries,

an explanation of inflation that attributes it primarily to wage-push accommodated

by  domestic monetary growth appears doubtful for most if not all of the countries
in the sample.
       The second set of results, the domestic versus foreign price comparisons,
has more negative than positive implications. They provide no evidence of a
strong   price arbitrage relationship and thus do not suggest   that domestic money
was purely passive or that foreign central banks were purely silent partners

to the U.S. monetary authorities. In this sense, the second set of results do

not contradict our other findings. They imply that the potential existed for a

nunber of the non—reserve currency countries to operate an independent monetary

policy, at least in the short run.

       The way in which the actual transmission process worked was through asset

markets. In all countries but Japan, some evidence of interest arbitrage was

uncovered. Additionally, in all but the U.K., changes in foreign reserves had

a   statistically significant effect on at least one of the three monetary aggre-
gates. Furthermore, in Canada and Germany -— the countries that both had very
similar price experiences to that of the U.S. in the period prior to 1972 ——
U.S.   monetary variables had a significant effect on the domstic monetary
variables. Thus, when we combine the price comparison results with the interest
arbitrage, and the foreign reserve—domestic monetary aggregate results, we obtain
a picture of the operation of a self—regulating mechanism preventing long—run
monetary   independence but allowing some scope for short—term domestic monetary
control.
                                   — 22 —


     Another set of implications stems from what we have learned from analyses

of changes in the asset components of the central banks' portfolios and of

their relationships with changes in high—powered money and the two broader

monetary aggregates. These are, however somewhat tenuous. In a number of
countries ——   France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands and to some extent Italy
and the U.K. —— we find evidence of some sterilization of reserve inflows.

For Canada, we found a significant positive effect of reserve inflows on

domestic assets.

     On the whole, these are a priori appealing results that appear to explain

some of the differences among countries: low and moderate inflation countries

trying to avoid importing inflation from the U.S. and being at least partially

successful; Canada seeking to stabilize its price level and exchange rate

vis—a—vis the U.S. dollar; and Italy and the U.K. ——   the   higher inflation
countries ——   acquiescing in the face of reserve inflows and perhaps, though
the data are mostly moot on this point, going the U.S. one step better in the

way of monetary expansion.'6
                                         — 23    —




                                         NOTES



          *The affiliations of both authors are Economics Department, Citibank, N.A.
     and the National Bureau of Economic Research. The authors would like to acknow-
     ledge the able researth assistance of Connie McCarthy and the helpful comments
     of the other members of the NBER project on the "International Transmission of
-.   Inflation," Anna J. Schwartz, Alan C. Stockmàn and, in particular, Michael R.
     Darby and Arthur E. Candolfi. The suggestions received from members of the
     Macroeconomics Workshop at New York University were also helpful, especially
     those of Michael Hamburger. This work has been funded by grants from the
     National Science Foundation (grant numbers APR76—12334 and APR78—13072),
     Scaife Yamily Trusts, Alex C. Walker Educational and Charitable Foundation,
     and Reim Foundation. This paper has not undergone the review accorded official
     NBER publications; in particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the
     Board of Directors and therefore is not an official publication of the National
     Bureau.


           'See   Johnson [1976] and the other papers in the volume in which       that paper
     appears    for various expositions of the MABP. Friedman and Schwartz [1963a],

     especially Chapter 2, present a more general monetary model of the open economy.

           2Blejer [1977], Cross and Laidler [1976], Jonson [1976] and Laidler [1978]

     present models of a quasi—open economy.

           3The papers by Candolfi and Lothian       (1980)   and Darby and Stockman (1980),

     provide    two somewhat different approaches to this problem. The authors of
     the   first paper estimate a reduced form price—equation under the assumption
     that the eight countries are largely closed. They then go on to "open" the
     model up, introducing foreign money and price shocks into the equations. The
     authors of the second paper initially adopt a more open framework, developing
     an internationally integrated simultaneous equations model with a variety of
     inter—country   linkages. They retain the possibility, however, of the model

     becoming   more "closed" by allowing for neutralization of reserve inflows by
     domestic   central banks.


           4Johnson's paper in Frenkel and Johnson (eds.) is the classicstatement

     of the monetary approach.
                                     — 24   —




       5Kravis and Lipsey (1978] among others, present evidence counter to the

arbitrage hypothesis.

       6See Blejer (1977] for a model in which the slower adjustment of prices

of non—tradeable than of tradeable goods plays a crucial role.

       71f the monetary change   were   fully anticipated, the price response would

be   immediate. The information set used to form anticipations, therefore, has
a crucial bearing on the exact timing relationship.
       he papers by Frenkel and Rodriguez and by Girton and Henderson describe
models of this general sort. In both, however, the authors confine their
analysis to organized asset markets.

      9Sargent (1976] contains a discussion of this form of the test.
      '°The data we use were compiled from individual country sources by the
NBER project on the "International Transmission of Inflation."
     11British    results from much longer—term time series consistent with these

findings   are reported in Uuffman and Lothian and for the    postwar   period in
Williams, Goodhart and Gowland.

     This   sane result was obtained for a broad range of Latin American
LDC's in Cassese (1979), Chapter VI.

           the   U.K. what we call 142 is what the Bank of England calls sterling

M3, but unlike their series, it is exclusive of government deposits.


      4Blejer [1979] presents results of similar tests     for four of the countries
in   our sample France, Germany, Italy and the U.K. and for Sweden. He, however,

finds considerably less evidence of sterlization.
                                 — 25   —




     15The results that we discuss   in this   section are for the   period ending
1971:3 only. Results for the: longer period during which exchange rates were
more variable were considerably less satisfactory.

     16The general thrust of these conclusions is highly similar to that of

Connally and Taylor [1979].
                                    — 26   —




                             Selected   References


Blejer, Mario I., "On Causality and the Monetary Approach to the Balance
   of Payments——the European Experience." European Economic Review, 12
   (1979), 289—296.

_______________   "Short—Run Dynamics of Prices and the Balance of Payments."
   American Economic Review, 67 (June 1977), 419—428.

Cassese, Anthony, Money, the Dynamics of Inflation and the Balance of Payments
   in Latin America, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, City University of New
   York, 1979.

Connolly,     Michael and Dean
                           Taylor, "Exchange Rate Changes and Neutralization:
   A   Test
          of the Monetary Approach Applied to Developed and Developing
   Countries." Economica, 46 (August 1979), 281—294.

Cross, R.J., and D. Laidler, "Inflation, Excess Demand and Expectations in
   Fixed Exchange Rate Open Economies: Some Preliminary Results." In Inflation
   in the World Economy, Edited by J.M. Parkin and G. Zis, 221—255. Manchester:
   Manchester University Press, 1976.

Darby,Michael R., "The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments: Two
   Specious Assumptions." Economic Inquiry, 18 (April 1980), 321—326.
_________________ and Alan C. Stockman, "The Mark III International Trans-
   mission Model." National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
   No. 462 (March 1980).
Frenkel, Jacob A., and Carlos A. Rodriguez, "Portfolio Equilibrium and the
   Balance of Payments: A Monetary Approach." The American Economic Review,
   64, #4 (September 1975), 674—688.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz, "Money and Business Cycles." Review
   of Economics and Statistics, 45, Supplement (February 1963), 32—64.

________________ A Monetary History of the United States, 1867—1960.
   Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.

_______________ Monetary Statistics of the United States, New York: NBER,
   1970.

Gandolfi, Arthur E., and J. R. Lothian, "InternationaiPrice Behavior and the
   Demand for Money," unpublished manuscript, NBER, May 1980.

Girton, L., and D. W. Henderson, "Financial Capital Movements and Central
   Bank Behavior in a Two—country, Short—run Portfolio Balance Model."
   Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, #1 (January 1976), 33—61.
Granger, C.W.J., "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and
   Cross—Spectral Methods." Econometrica, 37 (July 1969), 424—438.
                                     — 27 —


!Iuffman, Wallace E., and James R. Lothian, "Money in the U.K., 1833—1880."
   Journal of Honey, Credit and Banking, 12, #2 (May 1980).

Johnson, Harry C. "Towards a General Theory of the Balance of Payments."
   In The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments, edited by Jacob A.
   Frenkel and Harry C. Johnson, 46—63. Toronto and Buffalo:
                                                               University of
   Toronto   Press, 1976.
Jonson, Peter D., "Monetary and Economic Activity in the Open Economy: The
   United Kingdom, 1880—1970." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84
   (October 1976), 979—1012.

Kravis, Irving B., and Robert E. Lipsey, "Price Behavior in the Light of
   Balance of Payments Theories, Journal of International Economics, 8
   (May 1978), pp. 193—246.
Laidler, David, "A   Monetarist Viewpoint." In      Demand Management, edited by
   Michael Posner,   35—65.   London National Institute of Economic and Social
   Research, 1978.
Putnam, Bluford H. and D. Sykes    Wilford, "Money, Income and Causality in the
   United States and the United    Kingdom: A Theoretical Explanation of Different
   Findings."    American Economic Review, 68 (June 1978), 423—427.
Sargent, Thomas J., "A Classical Macroeconomic Model for the United States."
   Journal of Political     Economy, 84, #2   (April 1976), 207—37.
Sims, Christopher, ed., New Methods in Business Cycle Research: Proceedings
   from a Conference, Federal R2serve Bank of Minniapolis; October 1977.

Williams, David, C.A.E. Goodhart, and D. H. Gowland, "Money, Income and
   Causality: The U.K. Experience." American Economic Review, 66, #3
   (June 1976), 417—423.
Zeliner, Arnold, "Comments on Time Series Analysis and Casual Concepts In
  Business Cycle Research" in Sims, ed., 167—174.
                                                   —28---




                                                   TABLE 1


                                       Money 'and. Price Deflator
                                              In                  U
                                   = a0 +                   +
                                                                    ,3 xt_j
            Variable'
            Y
                                                             F —   Statistics
                                                                         for
Country            X                               Lags (in,n) and Period Ending:2
                                   1971:3                               1973:4                      1976 :4
                           m=6              zn=8                 in6             rn=8        m 6              m8
                           fl23             n=8                  n=3             n= 8        n=3              n=8

Canada      PD    H     5.0857**       2.8006*              4.2300**        2.2937*     2.3145k          2. 3198*
            PD   Ml     1.2176          1. 0800             1. 947 9+        1. 9383    3. 3748*         3.28 19**
            PD   M2     2.6210+        3.3309**             3. 3 975*       2.9488**    1. 6940          2. 1065*
            H    PD     0.9001         0. 9920              0. 3877         0. 7326     0. 7274          0. 8209
            Ml   PD     0.9338         1. 2448              0. 5 172        0. 8475     0. 8610          1.4687
            M2   PD     1.2395         1. 5719              2. 7234*        1. 9840+    2.3919           1. 2493

France      PD    H     4.7019**       1. 7986+             4. 6467**       1.7584+     0. 8354          0. 7941
            PD   Ml     0.5858         0.9226               0.   3987       1. 0925     0. 1559          0.4114
            PD   M2     0.1516         0.6431               0.   3631       0. 2317     0. 6683          0.   5199
            H    PD     1.0110         2. 6440*             1.   0153       1. 5907     0.7415           1.   2736
            Ml   PD     1.1399         0. 8372              1.   1634       1. 0560     0. 5488          0.   8831
            M2   PD     2.4164+        1. 6700+             2. 4090+        1. 2625     0. 4447          0.   4643

Certuany.   PD    H     3.5 186*       1.   0623            2.4042k         1. 0295     0.   6435        2. 4534*
            PD   Ml     0. 4479        0.   3952            0. 4683         0.2100      1.   1187        1. 3269
            PD   M2     1. 7745        1.   2036            2.0504+         1.   2604   0.   9762        0.6737
            H    PD     1 5316         1.   0373            1. 1161         0.   4482   0.   2838        0.1091
            Ml   PD     0. 7 794       0.   7514            0.9441          0.   6567   2.1476+          1. 2652
            M2   PD     0. 0693        0.   2920            0. 2636         0.   6659   0.4931           1 .0815

Italy       PD    H     1.1682         1. 1094              1. 3511         0. 8454     0. 9918          0. 7573
            PD   Ml     1.9426         1. 2206              3.0492*         2.0289k     1. 7427          1. 3796
            PD   M2     0.6455         0. 7834              2.2500+         2. 3987*    1. 0636          1.3427
            H    PD     1.8111         0.7057               2. 7941*        1. 2006     8.7666**         3.4494**
            Ml   PD     0.9739         0. 5882              0. 5743         0.4037      1. 2931          0.8135
            M2   PD     0.5978         0. 2149              0.4895          0.2453      2. 6562+         1. 1188



                                               (CONTINuED)
                                                      —29—



                                                TABLE 1 CONCLUDED


                                          Money and Price Deflator
                                                 m              n
                                  Y = a0 +       i, B   't_ + j=1
                                                               E y
                                                                  j
                Variable'                                    F —    Statistics   for
 Country        Y      X                               LagJrnn) and Period Ending:2
                                      1971:3                          1973:4                    1976 :4
                                               m=8                                      m=6
                               n3              n8              n=3             n=8      n=3               n=8


Japan           PD      H     3.8405*      1.9646k           6.0414**     2.4172*      3.2189*        1.3024
                PD     Ml     2.2473k      1.6163            2.2842+      1.8310k      0.9347         1.7369k
                PD     M2     1.1656       1.5835            2.2754k      1.8709+      1.6225         1.4317
               H       PD     1.5237       1.0461            1.3528       0.8219       0.6845         1.0836
               Ml      PD     3.0488*      1.2816            1.0183       0.9410       1.8314+        1.599Th
               M2      PD     1.3220       0.9918            1.4421       0.7127       4.2628**       1.4727

Netherlands    PD       H    0.7663       0.6710             0.1439       0.5099       0.2313        0.7476
               PD      Ml    2.8542*      2.8115*            3.4698*      2.2073*      1.1498        0.7352
               PD      M2    2.9346*      2.1987*            2.8755*      2.0128+      3.2533*       1.4874
               H       PD    0.1041       0.7291             0.3436       1.1746       0.4657        1.3963
               Ml      PD    0.9419       1.0318             0.8451       1.3412       1.7868        1.3853
               M2      PD    0.1341       0.9253             0.8393       1.6698k      0.7360        0.9330
               PD       H    1.1017       0.9244             1.3687       1.0933       0.2929        1.9991+
               PD      Ml    3.5272*      3.6844**           4.2292**     4.1970**     2.1304+       3.9948**
               PD      M2    3.3290*      4.0!D48**          34599*       4.8635**     1.0124        2.3725*
               H       PD    5.9046**     2.3159**           4.2821**     2.8633**     0.6952        1.4133
               Ml      PD    0.4415        1.2775            1.5263       1.6117+      2.8020*       2.0691*
               M2      PD    0.2520        1.6050            2.2744k      4.1369**     3.3308*       1.4786
U.S.           PD       H    3.0960*      1.2327             1.1244       0.8451       2.1612+       0.7881
               PD      Ml    7.1747**     3.2115**           3.9259*      2.3341*      3.6139*       2.6592**
               PD      N2    5.0927**     2.0143+            2.2580k      1.8163+      2.5727k       2.6491**
               H       PD    1.9995+      2.1232+            2.4702       2.5302*      1.6230        3.6927**
               Ml      PD    0.6292       0.3813             0.7209       0.8829       1.0213        0.4108
               M2      PD    0.5870       0.2438             1.3583       0.6631


1 —    All variables are first difference of the natural log; PD is the GNP or GD? deflator,
       H is high—powered ioney, Ml is currency plus demand deposits and M2 is currency plus the
       sum of demand and time deposits.

2— All regressions start in 1958:2. The null
                                                     hPothesisisthatthe.j?sareasagroupequa1tozero.
 + — reject null hypothesis at a = 0.10
 * — reject null hypothesis at a = 0.05
**   — reject null hypothesis at a 0.01
                                               TABLE 2


                                Money and Consumer Price Index

                                        + i!:t Bi "_i +
                              Yt =
                                                               1
          Variable'                                   F — Statistics for
          Y     X                                                             2
Country                                         Lags (m,n) and Period Ending:
                               1971:3                          1973:4                      1976 :4
                        m=6             m=8              m=6            m=8         m6               m8
                        n3              n8               n=3            n.8         n3               n=8


Canada    PC    H     1.7304         2.O398          2.8630*       3.4068**       2.428T
          PC   Ml     0.9011         1.3335          2.3543+       2.6750*        0.9549        1.896O
          PC   M2     1.8998+        2.3211*         2.1980+       2.4818*        1.7972        1.7O89
          H    PC     0.4004         0.9647          0.7010        0.7435         1.8513k       1.0520
          Ml   PC     0.7429         1.2814          0.6568        0.7356         1.1255
          M2   PC     1.9417+        1.2898          4.0227**      2.O999*        3.1621*       1.6265+
France    PC    H     3.0838*        1.6784k         5.9429**      2.1667*        2.1861k       1.1267
          PC   Ml     0.9035         0.4313          0.8488        0.9236         0.9707        0.7959
          PC   1f2    0.9320         0.8640          1.5080        0.6122         1.2368        0.5168
           H   PC     1.0301         1.1479          0.6391        0.8123         1.1896        0.9482
          Ml   PC     0.1366         0.7419          0.0794        0.8701         0.C667        1.0880
          M2   Pc     0.0472         1.1412          0.4648        1.0315         0.4843        0.8597

Germany   PC    H     0.3373         0.6452          0.7065        0.6828         0.6488
          PC   Ml     3.6700*        2.0O91          2.2902+       1.1840         0.8899        0.4544
          PC   M2     2.0487+        0.9324          3.6316*       1.4334         2.0873+       1.0248
          H    PC     1.3580         1.5144          0.7117        0.6157         0.1522        0.3870
          Ni   PC     0.1615         0.5855          0.2980        0.2447         0.3265        0.1900
          M2   PC     0.0639         0.5631          0.1868        0.6004         0.2075        0.7861

Italy     PC    H     2.O895         1.7326+         2.2146k       1.4969                       0.5277
          PC   Ml     0.7485         1.1998          0.6685        1.2960         2.5815k
          PC   M2     0.0562         1.4058          0.5205        1.9588k        2.6O5F        1.9O20
          H    PC     1.6496         1.5617          2.3577        2.0966k        6.1068**      2.6657**
          Ml   PC     1.2290         0.9196          1.0196        0.9489         2.7236*       1.1030
          M2   PC     0.8907         0.4999          1.3936        0.9262


                                          (CONTINUED)
                                                         —31—



                                                TABLE 2 CONCLUDED

                                        Money and Consumer Price Index

                                         =
                                             a0 +       8 'tt—i +        i X_
                  Variable'                                    F — Statistics for
                                                                                       2
 Country          Y      X                               Lags (m,n) and Period Ending:
                                       1971:3                           1973:4                      1976 :4
                                m6              m=8               m=6            m=8         m6               m8
                                n=3             n=8               n=3            n=8         n=3              n=8


Japan            PC     H     2.5529+        2.2855*            5.5676**    2.7080*        1h8263**
                 PC    Ml     0.8923         1.3026             1.3859      2.6490*        0.1656        1.6207+
                 PC    M2     1.2829         0.4988             1.7822      0.1308         1.7505        0.5856
                 H     PC     1.0003         0.5991             0.5468      0.3308         1.3736        0.9399
                 Ml    PC     1.2112         1.6718k            0.8157      0.9009         1.6885        1.2710
                 142   PC     0.3674         0.5470             0.1371      0.7524         1.8995k       1.7773k
Netherlands      PC     H     1.4213         0.7616             0.9301      0.6842         0.7642        0.5470
                 PC    Ml     5.4306**       3.5512**           6.8611**    3.6791**       1.84O8        1.1385
                 PC    142    3.7966*        2.5407*            4.5943**    2.9069**       3.8946*       2.6756**
                 H     PC     0.7038         0.6883             0.3858      0.6059         0.6452        0.7099
                 Ml    PC     1.9109+        0.9570             1.8164      0.8057         1.8521k       0.9979
                 142   PC     0.4137         0.8526             1.5806      1.5429         2.1967k       1.5192
U.K.             PC     H     4.9425**       2.2847*            5.6819**    2.6542*        3.2730*       4.0026**
                 PC    Ml     1.3392         0.9494             1.6227      1.1369         0.7719        1.8216k
                PC     142    0.4981         1.1294             2.3374+     1.7292+        1.6433        2.4200*
                H      c      1.0225         0.7083             0.5323      1.1533         1.2367        2.1754*
                Hi     PC     3.2914*        1.8360+            4.4124**    2.9159**       5.7665**      2.5341*
                142    PC     3.7181*        1.7491+            5.1800**    2.8629**       1.0491        0.7693
                PC      H     3.3590*        1,6969+            1.3730      1.1135         2.3505+       1.2689
                PC     Ml     4.5219**       5.0305**           6.6044**    3.9097**       8.6231**      4.2129**
                PC     142    0.5545         2.8073*            1.3136      3.1041**       2.4869+       3.2708**
                H      PC     0.1369         0.3614             0.4343      0.3393         0.2956        0.4610
                Ml     PC     2.4532+        1.8937+            2.6349k     2.2025*        1.8309        1.5376
                142    PC     0.9170         1.9163+            1.2794      2.2896*                      1.9386k



1— All variable are first difference of the natural log; PC is the consumer price index,
   H is high—powered money, Ml is currency plus demand deposits and M2 is currency plus
   the sum of demand and time deposits.

2 —   All   regressions start 1958:2. Thenulihypothesisis that the's areasagroup equal to zero.
 + — reject null hypothesis at a   0.10
 * — reject null hypothesis at a
                                   0.05
** — reject null hypothesis at a =
                                   0.01
                                               —32—




                                             TABLE 3



                                        Price Arbitrage


                               =
                                   a+   J1   j Yt-i +
                                          F—statistic2                    F—statistic
                         Variable'            m=6          Variable           m=6
Country                  Y         X          n=3          Y       X           n3

Canada                   PD     PDw          1.6741         PD    PDus        1.6765
                         PDw PD              3.4386*        PDus PD           0.5394

France                   PD     PDw          3.0056         PD    PDp.s       0.9744
                         PDw PD              3.9842**       PDus PD           0.4912

Germany                  PD     PDv          0.2701         PD   PDus         3.9752*
                         PDw    PD           0.8389         PDus PD           1.1123

Italy                    PD    PDw           1.1179        PD    PDus         0.3129
                         PDw    PD           1.3534        PDus PD            1.1805

Japan                   PD     PDw           2.3618+       PD    PDus         0.6907
                        PDw PD               0.6436        PDus PD            1.4863

Netherlands             PD     PDw           1.2523        PD    PDus         1.3365
                        PDw PD               0.9483        PDus PD            0.3511

U.K.                    PD     PDw           0.3151        PD    PDus         2.0759+
                        PDw PD               0.3744        PDus PD        -   0.4319
U.S.                    PD     PDw           1.4831        PD    PDus
                        PDw    PD            2.4181+       PDus PD


1 —    All variables are the first differences of the natural log. PD is the GNP or
       GDP deflator, PDw is the rest—of—world deflator and PDus is the GNP deflator
       for the United States.

2 —    All regressions 1958:2 to 1971:3. The null hypothesis is that the yj's as a
       group are equal to zero.

 + —   reject   null hypothesis at a =   0.10.
 *   — reject   null hypothesis at a =   0.05
**   — reject   null hypothesis at a =   0.01.
                                   —33—



                              TABLE 4


                        Interest Arbitrage


                   =    +           "t—i +
                                             Yj X_j

                                                 F—s tati stic2
                        Variable1                      xa6
Country                 Y      X                        n3

Canada                  IS    ISus                    3.3243*
                        ISus Is                       1.6404

France                  IS    ISus                    2.7322*
                        ISus IS                       0.8850

Germany                 IS    ISus                    3.6046*
                        ISus IS                       4.9406**

Italy                   IL    ILus                    3.9248*
                        ILus IL                       1.4547

Japan                   is    ISus                 0.2948
                        ISus IS                    1.4438

Netherlands             IS    ISus                 5.9041**
                        ISus IS                       1.0401

U.K.                    IS    ISus                 3.8546*
                        ISus IS                    0.8776

U.S.                    IS    ISus
                        ISus IS


1 — The interest rates are in first difference form. IS is the short—terni
    interest rate for each country except Italy for which the long—term
    interest rate is used. ISus is the short—term interest rate for the
    United States.

2 —   All regressions 1958:2 to 1971:3. The null hypothesis is that the
      ifs as a group are equal to zero.
 + —  reject null hypothesis at a = 0.10.
 *   — reject null hypothesis at a 0.05.
**   — reject null hypothesis at a = 0.01.
                                                —34—



                                            TABLE 5


                         Domestic Credit and the Balance of Payments

                                =
                                    a+                 +
                                                            Yj   X_
                       Variable'                       F — Statistics for
 Country                      X                                                 2
                                                  Lags (m,n) and Period Ending:

                                           1971:3            1973:4           1976:4
                                            m=3                  xn=3          m=3
                                            n=3                  n=3           n=3


Canada                 FR     DR           1.2185            1.4081           1.6945
                       DR     FR           0.8582            1.0134           1.0938
France                 FR     DR           0.1140            0.4690           0.1017
                       DR     FR           3.8398**          2.7887*          2.4045+
Germany                FR     DR           0.2463            0.6432           0.4089
                       DR     FR           2.2295+           3.3784*          3.9930**
Italy                  FR     DH           0.1142            0.4898           1.0168
                       DR     FR           0.8010            1.0569           2.2833+
Japan                 FR      DR           0.8563            1.9006k          1.5299
                      DR      FR           2.4706+           2.9194*          1.9233k
Netherlands            FH    DR            0.9079            2.7864*         2.7909*
                      DR      FR           4.6111**          4.3709**        6.0623**
U.K.                  FR     DR            0.3949            0.8334          1.4041
                      DH     FR            0.1568            2.4819k         2.5390k
U.S.                   BP      H           0.5770            2.0949+          2.6524+
                       H      BP           1.2728            1.1110           1.0156


 1 — The
         variables for Canada, Germany, Italy and Japan are first difference of the
     natural log. The variables f or France, Netherlands, U.K. and U.S. are
     arithmetic first differences scaled by high—powered money. PH is official
     reserve assets, DR is domestic credit, BP is the U.S. official settlements
     balance and H is high—powered money.

 2 —   All   regressions start in l958:2.Thenullhypothesis is that they 'sareasa group
      equal to zero.
 + — reject null hypothesis at a =       0.10
 * — reject null hypéthesis at a =       0.05
   — reject null hypothesis at a =
                                         0.01
