                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN THE INFLATION
                  PROCESS: THE ECONOMETRICS OF
                     "SELF-INFLICTED WOUNDS"


                            Jon Frye

                        Robert J. Gordon

                      Working Paper No. 550




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                         September 1980




This research has been supported by the National Science Foundation.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #550
                                                            September, 1980

              Government Intervention in the Inflation Process:
                The Econometrics of "Self—Inflicted Wounds"

                                 ABSTRACT

    This paper presents a single reduced—form inflation equation that can

explain both the variance and acceleration of inflation during the 1970s.

Inflation is explained by four sets of factors. Aggregate demand enters

through the lagged output ratio and the growth rate of nominal GNP.

The adjustment of inflation to changes in aggregate demand is limited by

the role of inertia in the inflation process, expressed as the dependence

of the rate of change of prices on its own past values. Two types of

supply—side elements enter. Government intervention directly altered the

price level during the Nixon control era, and in addition the government

has aggrevated the inflation problem by what have been called "self—

inflicted wounds," including increases in the effective social security tax

rate and effective minimum wage. Also there have been external supply

shocks that are outside of the immediate control of the government,

including changes in the relative prices of food and energy, changes in the

growth rate of productivity, and changes in the foreign exchange value of

the dollar.

    Considerable attention is given to alternative methods of estimating

the impact of direct episodes of government intervention In the price—setting

process, particularly during the Nixon controls. We find that such episodes

have been futile. Because of their futility, these intervention episodes

can be regarded as "self—inflicted wounds," like 'the payroll tax and

minimum wage changes that normally are described by this term.

                                         Jon Frye
                                         Robert J. Gordon
                                         DePartment of Economics
                                         Northwestern University
                                         Evanston, Illinois 60201
                                         (312) 492—3616
      While the inflation experience of the U. S. between the end. of the Korean

war and the end of the decade of the l960s can be explained adequately by a

 conventional Phillips curve approach, the high variance and continued accel-

eration of inflation during the decade of the 1970s pose new challenges to

the time—series econometrician. Why did inflation continue to speed up from

about 5 percent in early 1971 to 10 percent in early 1980, despite an average

ratio of actual real GNP to "natural" real GNP (hereafter the "output ratio")

that was below its average level of the 1950s and 1960s? And why was infla-

tion so variable, falling from an annual rate of 5.3 percent in the first

half of 1971 to 3.0 percent in the middle two quarters of 1972, then rising

to 11.7 percent In the last half of 1974, then falling to 4.2 percent in the

first half of 1976, and finally rising to 10.1 percent in the first quarter

of 1980?1

     This paper presents a single reduced—form inflation equation that can

explain both the variance and acceleration of inflation during the r970. It

can be regarded as a sequel to an earlier paper that fit a similar inflation

equation to a long period of historical annual data for the period l892_l978.2

It applies the same basic specification to quarterly data for the 1954—80

period and devotes more attention to supply—side variables that have particular

relevance for the recent behavior of inflation. Inflation is explaind by

four sets of factors. Aggregate demand enters through the same variables

as in the earlier study, the lagged output ratio and the growth rate of

nominal GNP. The adjustment of inflation to changes in aggregate demand is

limited by the role of inertia in the inflation process, expressed as the

dependence of the rate of change of prices on its own past values. Two types

of supply—side elements enter. Government intervention directly altered the
                                                                        2



price level during the Nixon control era, and in addition the government has

aggravated the inflation problem by what have been called "self inflicted

wounds", including increases in the effective social security tax rate and

effective minimum wage. Also there have been external supply shocks

that are outside of the immediate control of the government, including changes

in the relative prices of food and energy, changes in the growth rate of pro-

ductivity, and changes in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.

     Thus the main themes of the paper are that inflation cannot be explained

simply as the result of excessive demand stimulation, or of a single type of

supply shock, or of inertia by itself. Considerable attention is given

to alternative methods of estimating the impact of direct episodes of government

intervention in the price—setting process, particularly during the Nixon controls.

We find that such episodes 1ave been futile. The Nixon—era controls temporarily

held down the price level and then allowed it to bounce back to its "no—controls"

level, thus contributing to the instability of both inflation and real output.

Other episodes of intervention——the Kennedy—Johnson guidelines and Carter pay

standards——had no effect at all on the inflation process.

     Because of their futility, these intervention episodes can be regarded as

"self—inflicted wounds", like the payroll tax and minimum wage changes that

normally are described by this term of opprobrium. Although space limitations

prevent us from assessing the full range of policy alternatives that face

Washington policymakers, it seems clear that there are enough degrees of freedom

in the inflation process to allow creative policies to heal the wounds and to

offset the unavoidable impact of external supply shocks.
                                                                           3



         I BASIC SPECIFICATION OF TUE REDUCED—FORM INFLATION EQUATION


      We begin from a pair of wage and price equations and combine them to

obtain our basic reduced—form equation that is used for estimation below.

The rate of wage change depends on the sum of lagged price change and the

desired rate of real wage growth, on the level and rate of change of the

output ratio, and on supply shifts that affect the wage—setting process.

The rate of price change relative to the current rate of wage change depends

on the change in "standard" productivity, the level and rate of change of

the   output   ratio, and on supply shifts that affect the price—setting process.

When these two equations are combined, we obtain:




                  Pt
                       =            +           +      +
                           1o't—i
                           +   3t +


where upper—case letters designate logs of levels of variables and lower—case

letters designate their proportional rates of change. Equation (1) states that

the inflation rate             depends on past inflation         the difference between

the desired rate of real wage growth in the wage equation (Xe) and the rate of

"standard" productivity growth relevant for price—setting decisions              the

level of the output ratio               the rate of change of the output ratio

and a vector of supply shift variables               and an error term (iE).3

       What are the conditions necessary for (1) to generate a constant equili—

brium rate of inflation? First, the coefficient on lagged price change

must be unity. Second, the real wage term in the wage equation and standard

productivity growth in the price equation must be equal (X_a 0). Third,
                                                                          4




 the level and rate of change of the output ratio, as well as every supply

 shift variable, must also be equal to zero        =      = Z = 0).     Correspon-

 dingly, (1) lays out those events that can cause the inflation rate to

 accelerate, including an excess of       over a1, a level of the log of the

 output ratio above zero, a positive rate of growth of the output ratio,

 and any adverse supply shock. Clearly       = 0 (i.e.,      =
                                                                 Q),   represents

 the "natural rate of output" only If all of the other conditions stated In

 the previous sentence are valid. If there is, for instance, an adverse

supply shift (z >0), inflation can accelerate even if             0. In other
words, an excess of       over    or a positive realization of any z variable.

pushes the "constant Inflation" level of output below the value of            from
which        is calculated. Thus the framework of equation (1) has the potential

of explaining why inflation accelerated during the l970s, despite the fact

that our measure of       was negative on average during the decade.

       There is one rather subtle obstacle to the estimation of (1). We would

expect the rate of inflation to respond positively to the speed of economic

expansion, cl. But there are two reasons why Pt and         may have a negative

correlation that results in a downward bias in the coefficient
                                                                       y2. One
reason is measurement error; since nominal GNP and prices are measured

independently, with real GNP as a residual, any error in the measurement of

prices introduces an opposite movement in         Second, for any given growth
rate of nominal GNP, a supply shock (z > 0) raises p and reducesq; any

errors in measurement of the z variables may introduce a spurious negative

correlation between Pt and         To avoid this problem we use the identity

Pt +     =
             y,   where the latter variable stands for the excess of nominal
                                                                            5




 GNP growth over the growth in natural real GNP         =
                                                              — q).   When this

 identity is substituted for    in (1), we can factor out Pt and obtain our

 final estimating equation:4


      (2)
            Pt                    l2t + lQ1 +                         +         ÷   ci.

      (2) is the form for which we provide estimates in this paper. We must,

 of course, specify the productivity term (X —
                                                  a)    and the exact variables to

 represent the supply shock terms (zr). We note that the long—run equilibrium

properties of (2) differ slightly from those of (1). If the sum of coeff i—

 cients on lagged prices in (1) is unity     =    1),   then in (2) it will be the
sum of the coefficients on lagged prices and on y that equal unity.



                           II TWO TJNICAUSAL APPROACHES



     Before the details of the basic inflation equation are discussed and

results presented, we first provide estimates of two simpler equations that

stress single—cause explanations of inflation. In recent years considerable

attention has been given to autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA)

models, and an early evaluation of the Nixon controls program by Edgar Feige

and Douglas Pearce used this technique. A pure ARINA model explains inflation

entirely by its own past values. The ARIMA model thus represents an extreme

view that the inflation process is entirely dominated by inertia and is

unaffected by changes in current exogenous variables.       Nevertheless, an ARIMA

price change equation provides an interesting standard of comparison for our

more complete specification.
                                                                 6



     Another unicausal approach is a simple monetarist equation that makes

the rate of change of prices depend only on a distributed lag of past

changes in the money supply. While this framework is taken more seriously

by journalists and laymen than academic economists, a "money only" explana-

tion of inflation is implicit in some recent tests of the classical equili-

brium approach to macroeconomics.5 Like the ARIMA technique, the money—only

approach allows for inertia in the inflation process if it allows past changes

in money to affect current inflation with a long distributed lag. We use the

ARIMA and money—only equations to provide an alternative estimate of the effect

of the Nixon price controls.6 Dummy variables are added to both equations for

two separate periods, one when the control effect was "on" between 197l:Q3 and

l972:Q4, and a second between l974:Q2 and 1975:Ql when the termination of the

controls created an "of f" effect.7 Columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 display the

resulting coefficients on the dummy variables and the summary regression

statistics. Both the ARIMA and money—only models fit the data for the 1954—80

period with similar standard errors of about one percentage point.   The Nixon

controls dummy variables are scaled to show the cumulative impact of the

controls on the price level during the appropriate period, and thus their co-

efficients in both columns (1) and (2) indicate that the controls held down the

price level by about 3 percent at the end of 1972, while their termination

allowed the price level to bounce back to roughly its no—controls level.

    An alternative method of assessing the impact of controls is to compute

a post—sample dynamic simulation of an equation estimated to the pre—controls

period and treat it as an estimate of inflation in the counter—factual state.9

Line l4a and l4b of Table 1 show the post—sample simulation errors of an equation

estimated for l954:Q2 to 197l:Q2.. The post—sample ARIMA extrapolation cannot
                                                                               7

                                           TABLE 1

           Measures  of the Impact of Nixon—era Wage and Price Controls
                 Using Alternative Models of the Inflation Process
                           for the Period 1954:Q2—l980:Q2 a/



                                                     ARIMA      Money—Only   Comprehensive
                                                     Model b/      Model      Reduced—Form


      1.   Lagged Inflation cf                        ————           ——
                                                                                     0.94
                                                                                   (17.42)
      2.   "On" Dummy d/                             —3.14         —3.31            —1.45
           l971:Q3—1972:Q4                           (—2.99)       (—4.68)         (—3.18)
      3.   "Off" Dummy d/                              2.46          3.07            1.52
           1974:Q2—1975:Qj.                           (3.40)        (5.07)          (2.53)
      4.   Current and Lagged M1B e/                  -———          1.46             ————

                                                                    (21.8)
      5.   Lagged Output Ratio (Qt                                  ————
                                                                                     0.23
..                                                                                  (479)
      6.   Adjusted   Nominal GNP Growth   (t)                                       0.17
                                                                                    (6.74)
      7.   Food and Energy Prices                                                    0.29
                                                                                    (4.21)
      8.   Productivity Deviation f/                                                —0.38
                                                                                   (—5.91)
      9.   Effective Exchange Rate f/                                               —0.09
                                                                                   (—3.33)
     10.   Social Security Tax f/                                                   0.43
                                                                                    (2.19)
     11.   Effective Minimum Wage Rate f/             ————          ————
                                                                                    0.021
                                                                                    (1.47)
     12.   Constant                                   0.16         —1.42           —0.03
                                                     (1.42)       (—5.43)          (—0.18)
     13.   a. S.E.E.                                  1.15          1.05             .646
           b. D.W.                                    2.07          1.60            2.22
     14.   Cumulated Errors from Dynamic
           Simulation within Specified
           Intervals /
           a. "On" l97l:Q3—1972:Q4                   —1.93         —3.46           —1.23
           b. "Off" l974:Q2—l975:Q1                   5.28          4.09            3.08



           Numbers in parentheses are t statistics.
                                                                    8



Notes to Table 1

     a. The dependent variable is 400 times the quarterly first difference of

the log of the fixed weight GNP deflator.

     b. The coefficients in column (1) are estimated in a regression equation

in which all variables are pre—filtered as described in the text.

     c. The coefficient shown is the sum of 24 distributed lag coefficients

constrained to lie along a fourth degree polynomial with a zero end constraint.

     d. The dummy variables are constrained to add up to 4.0 (reflecting the

conversion of quarterly changes of all variables to annual rates). Thus

the "on" dummy is equal to 2/3 for the six quarters listed, and the "off"

dummy is equal to 1.0 for the four quarters listed.

     e. The coefficient shown is the sum of 28 distributed lag coefficients

constrained to lie on a fifth degree polynomial with zero end constraint.

     f. The coefficient shown is the sum of a set of unconstrained co-

efficients on current and lagged values, with four lags included on lines 8,

10 and 11, and two lags included on line 9.

     g. The equation represented by each column is re—estimated for the period

l954:Q2—1971:Q2 and dynamically simulated beginning l97lQ3. In column (3)

estimation is subject to the constraint that the sum of coefficients on

adjusted nominal GNP growth and lagged inflation equals 1.
                                                                 9



 explain why inflation in 1974 was so rapid, while the money—only equation

yields simulation errors that are roughly similar to the coefficients on

 the dummy variables. This difference is to be expected, since the post—

sample simulations of the money equations use information on the money

supply during controls but the ARIMA dynamic simulation uses no Information

beyond 197l:Q2.



           III     SPECIFICATION AND RESULTS FOR THE BASIC EQUATION


     The third column of Table 1 presents estimates of our basic equation

as specified in (2) above. A line by line discussion of our variables and

results follows:

     1. Lagged Inflation. The inertia in the inflation process is captured

by a distributed lag on 24 past values of fixed weight GNP deflator inflation.

Because the explicitly temporary effects of the controls program should not

enter this measure of inertia, the estimated controls effects are removed

from the lagged dependent variable, requiring iterative estimation. This

procedure reduces the standard error of the equation and increases the esti-

mated impact of both the imposition and removal of controls. The 24 lag

coefficients are constrained to lie along a fourth degree polynomial with

a zero end constraint, and their sum, 0.94, is reported on Line 1 of Table 1.

     2. and 3. Nixon Control Dummies. The Nixon controls program is esti-

mated to have held down prices 1.45 percent at the end of 1972, but this

effect was more than cancelled by the rebound inflation of 1.52 percent.

The estimate of each effect is about half of the corresponding estimate in

the unicausa]. models. This is because the unicausal models must attribute

the control period effects of all omitted variables to the control dummies.
                                                                      10




But inflation was low in 1971:Q3—1972:Q4 in part because of the productivity

gains of this period, and inflation was high in 1974 in part because of a

productivity reversal, food and energy price shocks, and the depreciation of

 the exchange rate of the U. S. dollar.

     5. Lagged Output Ratio. This variable is the log of the ratio of real

output to the natural rate of output, that is      =
                                                          — Q1.    The Q*

variable used to obtain the output ratio and, in rate of change form, to adjust

nominal GNP growth is from Jeffrey Perloff and Michael Wachter)0 This tradi-

tional Phillips curve variable is highly significant; its coefficient of 0.23

indicates that a one percentage point excess of actual real GNP above natural

real GNP causes an acceleration of inflation of 0.23 percentage points at an

annual rate per quarter. The total acceleration over the first year of such

an excess would be greater than 0.23 percentage points, because after the first

quarter the additional inflation would begin to feed through the lagged dependent

variable.

     6. Adjusted Nominal GNP Growth. Just as the demand level variable

is defined such that a value of zero makes no contribution to inflation, the

nominal GNP growth variable is defined net of natural real GNP growth. A slowdown

in the trend growth rate of productivity will reduce natural real GNP growth and

raise y, so that this variable represents the combined effects of demand stimu-

lation and trend productivity growth.

     7. Relative Prices of Food and Energj. The first of the supply shock

variables to be introduced in Table 1 is the contribution to inflation of

changes in the relative prices of food and energy. This effect is measured by

the difference between the rate of change of the private business deflator and

that of an alternative deflator that attempts to "strip out" the impact of the
                                                                 11




changing relative prices of food and energy.11 While this variable makes

a significant contribution to the fit of the equation, its coefficient is

surprisingly low. This probably reflects errors in the measurement of

the food—energy contribution due to differences in coverage and weighting

from the dependent variable.

     8. Productivity Deiation. Suppose desired real wage growth, X,

is 2 percent per year but mean productivity gains are fixed at 1 percent.

Then equation (2) states that this will add one percentage point to the

rate of inflation. Similarly, any difference between     and    is a source

of a constant term in a regression fit to (2))2 If the rate of productivity

growth varies, it is reasonable to assume that an average of actual and mean

productivity is used in pricing decisions, that is, some fraction of the

deviation of productivity from its mean. To capture the recent decline in

mean productivity, the productivity deviation variable is the residual series

from a regression of the rate of growth nonf arm productivity on a constant

and a time trend beginning in 1970.

     9. Effective Exchange Rate. The depreciation of the dollar during the

1970s has not been included as an explanatory variable in previous studies,

mainly because it has been difficult to find a statistically significant effect

for changes in the exchange rate. We believe that this previous insignificance

of the exchange rate stems from the impact of the Nixon controls in delaying

the adjustment of U.S. domestic prices to the dollar depreciation that occurred

in two stages between 1971 and 1973. We have created a new variable which is

equal to the actual change in the effective exchange rate of the dollar (i.e.,

the number of units of a market basket of foreign currencies that the dollar

can buy each quarter) starting in 1974:Q3, but which is set equal to zero
                                                                     12




before 1974 and thus forces the entire 16 percent decline in the effective

exchange rate that occurred between l971:Q3 and 1974:Q2 to occur in two

quarters, 1974:Ql and 1974:Q2.

     10. Social Security Tac. The coefficient of 0.43 indicates nearly

half of all changes in the effective tax rate,'3 which includes both employer

and employee shares, is shifted forward into prices.

     11. Effective Minimun Wage Rate. This variable is defined as the ratio of

the statutory minimum wage to average hourly earnings in the nonfarm private

economy. Its coefficient of 0.02 means that the cumulative 8 percent increase in

the effective minimum wage rate during the four quarters in 1978 accounted for

an acceleration of inflation of about 0.16 percentage points.

     The comprehensive reduced—form inflation equation of column (3) has a

standard error of 0.65, little more than half that of unicausal models. The

more complete model substantially improves our ability to explain the 1954—80

inflation experience.

     An alternative assessment of the effect of controls is provided by the

dynamic simulation beginning 1971:Q3 of our basic equation fit to data through
           14
197l:Q2.        The on effect estimated by dynamic simulation and reported on

line 14a approximates the dummy variable estimate, but the estimated "off"

effect is much higher because the pre—1971:Q3 equation does not contain the

effective foreign exchange rate. The post—sample simulation incorrectly

attributes the inflationary impact of the depreciation of the dollar to the

removal of the controls program. To correct for this, we have run twojn—•sample

dynamic simulations of the 1954—80 equation, one of which sets the change in
                                                                13




the effective exchange rate to zero. The difference between the two siinu—

lations yields the estimate that 1.50 percentage points of the high inflation

of the "off" period was contributed by the foreign exchange variable. A more

credible estimate of the impact of the termination of controls is therefore

3.08 —   1.50 = 1.58, which approximates the dummy variable estimate of 1.52.


              IV   SENSITIVITY AND EXTENSIONS OF THE BASIC EQUATION


     Another episode of government intervention occurred during the Kennedy

and Johnson administration, when there were quasi—voluntary guidelines

established for wage increases. These guidelines, first mentioned in the

1962 Economic Report of the President, are generally assumed to have been in

effect between early 1963 and mid—1966. Our guidelines variable is assumed

to be in effect between l963:Ql — 1965:Q4.   We enter a separate dummy variable

for the three—year period beginning in l966:Ql to assess the possibility that

part of the 1966—68 acceleration in the inflation rate was due to the end of

the guidelines rather than a general state of excess demand in the economy.

When these dummy variables are included in our basic equation, the resulting

coefficients and t statistics are:

           Guidelines dummy I    (l963:Ql—1965:Q4)       0.01   (0.01)

           Guidelines dummy II (1966:Ql—l968:Q4)         0.60   (0.61)

     The verdict of these coefficients is that the guidelines program had no

significant effect on inflation. The positive influence on inflation of demand

growth in the 1963—65 period was offset not by the guidelines program, but by

rapid productivity growth. An important implication of this result is that if

the guidelines had a significant effect in holding down wage increases, as
                                                                      14




found by George Perry and others, then the program created a boom in the profit

share.

       The Carter pay standards may be similarly assessed. We introduced two

dummy variables for the periods l978:Q4—l979:Q4 and 1980:Q1—1980:Q2, respectively.

The first dummy can be interpreted as the effect on inflation of the initial

year of the pay standards, while the second dummy can be interpreted either as

the effect of the second phase of the pay standards or of the "post—controls

rebound" following the first stage. The resulting coefficients and t statistics

are:

            Carter dummy I   (1978:Q4—l979:Q4)   —0.67    (—1.08)

            Carter dummy II (1980:Ql—l980:Q2)     0.05    (   0.18)
Both variables are insignificantly different from zero, suggesting that there was

nothing unusual about the inflation experience between late 1978 and mid 1980,

and that the other variables In the equation are capable of tracking the data.

       An alternative method of assessing the Nixon controls introduced by Alan

Blinder and William Newton estimates an equation which does not use dummy

variables. Rather, a new variable represents the "on" effect that is equal

to the fraction of the CEl subject to price controls in each month, based on

government records.

       The Blinder—Newton approach has two advantages over the dummy variable

technique. First, the "off" effect is captured by the change in the "on"

variable defined only in those periods when the controlled fraction decreased.

There is no need to make arbitrary decisions regarding the dating of dummy

variables, since the constructed variable contains its own information. Second,

the controls are allowed to have varying effects each quarter rather than the

uniform effect imposed by our "on" and "of f" dummies.
                                                                  15




     We substituted the Blinder—Newton "on" variable and current and four

lagged values of the "off" variable for our control dummies, and, following

Blinder and Newton, assessed the controls effects by two dynamic simulations,

one of which had the controls variables set to zero)5 The implied controls

effect (column (a)) may be compared to our own from Table 1 (column (b)).

                                    (a)       (b)

          Standard Error           0.649     0.646

          Maximum Restraint       —1.48%    —1.45%
          of Inflation

          Post—Controls Rebound +1.35%      +1.52%

The Blinder technique——despite the extra research required for construction

of the new variable and its lack of applicability to other episodes of govern—

ment intervention——provides neither a better fit nor an evaluation of the

Nixon controls that differs from our simple dummy variable approach.




                                V Conclusions


     An adequate explanation of inflation in the l970s requires a model that

Includes effects of aggregate demand, government intervention, external supply

shocks, and inertia In the adjustment of prices. Our basic reduced—form

inflation equation relies on the contribution of two variables for Its aggre—

gate demand effect, the lagged level of the output ratio and the change in

nominal GNP adjusted for changes in natural real GNP. Three forms of govern-

ment intervention influence inflation, the Nixon—era controls, changes In the

effective social security tax rate and effective minimum wage. External supply

shocks Include changes in the relative prices of food and energy, the influence

of changes in the effective exchange rate of the dollar, and deviations of
                                                                   16




 productivity from trend. Finally, inertia is represented by the influence of

 lagged inflation on the current inflation rate.

      The central focus of this paper has been on the interaction of the

 estimated impact of the Nixon—era controls and the other variables. Previous

 studies have estimated substantial effects of the controls in holding down

 inflation in 1972 and causing inflation to accelerate in 1974, and in many

 cases have found that implied impact of the removal of controls in raising

 inflation in 1974 was greater than the initial impact of the controls in

holding down inflation in 1972. Several of the variables that play an impor-

 tant role in our basic equation, especially the productivity deviation and

exchange rate, help to explain the actual inflation performance of 1972 and

1974 and thus assign a smaller role to the Nixon controls. In this sense

part of the impact of the Nixon controls in some previous studies confound

the actual influence of the controls and the influence of left—out variables.

In particular, we conclude that ARIMA and money—only models are inadequate for

this kind of research because they omit many variables that play an important

role in the inflation process, and therefore they yield biased estimates of

intervention effects.

     Three different methods are used to assess the impact of the Nixon—era

controls within the context of our basic reduced—form inflation equation.

Post—sample dynamic simulations tend to underpredict inflation in 1974 more

than they overpredict inflation in 1972, partly because there was no role of

the effective exchange rate before 1971. The inclusion of dummy variables

for the imposition and removal of the controls has the advantage of using all

of the information available in the full sample period. Dummy variables

indicate that the Nixon controls held down the price level by about 1.3 percent
                                                                 17




between mid—1971 and late 1972, and then allowed a rebound of about 1.4 percent

to occur in 1974 and early 1975. A third technique, introduced by Alan Blinder,

replaces the dummy variables with a variable that measures the fraction of prices

that were actually controlled each quarter. Although this variable seems concep-

tually superior, it does not alter the conclusions of the dummy variable technique,

yielding almost exactly the same standard error of estimate and the same estimated

magnitude of the impact of the controls on the price level.

      Why was inflation so variable between 1971 and 1980? And why did inflation

accelerate from 5 percent in early 1971 to 10 percent in early 1980? Our basic

equation explains the high variance of inflation mainly as a result of swings in

the effect of Nixon controls, the deviation of productivity from trend, the

relative prices of food and energy, and the effective exchange rate, with an

additional minor contribution made by the aggregate demand variables and by

social security tax changes. The overall acceleration of inflation during the

past decade is explained by the adverse contribution of most of the variables.

       While the inflation equation developed in this paper identifies the main

 factors that explain the recent behavior of inflation in the United States,

 additional research is required before this framework can be used to assess

 the consequences of alternative aggregate demand policies. Although for the

purpose of policy evaluation nominal GNP growth can be treated as exogenous,

and   the value of the lagged output ratio can be calculated from the behavior
of nominal GNP and the inflation rate that            predicts, nevertheless
                                             the equation

there remain two important endogenous explanatory variables that are affected
by   demand policy and for which auxiliary equations must be developed. The

full effect of a restrictive demand policy, for instance, would alter the in—

flation rate not only through the nominal GNP growth and lagged output ratio

variables, but also through. the effect of demand policy on the behavior of

productivity and the exchange rate.
                                                                18



                                REFERENCES


R. Barro, and N. Rush, "Unanticipated Money and Economic Activity", in

     S. Fischer, ed., RationalExpectations and Economic Policy, Chicago:

     1980, 23—48.

A. Blinder, Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation, New York, 1979.

___________ and W. Newton, "The 1971—74 Controls Program and the Price

     Level: An Econometric Post—Mortem", NBER working paper no. 279, 1978.

G.E.P. Box and G. Taio, "Intervention Analysis with Applications to

     Economic and Environmental Problems", Journal of the American

     stical Association, 1975, 70:70—79.

E. Feige and D. Pearce, "Inflation and Incomes Policy: An Application of

     Time Series Models", in Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, eds.,

     Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Supplement to

     Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 2, New York, 1976.

J. Frye and R.J. Gordon, "The Variance and Acceleration of Inflation in

     the 1970s: Alternative Explanatory Models and Methods", working paper,

     Northwestern University, 1980.

R.J. Gordon, "The Responses of Wages and Prices to the First Two Years of

     Controls", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1973, 4:765—79.

___________   "The Impact of Aggregate Demand on Prices", Brookings Papers

     on Economic Activity, 1975, 6:613—62.

W. Oi, "On Measuring the Impact of Wage—Price Controls: A Critical

     Appraisal", in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, The Economics of Wage and

     Price Controls, 1976, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public

     Policy, Volume 2, Supplementary Series to the Journal of Monetary

     Economics.
                                                                  19




J. Perloff and M. Wachter, "A Production Function—Nonaccelerating Inflation

     Approach to Potential Output: Is Measured Potential Output Too High?"

     in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series

     on Public Policy, Supplement to Volume 10, New York, 1973.

G. Perry, "Inflation in Theory and Practice", Brookings Papers on Economic

     Activity, forthcoming.
                                                               20



                                  FOOTNOTES



1.   Figures refer to the quarterly change in the fixed—weight GNP deflator

     expressed at annual rates. This is the dependent variable in all of

     the equations presented in this paper.

2.   See Gordon's 1980 article.

3.   A more detailed presentation of this specification is presented by Frye

     and Gordon.

4.   Equation (2) contains productivity and supply shift terms but otherwise

     is identical to equation (6) in Gordon (1980).

5.   See especially the paper by Robert Barro and Mark Rush.

6.   The use of dummy variables to assess an intervention in an ARIMA process

     is discussed by G.E.P. Box and G.C. Taio. We find inflation in non—

     controls quarters is described by the integrated moving average process

     (l—B)p =(l—0B)a, where B is the backshift operator B X =
                                                                    X1,   and the

     a have independent identical normal distributions. If the imposition

     and removal of controls affect inflation, we may write Pt =
                                                                      a    +

     a] ONt + ct2OFF. This implies the regression equation l:OB Pt =

        1®B ONt + 2 1—OB OFFt + a, in which each variable is pre—filtered
     by subtracting an exponential weighted moving average of its past values.

7.   Other choices for the timing of the controls effects are presented in Frye

     and Gordon.

8.   The dependent variable is a quarterly change expressed at an annual rate

     and varies from roughly zero to 12 percent during 1954—80.

9.   For more on the methodology of estimating the impact of controls and other

     types of government intervention, see Gordon (1973), Alan Blinder, and

     Walter Oi.
                                                                    21




10. Any mismeasurement of        is a source of a constant term in a re2ression

     fit to (2). For example, if Q were above the level required for non—

     accelerating inflation, the output ratio would be too low to explain

     its share of the inflation which actually occurred.

ll The exact method of performing the ttstripping process is described

     in Gordon (1975, pp. 656—660). This variable was updated using the

    methods described in that source to the end of 1976, and has been extra-

     polated using a regression of the 1954—76 variable on current and lagged

    values of the deflators of consumer direct expenditures on food and energy.

12. Possible mismeasurement of Q      is   the other source.

13. The variable is calculated as the percentage change in (l/(l—T)), where

    T   is   the ratio of total Federal and state social security contributions

     to total wage and salary income in the national income accounts.

14. The estimated equation differs from (3) in two respects. First, controls

     dummies and the effective exchange rate are, of course, omitted. Second,

     the equation is made dynamically stable by imposing the constraint y =

    Our iterative procedure to achieve this stopped just short of convergence,

     so the coefficient on lagged inflation is estimated at 0.85 and that on

    adjusted nominal GNP growth is estimated at 0.16. All other coefficient

    estimates are well within a standard error of those reported in (3),

    except the constant, which climbs to 0.30.

15. The estimated equation had the effects of controls removed from its

    lagged dependent variable,
