NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OIL AND THE DOLLAR

Paul Krugman

Working Paper No. 554

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
September 1980

This paper was presented at the NBER's 1980 Summer Institute in
International Studies. This research was supported by a grant from
the National Science Foundation. Olivier Blanchard, Jorge de
Macedo, and Pentti Kouri provided valuable suggestions. The
research reported here is part of the NBERts research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #54
September, 1980

Oil and the Dollar

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a simple theoretical model of the effect of an

oil price increase on exchange rates. The model shows that the direction
of this effect depends on a comparison of the direct balance of payments
burden of the higher oil price with the indirect balance of payments benefits

of OPEC spending and investment. In the short run, what matters is whether
the U.S. share of world oil imports is more or less than its share of OPEC
asset holdings; in the long run, whether its share of oil imports is more

or less than its share of OPEC imports. Casual empiricism suggests that
the initial effect and the long run effect will run in opposite directions
an oil price increase will initially lead to dollar appreciation, but
eventually leads to dollar depreciation.

Paul Krugman
Department of Economics
Building E52—252
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
(617) 253—2932

Probably the two most watched prices in the last decade have been the

value of the dollar and the price of oil. A natural question is how they
are related: how does an increase in the price of oil affect the dollarTs
exchange rate? This paper sets out a model which can be used to analyze
this question.

There are several reasons besides its practical importance why

this

is

an interesting subject for study. First, the interaction between oil
prices and exchange rates is inherently a problem of multilateral economic
relations, since we are concerned with the dollar rate against other

industrial countries' currencies rather than against OPEC currencies. Even
a minimal model in this area must involve at least three countries, in
contrast to the one— aid two—country models prevalent in the literature art
exchange rates.

Second, the problem of analyzing an oil price increase is one in which
some commonly used siriplifications made in much recent analysis can be

showr to be misleading. Recent papers by Findlay and Rodriguez (1977),
Buiter (197), and Obstfeld Q980) have treated an increase in oil prices

as an increase in a single country's import bill, invoking "small country"
considerations in neglecting the consideration of the effects of the oil

price increase on othercountries or of how OPEC disposes of its income.
In this paper we will see that such neglect is never justified, regardless
of the size of the country concerned.
Finally, the case of an oil price increase offers an interesting
example of possible conflict between an asset market and a goods
market

view of tile exchange rate. Suppose that one were, in practice,

to attempt to assess the effects of an oil price increase on the dollar.

2

One approach would be to focus on "real" factors: how does U.S. oil import

dependence compare with that of other countries? How much of its increased
income will OPEC spend on U.S. goods? Another approach would be to look

at financial factors: ho will OPEC invest its surplus? As I will argue
later, these approaches can easily yield conflicting answers, and in the

case of the dollar appear to conflict in fact. The model developed in the

paper suggests a reconciliation: in the short run, before OPEC spending
has risen to absorb its higher income, the financial question is the right
one, while in the long run, when OPEC is spending its income, the real
questions become appropriateo

The model developed here is a dynamic partial—equilibrium portfolio model

based in large part on Kouri (1981). The structure of this model is set
out in Section 1, and its dynamic behavior is analyzed in Section 2.
Section 3 contains the analysis of the effects of an oil price increase.

Finally, Section 4 contains an examination of the ways in which the analysis
would be modified if certain complications assumed away in earlier sections
are let back in.

1. Assumptions of the Node1
Consider

a world consisting of three countries: America, Germany, and

OPEC. America and
OPEC

has

Germany sell manufactured goods to OPEC and each other;

a single export, oil, the price of

which is

assumed exogenously

fixed in dollars.

Germany's trade balance with respect to the U.S., measured in dollars,
will be

assumed

to

depend

on the exchange rate:

T=T(V)

(1)

where V is the mark price of the dollar.
relationship we

are implicitly

r,r'iting this partial equilibrium

taking industrial countries' real incomes and

3

price levels as given.

Oil imports will be assumed to be exogenously fixed in volume terms,
(2)

0A°A

Thus we assume away—until Section 4 below——the complications introduced by
the possibility that countries will be differentially successful in reducing
oil consumption.

OPEC import behavior involves spending a share '
German products, 1 —

of

its expenditure on

y on American products, where y in general depends on

the dollar—mark exchange rate:
(3)

XG y(V)X
[1 - y(V)]X

=

where XG, XA are OPEC dollar expenditures on German

and

U.S. goods, and X

is total OPEC dollar expenditure.

What determines OPEC expenditure? The crucial aspect of actual OPEC
spending behavior that we will want to capture in this paper is the lag in

the adjustment of OPEC imports to export earnings. I will assume that OPEC
dollar spending adjusts gradually to the level of dollar export earnings:
x =

where 0

X(Pö

+

-

(4)

x)

is total oil exports.2

Notice that there is an asymmetry in the treatment of OPEC imports and

the imports of America and Germany. Industrial country imports are assumed
to depend only on.prices, whereas OPEC's imports ate allowed to depend

directly on income. The basic reason for assuming this is, of course that

4

the lag of OPEC spending behind income is central to our story, while

income changes in the industrial countries are not. One can, however, offer
an empirical justification. The redistribution Of world income caused
by oil price changes involves much larger percentage changes in OPEC real
income than in the income of, say, the OECD countries, for the simple
reason that oil imports constitute only a few percent of OECD GNP but most

of OPEC's GNP. Thus in considering the impact of an oil price increase it
may not be too unreasonable to take income changes into account izi analyzing
OPEC'S behavior, while ignoring them in industrial countries.

Let us turn next to the asset markets. There will be assumed to be only
two assets, dollars and marks, each held by all three countries. Following
Kouri (1981), we will assume that America holds a fixed dollar value of
marks in its portfolio, and that Germany holds a fixed mark value of dollars
-

in its portfolio:3

MA/V

HA

DGVHG
where NA is American mark holdings, and HA and Hc are constant terms.
OPEC will be assumed to allocate its wealth between dollars and marks.
Let

be OPEC wealth measured in dollars, i.e.,
(6).

WE D0 + N0/V
where D0 and

are OPEC dollar and mark holdings. Then we will assume that
in dollars:

a fraction ci. of this wealth is held in marks, 1 —

.

MQ/V =

CLW0

= (1

—

ç)

.

(8)

5

We have now specified a complete dynamic model. The next step is to
analyze its behavior, before applying it to the central question of the
paper.

2. Dynamic Behavior
To understand the model's dynamic behavior, it is useful to begin by

deriving several balance of payments measures, First, let us derive the
German current account measured in dollars. This is German net exports to
America, plus exports to OPEC, less oil imports:
BG = T(V) +

y (V)x —

P

Similarly, the American current account may be written
BA =

-T(V)

+ [l—'y' (V)] x —P

°A

(10)

We will assume that the appropriate Marshall—Lerner conditions hold, i.e.,

and B/V < 0.

V > 0

OIEC's current account is simply the difference between exports and
imports:

B0=P00—X

(11)

The equation for the rate of change in OPEC's wealth, however, must
also take into account capital gains and losses on its German currency

holdings; thus we have
=

B0 -ct W0 ('/V)

(12)

Next we can write down capital account balances. For Continuous
exchange rate changes, we can derive a net flow of capital into Germany
which equals purchases of marks by America and OPEC, less purchases of
dollars by Germany:

6

K0 MAIV + N0/V

—

(13)

(MA/V) (V/V) + (M0/V) (V/v)

+ P0 (V/V) + a
=

[MA/V

(1-a) W0 + D0] (/V) + a

+

B0

Now consider the condition of overall balance of payments equilibrium
for Germany (we could equivalently use a condition of equilibrium for

America). We must have BG + KG =
[MA/V + a (1—a) W0 +

0;

that is,

G] (V/V)

(14)

+aB0+B =0
or

—[B0 + a B0]

V/V

MA/V

____

+ a (l—a)W0 +

DG

This is a variant of the "acceleration equation" derived by Kouri. In
Kouri's two—country model, the rate of change of the eschange rate depended
on the ratio of the current account to gross international investment.
Here we have to extend the equation owing to. the presence of a third country,

but the principle remains the same. In the special case where OPEC holds
no marks, i.e., a =

O,(14)

reduces to Kouri's acceleration equation where

the rate of change of the exchange rate depends only on tile German current
account,
•

_BG

—

A /V +D0

M

1

(14 )

Similarly, if OPEC holds no dollars, i.e., a =1, the rate of change
of the exchange rate depends only on America's current account:

iv

=

A

(1411)

+ DG
Except in these special cases, however, there i no one—for—one relation-

ship between a country's current account and its exchange rate. Figure 1

7

V

/
/

/,'I

\

//

0

(\T
6G0
x
Fig. 1

8

illustrates

the dynamic system

defined

by equations (4) and (14).

OPEC expendi-

ture adjusts towards itS income,and this behavior is indicated by the vertical schedul

X = O

For reference I also indicate those combinations of X and V

for which the current account of each industrial country is in balance.
An

increase

and to

in OPEC expanditure improves each country's current account,

restore balance, this must be

dollar in

offset by an

appreciation of the

the case of America, a depreciation in the case of Germany. The

slopes of these schedules can be derived from (9) and (10):
dV
dX

1y
T

B 0

dX

Finally,

(15)

V

A

V V

B-0
G

we have the combinations of X and

V for which the exchange rate

is stationary, VIV-o. In the figure, this is shown as downward sloping, but
From (14), the slope is

in fact it can be slope either way.

=a'

dX

Whether
of

(16)

the schedule slopes up or down

marks in OPEC's portfolio — is

depends on whether a

greater or less than y,

the

—

the

share of

0 lies

German goods in OPEC imports. Clearly, also, the slope of V/V

between those of the current—account balance schedules (15). If
holds

only dollars, a

holds

only marks, a

0 and

= 1 and

the schedule coincides with BG

s1are

OPEC

0;

if OPEC

the schedule coincides with BA

The intuition behind these results is straightforward. Suppose OPEC
expenditure
direct

were to rise from its long—run level. This would have two

effects on

the current

goods. On

Germany's balance of payments. First, it would improve

account, because part of
the other

hand, it

would

the

expenditure would

fall

on German

worsen the German capital account, because

9

OPEC would now be running a current account deficit which it would in
part finance by liquidating its holdings of marks. Only if OPEC holds
no marks can this second effect be neglected.
As long as OPEC holds both currencies, neither country's current account provides an accurate guide to the direction of movement of the

exchange rate. At point I in the figure, America is running a current ac-

surplus, yet the dollar is depreciating; at J America is running
a deficit, yet the dollar is appreciating. Nor does the bilateral trade
count

balance between America

balance each country's

and

Germany provide a guide, since given this

overall

balance

still depends on

OPEC expenditure.

Finally, note that assuming that either Germany or America is "small"
does not remove these ambiguities. Suppose we wanted to assume that Germany

is "small", and wanted to argue that this would allow us to focus solely on
the German

of

BG =

alone.

current

account. Consider the slope of V/V

= 0 relative to that

only if these converge can we use the Gerniah current account
But the relative slope is 1 — ct/y. If Germany is small, both ci. and
0;

y will be small numbers, but their ratio need not be. The only justification
for an exclusive focus on an individual country's current account is the assumption that it is "sxaaller" in OPEC's asset holdings than in its import bill.
3.

Effects of an Oil

Price Increase

The effects of an oil price increase on the exchange rate depend primarily
on three parameters: c, the share of marks in OPEC's portfolio; y,

German goods in OPEC's imports; and a =

of

imports.

the

The short

run

OG/O,

impact depends whether 0.

the

share

the German share in world oil
is greater or less than a;

long run impact depends on whether y is more or less than a.

10

The intuition behind this is simple. Since OPEC spending lags behind
income, an oil pride increase initially increases industrial country import

bills without a corresponding increase in exports. While

American and

German current accounts are thus worsened, however, there is an improvement
in capital accounts as OPEC invests its trade surplus in dollars and marks.
Whether the net effect is favorable or unfavorable for the dollar depends on
whether OPEC invests in dollars more or less than America's share of the

industrial wor1ds current account deficit.
Over tiine hotever, OPEC's spending rises to match
the

its

income, and redudes

rate at which it acquires foreign assets. Thus the balance of payments

effects

of higher oil prices depend to a diminishing extent on OPECs asset

preferences, and increasingly upon its preferences for goods. In the long
run, OPEC ceases investing abroad, and only a comparison of import and ex-

port

shares matters.

Formally, we can determine the impact effect of an oil price increase by

(14) with respect to

differentiating

_________________

d(V/V) =

d

MA/V +

P0

The long run effect
that

B0

=

=
BA

0,

(17)

+

can be determined by setting X =

T

Interestingly,

(G—,y)

(18)

the initial movement of the exchange rate and its long

run change may be in different directions. If y > n

that

P00 and requiring.

which implies

0

dP,'

(l-ci.)

.

>

n,

for instance —

is, speaking loosely, f OPEC pr.efers. American investments and German

products —

the dollar ill appreciate in the short

long run. The process

run yet depreciate in the

is illustrated in Figure 2. Initially, long run

II

V

If.
x
Fig.

2

12

equilibrium is at I.

upward andX

An increase in the price of oil shifts V/V = 0

0 right, sothat the new equilibrium is at J. By referring back

to Figure 1, we can see that America remains in current account deficit through-

out this process, whereas Germany after initially running a deficit, may
later move into surplus; but the mark will appreciate whether or not this
happens, and will begin appreciating before Germany's trade moves into
balance if it does.
What makes this case interesting is that it seems to bear some. tesemblance

to the facts. If we view "Germany" as the OECD except for the U.S., the
relationship y' >

c >

appears to hold. The U.S. share of OECD oil imports

is comparable to its share of OECD GNP, while its share of OPEC imports is

comparable to its much smaller share of OECD exports. Except for the complicating factors to be discussed in the final section of the paper, this suggests

that an oil price increase ought to lead first to dollar appreciation, and
later to an even greater dollar depreciation.

4. Some Complications
The model presented in this paper contains enough structure so that
qualitative behavior depends on only a handful of easily quantifiable

parameters. In this section I will somewhat mar this simplicity by showing
that two other factors can matter. The first of these is the effect of
oil prices on oil consumption; the second of these is the effect of market
anticipation of exchange rate changes.
Suppose that instead of being exogenously fixed, oil imports depend

on the price of oil in domestic currency. We would then have to rewrite

(2)as
(19)

OG

00(P0

V)

13

where

)

and

O( ) are

demand curves which may have different elasticities,

although in both cases we may safely assume the elasticity to be less than

one. The introduction of demand elasticity will modify both the short—run
and long—run effects of increasing P0

since Germany!s share of the

the marginal burden of an oil price increase will no longer equal its

share of current oil imports. The appropriate share variable now becomes

a =

°G (l—)
OG(l

—

+ OA(l

-

EA)

——
where C, CA are the price elasticities of oil demand in Germany and
America——numbers much less accessible to casual, or even careful, empiri-

cism than

and

A more difficult analytical problem is posed by market expectations of

exchange rate changes. I have been assuming that OPEC holds a fixed share
a of its wealth in marks; that America holds a fixed dollar value of marks;

and that Germany holds a fixed mark value of dollars. Realistically,
all of these should depend on the expected rate of dollar appreciation:
a = a(Tr)

(20)

HA = HA(Tr)

HG

H(Tr)

where 11 = E

[1/v].

The effect of. introducing these expectations, particularly if we adopt

the popular hypothesis of 'rationa1" expectations, is to blur the distinction

betwee short run and long run. As many authors have

emphasized, long—run

factors, even if they have no effect on the current distribution of asset

hoidings can still have an immediate effect on the exchange rate through
their effect on expectations. Thus the real factors can dominate the
financial ones even from the start.

A complete analysis of the effect of speculation is a difficult task,
since it involves three differential equations and hence defies graphical

analysis. A heuristic approach, however, suggests the kind of results
which ought to emerge. Suppose we distinguish between the tnon_speculativeT
value of the dollar—the value it would have if investors expected its
value to remain unchanged——and its actual value. If expectations were
static, the "non—speculative

and actual exchange rates would always

coincide. What we showed In Section 3 was that if y >

a > a,

the path of

the rate would then look like the solid line in Figure 3. Now suppose that
expectations are rational. This will change the actual path of V; it will
also change the path of the "non—speculative" exchange rates because both
trade balances and capital gains will be different from what they would
have been under static expectations.

15

If these effects are not too strong, the qualitative features of the

"non—speculative" rate1s path will not change: it will first rise, then fall.

V

V
o

tinie

Figure 3

If this is the case——and I have assumed it, not proved it——then the actual
path of the exchange rate can be analyzed using the "non—speculative"

path as a reference. For V will lie above its non—speculative value if
V/V is positive, below it if V/V

is

negative.

The possibilities are indicated by the broken lines in Figure 3.

Either V is initially expected to rise or it is expected to fall. In the
first case there must be an initial jump in the value of the dollar and
continuing appreciation for a time before V/V turns negative and the dollar
falls below its non—speculative value (this must happen while the non—

speculative rate is still rising). In the second case there is an initial
discrete devaluation of the dollar, followed by continuing gradual depre-

ciation. Thus in tLis case the long—run fundamental considerations of
current account balance dominate even in the short run. This case is
presumably more likely, the fast2r the adjustment of OPEC spending and
the more sensitive portfolio holdings are to expected exchange rate changes.

16

In

this paper I have developed a simple model which

allows us

to consider

some of the channels through which changes in the price of oil affect

exchange rates. Although the model is necessarily a highly oversimplified

representation of reality, it does bring out two basic cnsiderations. First,
the effect of the price of oil depends on whether the burden to a country's
balance of payments created by higher oil imports is greater .or less than

the improvement due to OPEC imports and investment. Second, the relative
importance of OPEC investment preferences falls over time so that in the long
run it is OPEC's import preferences which matter.

NOTES

1

Alternatively, we might suppose that OPEC attempts to fix the real price

of oil by pegging the price to a basket of dollars and marks. This would
not alter the qualitative results.
2

Strictly speaking, it might be more reasonable to assume that real as

opposed to dollar spending adjusts with a lag. Again the qualitative
results, though more difficult to derive, remain unchanged.

This amounts to assuming that each country has a zero marginal propen-

sity to hold wealth in the other's currency. As Kouri and deNacedo (1978)
have shown, what is crucial for explaining the effect of current accounts

or

exchange rates is the "wealth transfer effect": each country has a

marginal propensity to hold wealth in its own currency which

is larger

than that of foreigners. The assumption made here can.be viewed as a
shorthand

way of capturing

this effect, one which will be a reasonable

approximation if foreign assets are a small fraction of each country's
portfolio.

REFERENCES

Buiter, W. , (1978) , "Short—run and long—run effects of external
under a floating exchange rate," Econornica, 45, pp.251—272.

disturbances

Findlay, R. and Rodriguez, C. , (1977), "Intermediate imports and macroeconomic
policy under flexible exchange rates," Canadian Journal of Economics,10,
pp. 208—217.

(l978), "Balance of payments and the foreign exchange market:
a dynamic partial equilibrium model," Journal of International Economics,
forthcoming.

Kouri, P. ,

J. deNacedo , (1978) "Exchange rates and the international adjustment process," Erookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1978.

_____ and

Obstfeld,

,

N., (1980), "Intermediate imports, the terms of trade, and the
dynamics of the exchange rate and current account," mimeo.

