                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INFLATION STABILIZATION
                     AND CAPITAL MOBILITY



                       Rudiger Dornbusch


                     Working Paper No. 555




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                        September 1980




This is a revised version of a lecture in memory of Miguel
Sidrauski delivered at the Meetings of the Econometric Society,
Buenos Aires, July 1980. Financial support for the research
reported here was provided by a grant from the National Science
Foundation.  The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #555
                                                          September, 1980




              Inflation Stabilization and Capital Mobility


                               ABSTRACT



     The paper investigates the process of inflation stabilization under
conditions of international capital mobility. A first part looks at
the traditional view of inflation and payments problems as a reflection of
fiscal problems and deficit finance. From there the analysis proceeds to
the macro—dynamics of inflation stabilization under alternative polciy regimes.

     Inflation stabilization is studied in an open economy model of inflation
and output determination with high but imperfect capital mobility. The policy
regimes considered range from a monetary growth rule combined with constant
real exchange rates to a prefixed path for the nominal exchange rate com-
bined with active money for external balance.

     The analysis identifies three main problems in the stabilization effort.
First and foremost, the problems of stubborn inflation. Because inflation
does not collapse in the face of good intentions inflation stabilization
requires a protracted reduction in the level of demand. The inflation
process is modelled along two different lines, each emphasizing inertia.
Second, the velocity problem which arises from the fact that a reduction in
inflation and nominal interest rates raises real demand. This implies that
in the adjustment process Inflation has to average less than money growth and,
indeed, has to fall transitorily below the new rate of money creation. Third,
the real exchange rate problem. This arises from the fact inflation stabili-
zation reduces output and raises real interest rates, thus improving the
balance of payments, creating a sterilization problem and/or putting upward
pressure on the exchange rate. An initial real appreciation might be welcome
as it provides help in the disinflation process, but it must be recognized that
the benefit is transitory and must ultimately be repaid when the real exchange
rate, with adverse inflation effects, returns to its equilibrium level.




                                          Rudiger Dornbusch
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                          Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

                                          (617) 253—3648
       n'uricx SAB1TLISXI kND CAPAL MJB]LITY
                   Rudiger Dornbusd-i
            Massachusetts Insti tote of Technology



                The prthl of stabilisation policy in high-infla-
tion cxx]ntries has, over the last ten years, undergone a substantial
develojirent. The traditional view takes stabilisation policy to be
prirrarily a fiscal issue. Wnile recognizing, and indeed errhasizing,
that stabilisatiari involves a cut in the standard of living, this
view attaches no grat transition costs to stabilisation. It hardly
perceives stabilisation as a rracroecx)ncrnc issue. The view is even
carried to the point of arguing that disinflation has been rrade to
lock nore painful than the historical record will bear
                 The new elarnants in thinking about inflation stabi-
lisation in high—inflation countries, whether they be industrialized
or semi-industrialized, include the follcwing: First, although fiscal
policy certainly sets the trend rate of inflation when there is defi-
cit finance, inflation may be quite independent of the budget in the
shortrun and enjoy a life of its own. Second, reinforcing the first
cbservation, stabilisation encounters the serious obstacle of inflation
inertia. Inflation, other things equal, is what it was and fiscal sta-
bilisation, or expectations thereof, will not lead to a collapse of
the prevailing rate of inflation. Third, iranaged real appreciation


1See A.Harberger "The Inflation Syedrare" in J.Flanders and A.Raziri (eds.)
 Inflation in Develcing Countries,AcademiC Press, 1980.
o e e:cha4-ge te ray prove a tetfrig tool in the blti
prcces. Fourth, capital flcs, rospensive to incornational interest
thffercntials, nay bc at various stages of the cycle an aide and
a bj.en to the stabjijsatjon effort. Fifth, ex:tations prove sth—
stantially rore ircxrtant in the capital account of the balance of pay
iunts than in the lahor carket. Sixth, there exiss a pessihiait' that
icnetary restriction induces, in me ahortrun, öfl adverse effect cc.
inflation.
               The first part of this paper sketches a sirpie version
or the traditional rodel and drs the principal lesscns. The clisccuss—
ion is follo.'ed by two points of aualificat.ion. Cce concerns the c:vos-
tion fnether the system is overdete-rnined — essentially the structura—
list vi of fiscal oclicy. The other concerns the esticn of terms
of trade shc:s and inflation. In the second pert, the stbiUsetion
pr±lern is acoroathed frai the perspective of acrcecormhc cyarrics.
flrphasis is placed there on the inertia of the inflation process and
on the interaction between stabilisation rules for rroney, interest rates,
and exchanQe rates and the resulting paths for output, real exchange ra-
tes and the balance of arents.
I. IN TIa ,FISCAL POLICY AND TEPJ'S OF TDE sioc:<s




1. F1SCalPoliarj d Inflation

                 A first model of the open economy focusses on

the goods market and the current account. Two key variables

are highlighted: the real exchange rate eEP*/P            and the
budget deficit ratio 0, expressed as a fraction of GDP.

                 In the goods market fullerrployrrent equilihruin

obtains when the demand for home output, determined by the

deficit ratio and the real exchange rate, equals the avail
able supply,y


(1)                   y =   J(e,)
In    Figure 1 we show the goods market equilibrium schedule II

along which internal balance prevails.        The schedule is
negatively sloped since a real depreciation raises         demand

for home output sc that for fullemployment          we require an
offsetting c3eflauonary cut in the budget. Points above the
schedule correspond to overemployrnent and points below         to

unemployment.

                 Along FF the current balance is in equilibrium.

A real depreciation improves the current       balance      (given

elasticity conditions) .     To maintain external     balance    a

real depreciation must be offset by a demand             expansion
through an increased budget deficit.
                    The budget deficit is financed by money crea-
tion or by the "inflation tax". With the demand for real
balances, x, a function of the rate           of inflation,p, the
budget financing implies:


(2)
                           x() =

With an inflation elasticity of less than unity the equation
implies that an increased deficit ratio calls for a higher
inflation rate to finance the budget. This relation is shown
in the lower eanel of Ficrre 1.

                   Eauilibrium obtains at point A where               the
economy     is   fully employed with   a balanced current         account
or    a current account financed by      exogenous   flows   of   lending,
direct     investment and aid. Corresuonding to the equilibrium
of the real economy is an inflation rate

                   What precepts does this mOdel yield? Themodel
has three implications:


      i.   inflation   is a purely fiscal phenomenon

  ii.      tiade problems reruire for their cure both             a real
           depreciation and fiscal. restraint.

 iii.      With trend inflation, as an implication of the fiscal
           situation, the appropriate exchange policy             is to
           have mini—devaluations that stabilize the real             ex-

           change rate.

                   Suppose past policies had moved the economy to
a position of fullemployment with an external deficit                  at

point A'. The conventional advice is to reduce the, budget
e                         F

                                  C




     F            H




                              I




C
-c

         ---—.-
            -—'-..——. -
  deficit and hence absorption and to generate an increase in
  net exports through a real depreciation. This would restore
  internal and external balance at point A.    The policy mix

  would also lead to a reduction in the rate inflation.                      In

  particular with a highly nonlinear inflation—budget                     rela-

  tion the gain in terms of reduced inflation                 may         prove
  substantial,        particularly so if the gover:urent collects
  only   a nir::r     fraction of the seiqnorage.1


 2.   The OverdetermjnedS\s-em

                   first complication to the program of sta-
                       A

 bilisation is the recognition of further constraints.    The
 model is nc only one of internal and external balance and of
 budget finaoe, it         also    includes cc'nstrein     on policies impos
 ed by social relations. These may            take   any   of a variety of
 forms: rigid real waces and hence a constraint on the real
 exchange ra-e, a distribution Of income, or a relation                     be—
 tween the real        exchange    rate and the budget.                 A broad

 characterisjon of these constrainse is shcwr. in                   Figure    1

 as the scheiule cc.         The schedule suggests that             a      real

 depreciatic-,        because it   lowers the standard of living, must
 be offset by an increased budget deficit that provides a real
 income suonThnent to some          sector:   food subsidies,            credit

 subsidies, etc.



1See R.A.   undell,I.bnetaTh, CcKyear Pinlishing Co.,1971, S.Fiscner,
 "SeigTiorage arid the Case for a National Mnriey",assachusetts Institute of
Technolcy,l9E: arid R.Dor±eisch,"Iriflation, Capital and Deficit Finance."
 uouiTalofCrethtaridEar1ng , Fehr.iary          1976.
                It is aoparent that the further constraint
nkes it impossible, except by good fortune, to attain
internal and external balance. Typically the real exchange
rate consistent with full balance leaves the public with a
standard of living below the level acceptable and hence there

is pressure to fiscalize the aspirations by moving to a
deficit point such as A", ith occasional return to eXternal
balance whenever external financing crises ce to dominate.

                It is apparent that under these conditions
stabilisation policy is not only a technical issue of restor
ing the right real exd-arge rate and stopping deficit finance.

More likely some structural policies such as      tariffs or
employment subsidies are required to help reconcile the
overdeterrnjried system.
                                                                          C.



3.   Terms of Trade Shocks and Inflation


                     The inflation stabilisation problem is frequently

rendered more difficult, and indeed obscured, by the presence of
high underlying inflation combined with terms of trade shocks.
These    complications make it essential to introduce the distinc-
tion between services and manufacturs where wage-price forma-
tion is I*macroeconomicu and            (beef, coffee, oil) the
prices of which are susceptible f shochs .        naes     in the world
prices    of commodity exports or imports, reiati\Te to those of
manufactures, exert important effects on the inflation            process
through       several channels:

         i. Direct input cost effects.
        ii.    To the extent that the   commodities are   wage goods the
               required real wage in    terms of manufactures rises.
               With home manufactures priced by a mark—up on         wages
                this implies a pressure for a real appreciation to
               compensate for the loss of real income in terms of
                             increased purchasing po:er in terms of
                commodities by

               manufactures mport.s. This is, of cours, a real wage
               resistance   argument. It is particular forceful when
                the price shock occurs in commodity exports since in
                that event the economy can actually afford, from   a

               current account point of view, the real appreciation.

               Of course, for manufactures it represents a loss in

               competitiveness.

     iii. Closely related to the preceding argument, changes in

               commodity prices, in the presence of sticky       relative
            sectcra1 wages, can lead to a rise of wages in industry.

            Agair. with mark—up pricing inflation and real apprecia
            tion will result.

       iv. Chances in the real price of commodities affect real
            iricce and hence aggregate demand     for industrial output.
            A rising real price of conrnodity    exports   leads to real

            appreciation     for manufactures and conversely for an
            increase    in real corrodity import price.


            In the remainder of this paper I will abstract from
these ccinodity inflation issues. They are introduced here mainly

because in recent history they may have been an important aspect

of the stabilisation problem.1




1See   Bao Central de   la Republica Argentina AnticioiO Meiria Anua11979,
Mercad.o (Argentir) January 10,1980 pp.20-27 and,for theoretical issues:
W.Bu.iter"Shortrun nd Lonrur. Effects of External Disturbances Uner a
Floating Exchan Rate",Econc1ric-,45,l978,E.CarGOSO "Oferta de Alirrentos C
Infiaçc ",P:Lsa e Ple eaer.th,lO,l98O and R.Flcxxl and N.Peregrirr. Narion,
"The Tran.srrissien of Disturbances Uncer Alternatve Exchange Rate Regires
With Ottiira1 Inexing." ,National Eureau of Econaric Research,1980.
              flJ DYNAMiCS OF INFLATION STJ\ESILISATION


In    this part we investigate the dynamics                   of inflation stabilisa—
tion.     ;e start with a brief discussion of our                 macroecnrnjc     model
and    then   sketch        alternative    policy arrangements. After identify—
ing three key Droblems in the stabilisation effort ;e discuss
the adjustment process under alternative rules.


1. The Model

            consider an economy that produces and exports a
               We

single commodity, facing a downward sloping demand curve in the
world market. Demand for domestic output dds on ncm, e
relative price of competing importables in terms of domestic
goods,    ,    and of the real rate                   interest, r.         Output, y, is
demand determined. Ecuilibrium in the home gos market requires
the ecuality of output and demand                ,   or   in reduced fo]I1:1



(3)            y       ae       br


               Noretarv ecuilibrium,           in    ohs manner     of the standard LM
curve, determines the                interest rate, i,        as a function of real
balances and real income:



(4)            i   =   cy   —   dx


where x denotes the lo: of real balances, x=m—p with m and p


1
    Here   and e are the logs of output and the real exchange rate. Furthermore
    by choice of units y can be interpreted as the deviation of output from the
    fulleoployrnent level y = 0.
the logs of nominal morey and prices.

             The balance of payments depends, via the current account,

on real income and the real exchange rate and,
             via the capital account, on the interr1ational interest

differential adjusted for anticipated depreciation,


             B =    fé   —
                              gy +   h(ie)

             Noting the definition of the real exchange rate,           =

we   can rewrite the capital account as a function of the real in
terest rate, r =         i -p    and the real depreciation rate, é = e - p:



(z)           B =   f6    —
                              gy + h(r—6)


In defining the capital account of the balance of payments we

have, already, imposed the perfect foresight assumption in that
we identify expected inflation and depreciation with the actual

rates.


              The rnoae is as yet incomplete in tnat neither the :n-

flation process :p.or the monetary and exchange rate policies have
been specified. Even so we can look at equilibrii of the gocds irar-
:Kt     and the balance of payments, to gain some understanding of
the real interest rate—real exchange rate relations. In Figure 2

we plot as the II schedule the combinations of real interest rates
       real exchange     rates
and 'ompatible with fullemployrnent internal balance. Higher real



     Note that for simplicity the foreign nominal interest rate is set equal to
     zero. With e the nominal e>:change rate; e represents the rate of deprecia
     tion and i—è the interest differential in favor of the home country.
interest rates reduce demand and thus must be compensated by                   a
real    depriation that shifts demand toward domestic goods.Her:a
II is upward sloping.


              The schedule FF shows external balance.             The schedule
is drawn for a zero rate of real depreciation.A higher level of

the real exchange rate (a real depreciation) improves the current
account and thus must be offset by a capital account deteriora-
tion due to lower real interest rates.' Thus              FF is negatively
sloped.      Points to the right of      FF correspond to extenal balance
with a depreciating real exchange rate, and points to the left
to an appreciating real exchange rate. ngi-un equilibrium obtains
at point A where internal and external balance obtain, cornbi:.ed
with a constant real exchange rate.1 We observe that the longrr
real equilibrium in       Figure 2 is independent of the rate of in-
flation. In      shortrun, though, inflation stabilisation typically
                   the

involves a move from a point like A to B: a reduction in demand
below potential output, due to both real appreciation and increas
ed   real interest rates,and a payments surplus? Bycnd the               rea
interest— real a.n.ec:ation feature that needs explanaLon, s:a—

     We entirely abstract from the effect of current account imbalance on asset
     accumulation. For references to the extensive literature on this question
     see R. Dornbusch Open Economy Macroeconomics, Basic Books, 1980.
9
     There is now an extensive literature on this question. See in particular A.
     arti.rena antel "Devaluacion Inflaciori Y Desempleo" Economica, Jan'ary—
     August, 1968 and "The Argentina Experience with the Crawling Peg" in 3.
     Williamson (ed. The Crawling Peg: Experience and_Prospects MacMillan, 1981.
     Carlos Rodriguez "El Plan. Argentino de Estabilizacion del 20 de Diciembre"
     CEMA, July 1979, C. Calvo "Stabilisation Rules and the Nanag Float:         A
     Search for Essentials" Columbia University, 1979,    C. Diaz —      Alejandro
     "Sabilisation Policies in the Southern Cone", Yale University, 1979,issan
     Liviatan 'nti—Inflationary Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax."
     Hebrew University, 1979, D. Nathieson "Financial Reform and Capital Flows
     in a Developing Country" Iff Staff_Papers, N9 3, 1979    and     Krugman, P.
     "Speculation and Inflation with a Crawling Peg." MIT, 1979.
                    F
    r
                                                    I




                        B



         I————




              I                                    F(=fl)



                                     p

                               F-TCPI:   2




bi1s&tion 1icies have typicl1y enccntered three specific
dif ulties;
           The velocity problem: In the transition to a perrranent
           redction         in the rate of inflation the demand for real

          halnc r:es. If the price level is not instantanecs-
           ly flexible, this required gain in real balarces st
          be borne in mind in designing stabilisation rules. In

          tar:icular,a fied rricrey            growth   rate rule IITposes Un-

          necsary costs in terms of output lost.1



         pr±la. is
  This
cussion see   .         well-friliar frnn Oiicaqo prelins. For a recent dis—
                  Sirronseri   "PationaJ. Exoectations and Inflation Stabilisation"
Fundçao Get;lio Vargas, 1980 and M.Kkian and M.Knight,"Stabilisatiori Programs
in Develo ing Countr±es:A Foial Fraork . International i4cnetary Fimd,1980.
           ii. The real appreciation problem: In the early stages of a

                stabilisation program real appreciation is often weicorr.-

               ed es supporting directly the disinflation effort
                thcuqht a "cooling" of the hcsre inflation process.
                     is nelected is the fact that across steady states

               the ecuilibrium real exchange rate remains unchanged.

               Any shortterm gain through real appreciation is only' bor-
               rowed and iiust   be repaid later when the real eXthry
               rate dereciates.


          iii. The stubborn inflation problem:        Because of a lack of

               credibility,because of longterrn contracts, and/or bo
               cause of real wage resistance ,the inflation process is
               st.:bborn. The erice level is nc:           instantareos1v
               fle::ibie,   nor is even the rate of   inflation.
                       is a wide variety of policy mixes that can
                    There
 be   used to stabilize inflation. Pássibiljties range from fully
 fletble      nomonal exchange rates with a constant money growth rate
 rule to a constant real interest rate with a managed real exchange

 rate, an ince:mediate case being a constant real exohanoc rate
combined witn constant money         growth. e limit our analysis to
only      a few reimes, trying to highlight the interaction of the
inflation      process and the oolicy rules.
2.    A   Monetary Rule anda     Constant_Real Exchange Rate

              In this section we assume that the governmrnt sets
a fixed growth rate of nominal money,    and that the exchange



Beal appreciation is of course being used in the U.K. stabilisation effort.
See the dliscassi:n in House of Ccoijflg,EflouiL2netsrvpo1,H.M.S.
Stationary Cffic,July 1980.
rate is pegged along purchasing power parity lines so that
or    é =    0. These assumptions describe the policy regime. We further
need to specify the inflation process.           As our first example e
take an inflation process that highlights the sluggishness with
which expectations of trend inflation adjust to actual chrs
in monetary growth. Specifically, we assume that inflation is

determined by exchange depreciation, expected trend inflation,
z, and the output gap:



(6)                 p =   e + (1 — r) z +   cy


where z is anticipated trend inflation that is formed adaptively
on the basis of observed money growth:



(7)                   =   (rn—z)


The model, of course, implies that a sustained reduction in
monetary growth will ultimately be reflected in lower actual and
trend inflation.


                    Our assumption about the exchange rate rule,     =

implies       that inflation just depends on trend inflation and the

gap.



(6)'                  = z +



From the definition of the real interest rate i-b, and equations

(3) ,       (4) and (6)' it is readily shown that output is an increas-
ing function of real balances and trend inflation while the real
interest rate is a decreasing function of these variables, as is

the balance of payments:



(8)             y=y(x,z)      r=r(x,z)           B=B(x,z;8)


In Figure 3 we show the schedule II along which output is at the

fullemployment level and the external, balance is in equilibrium,

given the purchasing power parity exchange rate rule. The schedule
is negatively sloped since an increase in real balances lowers
real interest rates thus raising output and deteriorating the
balance of payments. To restore balance a reduction in expected
inflation is required.

                Figure 3 also shows the schedule        = 0   defined by

equation (9).



(9)                 ih - =     - ----y   (x,z)




The position of the schedule is explained as follows: If actual
money growth falls short of trend inflation          real balances are

falling unless a sufficently low level of activity helps darrpen
the inflation rate. The arrows in Figure 3 define the adjustment

of real balances and trend inflation, the latter being determin-

edby (7).

                Suppose now that the authorities permanently reduce

money growth from an initial level at point A to the lower rate,

i'i, indicated by the line through point A'. How will employment,

inflation and the balance of payments respond to the stabilisa—

tion ? When money growth is first reduced, there is no impact
effect at all. Real balances start declining, as money grc:th
now falls short of trend inflation expectation       and thus of
actual inflation. Only as real balances actually have declin-
ed,do we start having an effect. The real interest rate          is

rising and hence output starts falling. Together with the fall
in output, which improves the current account,the rise in real
interest rates improves the capital account. There is accord-
ingly a balance of payments improvement or net reserve inflows.
Inflation is decelerating.


             As trend inflation is revised in the light of
actual   money growth ,this, in combination with the inflation
dampering of the recession, helps stop the decline in real
balances. From here on,actual inflation further declines, and
real balances grow.


             The inflation trend is being revised downward in

the light of actual money growth. The output gap dnpens in-
flation and the combination of the two effects tends to lower
inflation to the level of money growth. seal balances      at first

attair. a poir.t of constancy and then start rising. Only after

real balances start rising, at a point like c,do real interest

rates stop increasing and then start falling. The turning points for

output and the balance of payments thus occur after point F,
the turning point for real balances. The turning point for in
flation and depreciation, finally, follows that of output and
real income. -These relations are shown in Figure 4.


             The exercice shows some of      the principal lessons

of the stabilisation problem. First that inflation stabilisa-
                                                     1E.


     I
         N
                 A




                     N
                                      A'
In
                                      r

                                           =0
                     L
                                           NI
             0

                         FICUPE




                                  r




                                                In




                                                time
             A..         B   C        B

                         FJCI 4
                                                           a9.

tio.    will involve transitory unemployment. Second that in tr;e

adjstrrient   process real interest rates rise,which in corrir.a-
tion with the decline in output, leads to a balance of payments
surrlus. Third, that in the transition, inflation and deprecia-
tion decline below the new rate of monetary expansion so as to
raise real balance and accommodate the change in desired velocity.



3. An    Alternative    Inflation Model


               The preceding analysis captured the stickiness cf

inflation by    the   assumption of a slowly adjusting   expectation
of trend inflation. An alternative assumption is that inflation

 is what it was, except for the accelerating effects       of    real

depreciation or overemployrrent:



 (10)          p =    \(—) +

                In    this formulation, compatible for example   with

 indexation, real depreciation exerts upward pressure on infla-
 tion because it raises input costs and cuts real wages. Conversely,

real appreciation exerts a dampening influence on         inflation.

Donestic cyclical considerations affect inflation in that un-
employment leads to a deceleration of inflation while overemplo
ment promotes an acceleration. What is special about this formula-

tion of inflation is that only a period of sustained        unemploy-
rnent or real appreciation will achieve a reduction in inflation.



4. Managed Nominal Exchange Rates and Real Interest Rates

                The next exercise considers the inflation nodel in
                                                                     2C.

(10)   and a policy regime where the nczTiinal exchange rate is cieco1:r•-
ing according   to a pre—set table . The         real rate of interest ar
hence nominal    money growth, are managed so as to maintain balance

of payments equilibrium. The model is difficult to present, b.t

it is sufficently important as a policy setting do deserve spell

ing    out.


                 The exchange rate rule is specified in (11)           as a

rate of deceleration of the depreciation rate proportional to the

discrepancy from the longrun target, e':



(11)




Balance of    payments equilibrium, from (5)' and (3)         specifies e
real interest rate as a function of the level and rate of char.e

of the real exchange rate.1



(12)             r =     -           a,B   > 0




1Frnr ba1nce of pamnts eJlibrium in (5') we tain an eation for tE
real interest rate: r=i— -((f--ga)8 -hG)/(h+gb) where (f—ga) is assed
positive. ,thus giving us (12). We can also translate the real interest race
recui.red for external balance into a real balance requirrient by solving for
the real interest rate fran (3) and (4) to obtain: j—=(ca0--dx)/(l+bc) and,
equating the io real interest rate expressions to ensure gocxis
irarket equilibrium as well as paiients balance, we solve for real balances:
x = x (8 ,ê ,). The real rrney stck required for external balance will be an
increasing function of the real exchange rate arid a declining function of
the rate of real depreciation and the rate of inflation.
                      Figure 5 illustrates the stabilisation process in
     this model. We show the internal balance schedule II and the
    external balance FF, corresponding to a constant real exchange
    rate. We also show the schedule j=O. The schedule lies in be-
     tween the FF and II schedule —    to maintain inflation constant
    real depreciation (to the rigñt of FF) must be offset          by   urA-

     employment. whether the schedule is positively or negatively
     sloped depends on the relative effects of depreciation arid   employ-
    ment on the acceleration of inflation. The case shown in Figure
     5 reflects a relatively strong employment effect. (See 1ppendix)




r
            F




                                                      I




r
    0


                                                   F(E0)
                  I




                                        C
                 The arrows in Figure 5 indicate the adjust:rt
riath under a policy that implements a deceleration of inflation
starting from full equilibrium at point A. We note that as the

policy is first set up,       inflation does not, as yet, respond.

The   nominal exchange depreciation   starts declining,           thereby

causing    the real exchange rate to start appreciating. The     tendency

for the    real exchange rate to start appreciating in turn reGuires

oli' makers     to offset the balance of payments improvement by
lowering    the       nominal and real interest rates.  The first
effect    then is an appreciating real exchange rate and a declin-

ing real interest rate. In terms of Figure 5         it        is apparent

that the initial real appreciation and real interest decline iray

be such that output rises and inflation accelerates. This need
not, however, be the case.

                 The subsequent path of the real interest rate and

the real exchange rate involve continuing real appreciation, as
inflation deceleration lags on the deceleration           of      exchange
depreciation. But now the worsening of the current                 account

requires a rising real interest rate. After the path crosses
the FF schedule the real exchange depreciation         starts        being

undone. Inflation deceleration continues,supported by the high
level of unemployment, but gradually peters         out.          The real

depreciation now improves the current account and thus allows

real interest rates to be lowered.

                 The stabilisation problem differs here fran

the preceding analysis in                   three respects:         First,

there is throughout balance of payments equilibrium.               Second,
                                                                    23.


because monetary policy maintains payment equilibrium it s
possible that inflation in the first instance accelerates. Third,

in the transition process the real rate first appreciates and
then deDreciates. It is inrtant        to   regnize that the cumulative
change in the real exchange rate is zero and that, accordingly,
by (10) the cumulative disinflation is        entirely due to an output
level that is on average below potential



5. Fixed Real Interest Rates and Manajed Real           Exchan2e_Rates
                  last application of our model looks at the
                 The

case of a pegged real rate of interest,rr, combined with an
active   real exchange rate management. The real rate of exchange
is manaced so as to reduce inflation. The particular rule for

the exc:range rate is to depreciate at the rate of inflation,but

with an adjustment for the discrepancy between actual inflation

and target inflation,'


 (13)             =    - k(-')         or       0 =   -kp


 where we have assumed that the target rate p'O.            According to

 (13), the nominal and real exchange rate is actively managed to

 achieve disinflation.

                 Combining the exchange rate policy with the infla

 tion model in (10) and the output equation in (3) yields an equa

 tion for acceleration of inflation:



 (14)              =-'k1 +   p(ae-b)
 where     is the given. real rate of interest.
                                                                           24.

                    In   Figure 6 we show the schedule =O along which
inflation is constant. A real depreciation, by raising Output,
 leads to an acceleration of inflation. To maintain inflation
 the   level   of the inflation rate must be higher so as to induce

a more vigorous real appreciation rate. Points to the left of

p=O correspond to decelerating inflation.

                    We also have   in Figure 6 the   schedule II that shows

 the real exchange rate at which fullemployment              prevails (given
 the   real interest rate) .        The schedule FF, finally, shows the
 combination of inflation rates and real exchange                 rates that
 ensure balance of payments equilibrium. Higher inflation, via
 the exchnge rate policy ,implies a more rapid rate of                     real

 appreciation and therefore a higher return on domestic assets.

 To maintain payments balance the favorable                 capital account
must be offset by a current account deterioration through a real

appreciation) Points to the left of FF correspond to a                     pay-
ments deficit and points to the right to a surplus.


                    Suppose now that the stabilisation           program         is

implemented from an initial position at point A where there is
overemployrnent (following a demand expansion) and the inflation

rate is . The excessive rate of inflation leads the government
to start appreciating the          real   exchange rate, by depreciating

the nominal rate below the prevailing rate of inflation. The ba-
lance of payments immediately shows a surplus as the real reti.in

on   home securities       ,   compared to foreign securites,re, rises.



     Conbining (13) and (5') ,       and setting the ba1are of payments equal
     zero yields:    = — ((f—ga)                      (f—ga) is assumed positive.
                                                                  25
       p
                                            I




                                                           F =0




                     III




       0




                     I V


                                        I
                                                 F




                  Over     tire,as   the real appreciation gradually

builds upi the declining
                              competitiveness starts reducing output,
while the current account
                              deterioration begins to reduce the
payments surplus. Entering into region II,output has fallen be
low potentiai,as a consequence of real appreciation. Now the
external balance approaches
                                equilibrju, but the policy of real
appreciation continues because inflation, while declining,stjll
remains excessive.  In passing to region iii         we arrive in the
policy maker's trouble zone.     Output has fallensubstantially
below normal through deliberate appreciation. The Current account
has deteriorated and is no longer offset anymore by capital inflows

Inflation has declined a lot, although it has not yet reached the

zero target.If policies are continued we now see in region IV
 an uncioir of the real appreciation. With
                                                    unemnloyrrent now
 dampenir:c   the inflationary    impact of the real deprciation
 the real exchange rate reverts to its equilibriijm value. Of

 course, to make this possible, inflation must fall below the
 target level. The early disinflationary effects of real apj:'rc--
 ciation are thus repaid in regions IV and V.

                Again, as in the earlier examples, nemplovment
 is the chane1 through which disinflation is achieved. What
 is special here is the balance of payments and real exc:-;ance
 rate cycle. The model hiahligbts the stabilisation problem in
 region    III and IV where    unemplovrrent and a deficit make it
hard to believe        that real appreciation is the appropriate policy.
 :t   is important to recognize that
                                          an attempt to return to A'
 throughrapid real depreciation or a devaluatior, might cause a
sharp acceleration of inflation. At the same time such a move
would lead to dramatic capital outflcs (The FF schedule would
shift to    the right)as the public recognizes the possibility of
 arge capital losses on home assets. This
                                                    point emphasizes the
link between the capital account and actual and prospective

p:licy

III   .
          CONCLUDING    REMARKS

                 This paper has analyzed inflation
                                                            stabilisation
policy by    stud\'ing a number of alternative policy mixes.             We
started    off with the recognition that
                                             the important issue         in

:rne discussion here alludes to the "peso problem" — the possibility of a
 change in rules which is taken into account in speculators calculation of
 the prospective return. See S. Salant and D. 1-lenderson "Market Anticipa —
 tion of Government Policies and the Prices of Gold" Journal  of Political
 Economy, 4, 1978 W. Krasker "The peso problem in Testing the Efficency of
 Forward Exchange Markets." Journal of Monetary Economics, April 1980 and
 3. S. Lizondo "Precios a Futuro de Divisas bajo Taxas de Cambio Fijas
                                                                           y
 corn Expectativas de Devaluation" Unpublished Manuscript, ITAN, Mexico,March
 1980.
                                                                    27.



stabilizinc inflation is not only the inevitable fiscalsar.a—
tion, but more particularly the macroeconomic dynamics. With in

flation stubborn or with inflation inertia, be it               because of
contracts, relative wages, real resistance or credibility,            reduc-
ing infThior.      involves inevtabl a       protracted    recc or.

                  The fact that inflation stabilisation pcses inevitably
the need for a protracted recession raises                     issues. The
first is how to avoid any excess cost that                arises from the
velocity problem or from an overappreciation of the real ex-
change rate. This suggests that a purchasing power parity ex-

change rate policy might be preferable ,although it may imply a
slower process of disinflation.         The velocity problem, in          turn

suggests    that anythingjn    the nature of a constant money         growth
rule is particularly undesirable.


                  The   chief concern, of    course, remains the proposi
tion that inflation stabilisation involves i.avitably a protract

ed recession. All the evidence suggest              that there is          not

sufficient inflation flexibility to all for a collapse of prevail

ing   inflation rates simply because       money growth has fallen. Ee-

cause the costs of a protracted recession are vast compared to
the allocational costs of policy activism ,one cannot but return

to the suggestion that an effective stabilisation program,along

with fiscal sanitation and some contraction of demand            should    in-

clude wage controls and real interest rate ceilincs.1


1
    Real interest rate ceiling are required to avoid the inflationary effects
    of tight money: See D. Cavallo "Stagflationary Effects of Monetarist Sta
    bilization policies in Economies with Persistent Inflation." in J. Flanders
    and A. Fazin Inflation in Developing Countries Academic
                                                            Press, 1980.
 2DIX
In section II;2 we cscuss the turning points of real bal&rices, real interest
ratis and the rate of cepreciation. The discussion isbased on the follcwing
eations:Frcgri th definition of the real interest rate,i—, the interest rate
equation (4) ,the iricar equation (3)                 and    the inflation equation (6') we have:
           r (vaO —dx—z)/(l±bv)    v=(c—o/(n))> Oby assurnptibn
Differentiating A—i with respect to tire,and using (7) and (9) yields:
A-2           =            — ( dx

Ence    x—z       is       negative the real interest tate is still rising at the point x,
attaining its rraximir level only after real balances have started already rising.
Peal incone and the balance of payrrents ,given the real exchange rate, share the
turning points of the real interest rate. The inflation and depreciation rate,f rat,
(6)' has the follcing acceleration:
                           + yc/(l—i) = (ir-z)            bor/(l-)

:cji usijig -2 to st±stitu-e for                 we have:

          =+ bd+                               ;b=b/(l+bv)
              =

Thus inflation initially decelerates.cataring A-2 and A—4,wheri the real rate
is constant inflation is still decelerating. Only after the real rate starts
falling,so that the term in brackets becares positive, and sufficently so, cices
inflation stop decelerating and turn around toiard the target level.

In section 11.4 we introduce the =0 schedule.FrarL the balance of payiTerts equation
we can solve for arid substituting frnn the goods irarket uation in (3) yields the
slope of the schedule:
A—5                             dr/d         (f—ga) + ah.i)/(v(gb+h)- ibh

the slope is positive as ass.cred if (vg—.ih ).                      0

Differentiating                (12) ,using (10) and (11) we obtain the evolution of the real interest
rate:
                           =
A—6                    1
                                          —(c+).      —
                                                          cqiy       d/de' = cik
At    the initial equilibrium,with y=O and G                     at point   A, the real interest   rate   is

being   lcered.Then,                as unerrloyment   develops   and real appreciation proceeds, interest
rates   start      being        raised.
