                                                  NBER Working Paper 11556
                                                           September, 1980




       Trade Adjustment Assistance Under the U.S. Trade Act of 1974:
               An Analytical Examination and Worker Survey




                                 ABSTRACT




     The goals of trade adjustment assistance (TAA) are to ease transition,
compensate injury, and bleed political pressure for protectionism. Section
I of the paper outlines the economic principles underlying these goals, arid
their shifting historical importance in the U.S. Sections II and III of
the paper discuss the personal characteristics of a representative sample
of worker recipients of TAA in 1976, and their labor market success in
several subsequent years. Their experience is compared to that of a matched
sample of workers receiving standard unemployment insurance (UI). Coinpari—
Sons in Section II focus on differences in mean characteristics and
between the TAA and UI samples, controlling only for whether workersexperience
                                                                      returned
eventually to the firm from which they were initially separated.
                                                                   Comparisons
in Section III focus on differences between the TAA and UI samples in their
ability to recover lost employment and income, using a regression approach
that in principle controls for all relevant variables, and not for just one.

      The most important conclusions of the research are the following.
 (1) The majority of TAA recipients in 1976 were not permanently displaced,
but returned eventually to their former employers. A far greater proportion
of UI recipients suffered permanent displacement. (2) Workers receiving TAA
had higher incomes on average than their counterparts who received only UI.
Their incomes furthermore fell less frequently below the poverty line. (3)
TAA recipients nevertheless experienced more frequent and enduring transi-
tional unemployment than did UI recipients, and did not return to their former
income level as rapidly. (4) The reasons for conclusion (3) were unclear. It
could not readily be explained by differences between the TAA arid UI samples
in permanence of layoff, generosity of program benefits, age, experience,
Industry, affluence, economic environment, socioeconomic status, or behavioral
responses to any of these variables.

     Conclusions (1) and (2) are at variance with most previous work on TAA.,
Conclusion (3) is not, but the traditional explanations for it are those that
conclusion (4) rules out.
                                                 'J. David Richardson
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  6424 Social Science Bldg.
                                                  University of Wisconsin,
                                                    Madison
                                                  Madison, Wisconsin 53706
                                                  608 263--3867/3876
                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE UNDER
                   THE U.S. TRADE ACT OF 197: AN
              ANALYTICAL EXAMINATION AND WORKER SURVEY


                         J. David Richardson


                        Working Paper No. 556




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge    IA 02138

                           September   1980


This paper was prepared for a National Bureau of Economic Research conference on
Import Competition and Adjustment: Theory and Policy, May 8—11, 30,
Cambridge, Massachusetts. I wish to credit Steve Parker for va1'iable commentary
and research assistance, and Walter Corson and Walter Nicholson fcr stimulating
interaction and patient responses to endless questions. I am grateful to C.
Michael Aho, Robert E. Baldwin, Robert W. Gillespie, Rachel McCuiLcch, Allen
Proctor, Steven Symansky, Martin Worif, and participants in sem±rars at
Wisconsin, Illinois, and Tufts. Financial support from the Instit:e for
Research on Poverty at the University of Wisconsin, Madison is gratefully
acknowledged. The survey on which the empirical work is based was conducted by
Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. (Princeton, :'ew Jersey) under ctract
 (J9K70010) to the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Internationa. Labor
Affairs, Office of Foreign Economic Research. Opinions and interretations
expressed herein are my own, and should not be taken to represent those of any
of the individuals or institutions named above. The research retorted here is
part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
a.




                   CONTENTS

                                          July 1980
                                                      Page




       INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW                        1


       I.   HISTORICAL AND ECONOMIC
              UNDERPINNINGS OF U.S.                     3
              TRADE ADJUSTMENT
              ASSISTANCE



      II. TAA EXPERIENCE UNDER THE
              TRADE ACT OF 1974: MEANS
              AND CROSS-TABULATIONS FROM               19
              A COMPARATIVE SURVEY OP
              WORKERS



     III.   TA.A   EXPERIENCE UNDER THE
              TRADE ACT OF 1974: JOB                   34
              AND INCOME RECOVERY IN
              A REGRESSION APPROACH
'I
                                  INTRODUCrION AD OVERVIEU



            Since   1962 in the United States, workers and firms suffering
     transitional injury due to international trade have been able to benefit
     from a U.S. program of "adjustment assistance." The goals of trade
     adjustment assistance (TAA) have been to ease transition, compensate
     injury, and bleed political pressure for protectionism.
          Section I of the paper outlines the economic principles underlying
     these   goals, and their shifting historical importance. Sections II and

     III of the paper     discuss the personal characteristics      of a representative

     sample of worker recipients of TAA      in    1976, and their labor   market   success

     in several subsequent years. Their          experience   is compared to that   of   a

     matched sample of workers      receiving standard unnp1oyment insurance (UI).
     Comparisons in     Section II focus on differences in mean       characteristics     and

     experience between the TAA and UI samples, controlling only for whether

     workers returned eventually to the firm         from which they were initially

     separated. Comparisons in Section III focus on differences between the

     TAA and UI samples     in   their ability to recover lost nployment and income,

     using   a   regression approach that   in   principle controls for all relevant

     variables, and not for just one.

             The most important conclusions of the research are the following.

     (1) The majority of TAA recipients in 1976 were not permanently displaced,

     but returned eventually to their former employers. By contrast, a f at

     greater proportion of UI recipients suffered permanent displacement.

     (.2)   Workers receiving TAA bad    higher incomes on. average than    their   counter-

     parts who received only UI. Their           incomes furthermore fell less frequently
                                       —2—


below the poverty line.     (3) TAA   recipients   nevertheless experienced more

frequent and enduring transitional unemployment than did UI recipients,

and did not return to their forrner income level as rapidly. (4) The

reasons for conclusion (3) were unclear. In particular, it could not

readily be explained by diffetances between the TAA and UI samples in

permanence of layoff, generosity of program benefits, age, experience,

industry,   affluence, economic enviromnent, socioeconomic status, or

behavioral responses to any of these variables.

     Conclusions (1) and (2) are at variance with most previous work on

TAA. Conclusion (3) is not, but the traditional explanations for it are

those that   conclusion   (4) rules out.
                                      —3—




          I. HISTORICAL AND ECONOMIC UNDPINNINGS OF

                 U.S. TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE1




     1This section is an expansion of parts of my contribution to Corson
et al. (1979).




Economic Underpinnings

    U.S. trade adjustment assistance (TAA) can be historically explained

as alleviating three problems that relate to international trade liberalization.

The first is a problem of distributional equity, reflected in protectionist

political pressure, and the second, of al].ocative efficiency, reflected in

much economic commentary. Political economy plays an important role in its

most recent justification ——   it   is now frequently defended as a bribe

necessary to avoid disastrous de—liberalizing trade wars.

     (1) Distributional Equity. Except in ideal worlds, there are always

gainers and losers from trade liberalization. To design and carry out prac-

tical mechanisms whereby every loser was fully compensated (and more) would

require a mammoth diversion of any nation's resources from wealth—producing

to wealth-transferring activity. Yet in the absence of much mechanisms,

there may be instances in which trade liberalization is rejected or reversed

because it undermines a society's sense of equity, or because its rejection

creates an implicit contractual claim to comparable protection (insurance)

in similar circumstances by those who sacrifice their gains from trade

liberalization voluntarily (in order to inherit such insurance).2 Once one



     2Baldwin (1980) is a recent expansion and illustration of these points.
                                                          each as a
Cordes and Weisbrod (1979) identify rejection or reversal
form of implicit compensation, while classifying and evaluating other means
of indirect compensation.
                                  -4--




grants either such altruism or such implicit social contracting, there

exists the possibility of a social consensus that the moderately in-

creased satisfaction of the many from trade liberalization could be judged

insignificant compared to the dramatic uuhappiness imposed on the few.3



        public opinion survey summarized in Laudicina (1973, pp. 51—57)
reveals that the most persuasive reason for opposing free trade was that
"free trade would put some American laborers Out of work because their jobs
can be done by foreign labor at much lower cost." 34 percent of the sample
said. they would "basically oppose" free trade. But only 15 percent would
continue to "basically oppose" it "if American workers who lost their jobs
because of free trade did not suffer any personal financial loss and were
retrained in jobs equal to or better than their old ones." The survey is
also summarized in Frank (1973, Appendix B).

     Partial compensation is of course one compromise position between no

compehsation and maintenance of the status quo. It seems reasonable to

insist that government policies like trade liberalization, undertaken in

the name of the whole society, should not burden any one part of it

excessively.

     (2) Allocative Efficiency. Furthermore, the kind of losses that trade

liberalization can cause are in part social losses. In the face of contrac-

tually—determined, downwardly rigid rates of increase4 in wages, rents,


     41n an inflationary environment, not only factor prices themselves, but
their rates of increase over time may be temporarily rigid. Rigid rates
of increase that are embodied in existing contracts presumably hover on
average near the sum of expected rates of inflation and productivity growth.


borrowing costs, and dividends, trade liberalization that discourages do-

mestic demand for import substitutes may cause temporary layoffs and idling

of productive land and equipment. Dislocated labor and resources are made
                                    —5—




involuntarily unproductive until they can be re—absorbed.5 And even then,



     5Characterizing dislocation as "involuntaryt' is controversial, as are
therefore the "social" costs that rest on that characterization. The eco-
nomics of optimal contracts suggests that. labor and other factor suppliers
may be influenced by uncertainty and subjective attitudes toward risk to
choose (optimally from their viewpoint) rigid—price or rigid—rate—of—change
contracts and (optimally again) to accept the consequent quantity adjustments
to their employment and utilization rates. For similar reasons, producers
may choose to contract for product price rigidity, and may find the offer of
fixed—schedule contracts for factor prices more supportive of their goals in
the face of uncertainty than flexible—price contracts. When rigid factor
and product prices are optimally chosen in this fashioit, it is not clear that
there is any social cost to the resulting periodic unemployment and excess
capacity. In this case then, the principal defense of TAA must be on grounds
of distributional equity.

their productivity may remain temporarily below par if labor must be re-

trained, and if resources must be retooled, refurbished, and relocated ——

often   by labor and resources that are themselves diverted from other pro-

ductive activity. The national efficiency cost of this adjustment process

is measured by the value of goods which could have been produced, but were

not, because of temporary unemployment, underutilization, and diversion of

resources.6 (And there may also be very real subjective and psychic costs



     6Ef forts to calculate these costs empirically have been made by Magee
(1972), Cline et al. (1978), and Baldwin et al. (1980).


to those unemployed that affect their future productivity unfavorably and

permanently).

        Both of these concerns can be seen underlying the U.S. political!

economic/philosophical concept of "injury" that was prominently stressed

in the Trade Agreements program of 1934. The belief is that trade



     7Metzger (1971, Pp. 319—326) is a useful brief history of the concept
and its reference to TM.
(
                                           —6--




    liberalization should be abandoned if it involves undue economic injury

    to U.S.   firms   or labor groups.. That rule was formalized in the late 1940s

    by the "escape—clause" provisions f U.S. trade legislation, and also by

    Article XIX of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), Govern—

    merits could "escape" from trade concessions that caused undue injury by

    restoring, their previous trade barriers or acceptable substitutes.    The

    domestic income distribution would presumably return toward the desired

    status quo. And wasteful unemployment of labor and resources would be

    discouraged.

         Invoking the escape clause, however, appeared to many commentators to

    be a costly way to avoid undesirable dislocation, it essentially surrendered

    all resource—reallocation and standard—of—living gains that had come from

    the trade concession in the name of avoiding inequity and dislocation ——

    thereby throwing out the baby with the bath water. Furthermore, under the
    rules of the CATT, recourse to the escape clause allowed trading partners

    to be compensated8 through retaliation —— which could sometimes impose



         8Two "needs" for compensation invariably arise in trade policy: the
    need for domestic losers to be compensated by domestic gainers, and the need
    for foreign losers to be likewise compensated. In both cases, once the merit
    of compensation is granted, the key problem is finding the most efficient
    (or least inefficient) scheme for carrying it out. See Cordes and Weisbrod
    (1979).

    unexpectedly severe injury on the U.S. export.ables sector. Finally the U.S.

    escape clause made other nations less willing to embark on significant multi-

    lateral liberalization, since they could not be certain of just how permanent

    U.S. concessions would be (Metzger (1971,     p.   324)).

         In practice, the escape clause was simply infeasible as a tool for

    avoiding inequity and dislocation while pursuing expanded national pur—
                                  —7—




chasing power through trade. Between 1947 and 1962, the U.S. Tariff

Conznission found injury in 33 escape—clause cases brought before it, and

split evenly in 8 more. Of the 41, the President invoked the escape clause

in 15, and refused to do so in 26, presumably with an eye to foreign re-

action and retaliation. In the 15, at least some beneficial trade liberali-

zation was abandoned. In the 26, at least some undesirable injury was left

unrequited.

     To several comniissions and commentators in the 1950's, this Hobson's

choice was neither intrinsic nor inevitable.9 Most explored and recommended



     9Frank and Levinson (1978, pp. 2—3) cite a number of examples, including:
an influential article by Clair Wilcox (1950); the "Bell Report" (U.S. Public
Advisory Board for Mutual Security (1953)); and the well—publicized 1954 ideas
of David McDonald, president of the United Steelworkers of America in the
"Randall Report" (U.S. Commission on Foreign Economic Policy (1954)). For
eight years following McDonald's proposal Congressional bills were introduced
that codified the idea of trade adjustment assistance. But no hearings were
ever held, even during consideration of the 1955 and 1958 extensions of the
Trade Agreements Act (Metzger (1971, p. 323)).

alternative ideas that later became embodied in trade adjustment assistance:

(1) directly targetted financial support to compensate both dislocated labor

and firms; and (2) encouragement to both labor and firms to re—orient quickly

their skills, resources, and enterprise toward expanding buoyant industries

(such as exportables) where their productivity would be enhanced in the long

run. It was hoped that the former aspect would ease distributional inequities

from trade liberalization, and thereby remove political obstacles to it. It

was hoped that the latter aspect would reduce the duration of inefficient,

involuntary unproductivity for resources moving among sectors, and thereby

reduce the economic cost. of trade liberalization. Neither aspect, of course,
                                     -8-




would force the U.S. to forego beneficial trade concessions. And neither

would provoke foreign anger, retaliation, or reluctance to bargain.     Adniin—


istrative resource costs of each kind of compensation would probably have

seemed   comparable   —— some government agency would have to investigate and

recommend in each case, and the executive branch would have o approve or

deny the recoitiniendation. For all dimensions taken together, therefore, trade

adjustment assistance seemed in principle to dominate escape—clause relief.

     (3) Bribes. In recent years, the issue underlying trade adjustment

assistance has changed from T0 much trade liberalization?" to "how much

protection?". As a result, TAA is frequently defended from a new point of

view that springs from political economy. It is argued that if TAA were

not available, the political forces for increased protection would dominate,

imposing large social costs through inefficiencies that would increase

exponentially as trade barriers rise. TM still assists and adjusts ex post.

But now it also bribes ex ante those coalitions of losers from trade that

would destroy a socially beneficial status quo in the absence of TM. In
                                                        and allocative effects:
its new role, then, TAA has additional distributive

compensating groups with credible threats to do social harm, and avoiding

the allocative inefficiencies that are the instruments of that potential harm.


The Program Under the Trade Expansion Act of 1962
                                                    attitudes both at home and
      The Kennedy Administration was prodded by
                                                   formally in 1962. Kennedy
 abroad to propose trade adjustment assistance
                                  multilateral tarife cuts to assure U.S. access
 very much wanted significant
                                                To gain the same commitment from
 to the burgeoning European Common Market.
                                               tightening of the criteria for
 European nations, he proposed significant
                                        —9—




escape—clause relief, so as to reassure them of the permanency of U.S.

concessions. To reassure Congress about this tightening, and to gain

cozgressional authority for substantial tariff cuts, he proposed TM      as
the preferable way of relieving any U.S. injury. A cautious Congress in-

corporated a carefully circumscribed program1° into the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.



     10Congressional caution was due largely to the unprecedented nature of
the program. The early 1960's also marks the beginning of a similar program
to assist Americans dislocated by military base closings, and to help them
adjust. These years also saw passage of labor "adjustment" legislation such
as the Manpower Development and Training Act (1962) and the Economic
Opportunity Act (1964). On these parallel programs to TM, see 1'rank and
Levinson (1978, Chapters 6 and 7). Trade adjustment assist3nce was also a
temporary feature of the Canadian—American Auto Agreement, and is summarized
briefly by Fooks (1971, p. 352) and Jonish (1970).

     The most important distributional assistance provisions of this early TAA

program were:

                ——   for   labor: supplements to unemployment insurance (UI)

          payments to replace 65 percent of normal income for up to one

          year,11 and up to a year and a half for workers who were over



     11One might argue that normal unemployment insurance would have been
sufficient. But that would give no weight to the social—choice motivation
for compensating this injury. Workers dislocated because of trade liberali-
zation are paying a personal price for a policy deemed socially profitable.
On the other hand, workers dislocated because of similar socially profitable
policies such as deregulation, environmental control, and occupational safety
and health standards receive no compensation beyond UI.


          60 or being retrained, as long as such payments did not exceed

          the maximum income—support level of 65 percent of the average

          weekly manufacturing wage;
                                      —10—




               ——   for   firms: special ta privileges that enabled

         them to increase after—tax profits.

The most important provisions that were designed to reduce inefficiency by

speeding adjustment included:

               ——   for   labor affected (or threatened) by trade liberali-

         zation:      (1) special encouragement to take part in existing

         training, counseling, and job—placement programs (but no

         special programs); and (2) relocation allowances covering

         family moving expenses to a new job elsewhere:

               ——   for   firms affected (or threatened) by trade

         liberalization: low—interest loans or loan guarantees

         for modernization or retoo1in of plant and equipment and

         for acquisition of working capital; free tectiriical con-

         sultation on adapting to change, and on sales outlooks and

         forecasts.

     In practice, trade adjustment assistance under this legislation was

initially non—existent. The support of organized labor for the US. program

quickly dried up as seven years went by with significant import growth but

without a single approval of •        adjustment assistance case. (Six cases
were turned down.) Adjustment assistance, in the eyes of most labor

spokespersons, was a cruel hoax.

     What   created   this dormancy was a combination of stringent criteria for

eligibility, and strict interpretation of the criteria by the Tariff Coinmis—

sion officials responsible for ruling on each case. To be approved for

adjustment assistance benefits, petitioners had to prove not only that they
                                           —11—

had been injured by U.S. trade liberalization, but that            it   had   been the
major    cause of their injury. "Major" was initially interpreted to mean
"single most important." That conservative interpretation made approval

almost       impossible ——   labor   and management are continually buffeted by a

myriad of other important shocks in addition to trade liberalization,

        Furthermore, the process of applying for adjustment assistance was a

bureaucratic nightmare. It not only diverted the services of company and

union officials, but also required lawyers in preparation of "the case,"

and finally involved considerable time. Each case had             to    be determined

within roughly eight months, but coupled with other lags and delays, it

could sometimes take more. than two years tQ          rece.ye   the Urst adjustment
                                                                   12
assistance payments — even when the case was approved,                  There is no



        12
          Bale
            (1973) reports an average delay of 13 months between separation
and receipt of the first adjustment assistance check. McCarthy (1975a,
p. 8) reports an average delay of 19.4 months for a sample of dislocated
New England shoeworkers. Other studies of worker and firm experience
under the initial U.S. TAA program include McCarthy (1975b, l975c), Neumann
(1978), and Neumann et al. (1976). Studies of worker experience under the
most recent TAA program include Corson et al. (1979) and Jacobson
(1979). Studies of worker and firm experience under both programs
include numerous General Accounting Office reports, Frank and Levinson
(1978),      and Bale (1979).


doubt    that many firms and labor groups simply were unwilling to apply. Even

approval would have been unprofitable. For them, adjustment assistance might

just as well not have been available.

        The Nixon Administration brought a shift toward less strict inter-

pretations in the early 1970's, and revived U.S. adjustment assistance.

Both applications and approvals accelerated. Legislative revision of the

adjustment—assistance program under the U.S. Trade Act of 1974 made an even

more dramatic impact, as revealed in Table 1. Most dramatic of all is the
                                   —12--




increase in petitions and projected outlays brought on by the auto—centered

recession of 1979—80. These are not reflected in the table but have been

estimated to require an extra $1 billion of outlays in fiscal 1980 and

$0.4 billion in fiscal l9l (Washington star, April 3, 1980). 859 petitions

fo.r TAA were filed during the first three months of 1980 alone (Rosep

(1980, p. 2))!


The Program Under the Trade Act of 1974

      Under the Trade Act of 1974, the number of wbrkers certified eligible

for TAA benefits quickly rose to. more than 10 times its annual average under

even the liberal administration of the former prcgram. And budget outlays

mushroomed comparably.

      Statutory changes that made adjustment assistance more attractive

included: (1) raising labor's potential income support with TAA supplements

to 70 percent of normal income, as long as this did not exceed 100 percent


(raised from 65 percent) of the average weekly manufacturin.g wage; (2)

requiring that labor cases be determined in two, not eight, months, by the

Secretary of Labor, and not by the slow—moving, quasi—judicial International

Trade   Commission (ne the Tariff Commission); (3)   providing separate funds

out   of tariff revenues for retraining trade—displaced workers;   and (4)

allowing reimbursement for a portion of job—search expenses.

      But by far the most important statutory changes related to eligibility.

First, adjustment assistance was made potentially available to firms and

labor injured by imports f or      reason, whether because of government

trade concessions or not. And second, imports needed only to contribute

importantly to the injury, not be its major cause.
                                                       TABLE 1

                                      THE HISTORY OF U.S. ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE




                               ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR LABOR                          FIRM ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE


                    Cases     Cases      Number of      Number of         Dollar        Cases       Cases      Dollar
                  Approved   Denied       Workers        Workers          Outlays     Approved     Denied      Outlays
                                            in             in            (Millions)                           (Millions)
                                           Cases          Cases
                                         Approved        Denied


UNDER THE TRADE
E)ANSION ACT
OF 1962:

    1962_721         56        80          23,519              27,632      n.a.           6          15          n.a.

    1972_752         54        91          30,380              39,799      n.a.          22         n.a.         n.a.

     Total          110       171          53,899              67,431      $75.6         28         n.a.        $45.3


UNDER THE TRADE
ACT OF 1974:                                               ,


    l975            123       112          51,261              56,887      n.a.          13          1          $    3.5

    1976            428       442         131,765       177,889            $162.5        25          3          $14.4

    1977            413       612                              99,624      $151.7       116          3          $2e.3
                                          107,674

                                                       —                                129          1          $72.2
    1978            844      1010         126,403              65,l79      $280.0

    1979            710       957         165,123              63,1896     $27O.O       n.a.        n.a.            n.a.
   1October, 1962, when the Trade Expansion Act took effect, through February, 1972.

    2March, 1972 through March 1975, when the Trade Expansion Act was superseded by the Trade
Act of 1974.

    3The nine months from April to December.

     4The cumulated total of workers denied adjustment assistance unaccountably falls from the
22nd to the 23rd Annual Report on the Trade Agreements Program (see sources below). Three
industries account for almost all the decline

                                                   Workers Denied Trade Adjustment Assistance
                                                  4/3/75 — 12/31/77        4/3/75 — 12/31/78

     Total                                           334,404                  269,221
     Fabricated Metal Products (SIC 34)               40,308                    9,305
     Electrical Machinery (SIC 36)                    26,056                   16,194
     Transportation Equipment (SIC 37)               135,635                   64,438


     5First 11 months of 1979 except for dollar outlays, which are for the calendar year.

     6332,410 less 269,221 (see note   4   above).

     7Washington Post, April 10, 19S0.



     Sources; U.S. House of Representatives, Hearings J3efore the Subcommittee on Foreign Economic
                                                                     Second Session, April 24—26,
Policy of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Ninety—Second Congress,
                                                                                     President of
May 9—li, 17; 1972, entitled Trade Mjustment Assistance (Washington, 1972),— p. 49;
the United States, Twentieth Annual Report on the Trade Agreements Program    1975, pp. 47—50;
Twenty—First Annual Report on the Trade Agreements     Prom —_1976, pp. 56—59, 74; Twenty—Second
Annual Report  on the Trade Agreements Program — 1977, pp. 65—70, 118; TwenyTThird Annual Report

ofl the Trade Agrenents Program — 1978, pp. 92—93, 163—166; U.S. Department of Labor (1979),
Table entitled "Cumulative Program Activity."




    n.a. =   not   available.
                                    —15—




     While   the   second change is laudable from the point of view of equity

(and perhaps efficiency), the first raises awkward questions regarding

a distributional defense of TAA ——    that   policy for the national interest

not impose excessive burdens on any citizen. Why, for example, should

workers be compensated at higher than UI levels for market—determined injury

just because the markets are international? Is it economically defensible

that the U.S. compensate domestic producers who are in an extreme case lazy

or slow to adopt technological advances, thereby losing competitiveness to

foreigners? Compensation for such injury is possible under the new adjust-

ment—assistance program. The increasingly familiar answer is that "political

reality" dictates such compensation as a super—normal bribe to mollify

protectionists. But the potential conflict between this rationale and a

society's distributional goals is apparent. Such bribes may create

inequities rather than curing them. And they clearly distort market signals

and incentives.13



     13Alan Deardorff has argued that one should not overemphasize the
severing of TM's link to trade concessions under the 1974 Act. TAA is
still linked to government trade policy to the extent that if it were not
there, then increasingly protectionist trade barriers would substitute for
it. One can view the U.S. government thus as using TAA in the familiar
historical way to facilitate "concessions" on potential trade barriers
(that is, to reject recourse to them).

     A second answer might begin with the observation that most foreign

governments are committed to aiding industries that suffer structural dis-

location and adjustment problems from any source, including the market)4



     14Recent summaries of foreign adjustment assistance programs, some
trade—related and some not, exist in Frank and Levinson (1978, Chapter 9),
Weisz (1978, Part III and Appendices B and C), and U.S. General Accounting
Office (1979). Baldwin and Bale (1980) contains a useful summary of Canadian
adjustment assistance programs, and on these, see also Jenkins et al.
(1978).
                                  —16—




In light of this, protectionist changes   in   U.S. adjustmeflt assistance

can perhaps be defended as defensive, equalizing retaliation to foreign

beggar_your_neighbor policies with adverse consequence for the     U.S.   income

dis tribut ion.

     A general impression of the 1974 program in practice is that its

assistance (equity) provisions have been considerably more successful than

                                                         for one is not
its adjustment (efficiency) provisions. And success

necessarily unrelated to failure for the other.      Insufficient attention has

been drawn to the intrinsic incompatibility of "assistance" and "adjustment"

programs as presently structured: one of the surest ways to bring about

adjustment would be to provide no assistance, and assistance that compensated

for every burden would leave no incentive to adjust.       One of the surprising

                                                                sections was the
conclusions of the worker survey reported on in subsequent

large number of TAA—supported workers who returned not only to their former

industry, but to their former firm (roughly 3 out of every 5), and even to

their former job.15 Generous TAA benefits niay even



     15This accords well sith McCarthy's (1975c, p. 63) finding that roughly
                                            shoeworkers who received TM
two out of three re—employed Massachusetts
benefits under the 1962 program remained in the shoe industry. By contrast
Neumann   etal. (1976, pp. 3—19, 22) found that only about one in five re-employed
TAA recipients remained in their former industry.

                                           of the number of workers needing to
have brought about a perverse expansion

be compensated —_   if   it made emplOyers more willing to lay them of f.16 Once


                                                                for laying
      16Employers do not pay any supplemental financial penalty
 off workers who will be supported by TM supplements  to UI. Yet  they may
                                                        TM benefits make
 take advantage of the fact that comparatively generous            of these
 workers less resistant to layoffs. On the possible implications
                                         Feldstein (1975, 1976, 1978)
 matters for temporary unemployment, see
                                  —17—




a worker is certified eligible for TAA benefits, that eligibility is auto-

matically activated for all layoffs covered by the petition in the subsequent

two   years.
       Based on the survey of 1976 recipients that is described below, adjust-

ment aspects of the 1974 program ——   training,   counseling, job—search, and re-

location allowances —— were neglected about as much under the 1974 program

as earlier. Less than 10 percent of TAA recipients took advantage of

available employment services, and published figures on cumulated experience

are even more discouraging (U.S. Department of Labor (1980)). Only 1 Out of

every 30 TAA recipients from 1975 through 1979 (November) entered training;

only 1 out of roughly 200 received a job—search allowance; and only 1 out

of roughly 350 received a relocation allowance.17



     17Use of these adjustment services has increased markedly among recent
TAA recipients, however. See footnote 2 of Aho (1980).


       Distributional goals and realizations are by contrast much more con-

sistent. Combined UI and TAA payments replaced 76 percent of after—tax

income on average for as long as the eligibility of workers surveyed lasted.

Nevertheless, the survey reveals that workers who are permanently displaced

by trade seem to suffer a large income sacrifice even three or four years

after displacement (10 percent lower incomes for ten than in their former

job, compared to 20 percent higher incomes for comparable UI recipients;
                                                                 And it seems
5 percent lower for women, compared to 16 percent higher).

there still remained substantial unpredictability and unduly long delays in the

process of petition, certification, and delivery of benefits. Despite the
                                —18—




attempt to streamline the process, the first TAA   payment was still generally

received more than a year after the separation that justified it.18 Lump



     18Fourteeti months on average from the survey, which applied to 1976.
The average lag between separation and application was half of the total.
Considerable improvement in this aspect of performance has taken place in
1979 and 1980, however. See Aho (1980, footnote. 2) and Rosen (1980, p 4).


sum payments were still received by almost 4 out of 5 surveyed TAk   recipients,
and delays in payments during the first year after sEparatiOn caused wrkerst

income losses to be more than 50 percent higher than if TM payments had

been made "as earned."
S




                                      —19—




           II. TAA EXPERIENCE UNDER THE TRADE ACT O 1974: MEANS AND

            CROSS—TABULATIONS FROM A COMPARATIVE SURVEY OF WORKERS



        Describing the beneficiaries of the program, including the stability,

    level, and growth of their income, is more important for TAA than for many

    other government programs because of its distributional and political jus-

    tifications. Sensible assessments of the program must identify whether those

    who are aided are in fact "deserving" by some measure of equity or political

    muscle. And such assessments should attempt to measure the extent to which

    program benefits offset injury.19 How the "deserving" are defined —— whether



         19As described below, this aspect of any assessment is methodologically
    difficult. In principle, TAA benefits are paid whenever trade—related injury
    is documented, and are not paid when no injury is present. Thus in principle,
    one can observe instances only of simultaneous injury and benefit or of the
    absence of both. That is, one can detect only the net influence of injury
    and benefits. Short of social experimentation in which some economic agents
    experienced either the injury or the benefits, but not both, there seem to
    be only very subtle, uncertain ways of quantitatively assessing the scope of
    injury alone, the impact of benefits alone, or the "extent to which program
    benefits offset injury." A careful attempt is Jacobson (1979).


    as poor, old, ambitious, productive, politically powerful, or some combina-

    tion will not concern us here.

        We will characterize workers receiving TAA, and not firms. In this

    section we do so by comparing them one—dimensionally and two—dimensionally

    to a sample of peers, focussing on unconditional mean differences or else

    controlling for one other variable via cross—tabulations. In the next section

    we compare TAA recipients to their peers multi—dimensionally, controlling

    when feasible for all variables that are alleged to cause different worker

    experience via regression analysis.
                                   —20-




A Recent Survey


     The most recent survey of worker recipients of TAA was commissioned by

the U.S. Department of Labor, and is   summarized in Corson et aL (]979)20


     20Previous surveys are referenced in note 12 above.


Sample design and survey methods are described at length in Appendixes A and

B of that report.

     Interviews were carried out from November 1978 through February 1979,

virtually all of them in person, under the supervision of Mathernatica Policy

Research, Inc. (Princeton, New Jersey). Interviewees had received first

TAA payments in 1976, and the survey sample was designed to represent the

population of 1976 TAA recipients. 84 percent of those interviewed were

separated from their employer in late 1974 or 1975; 16 percent were

separated in 1976. For comparison purposes, a smaller sample of UI recip-

ients (not receiving TAA) was selected from the same state unemployment offices

that administered benefits to TAA recipients.21 The interview form was pre—



     21For reasons described in Corson et al. (1979, pp. 195—198), the UI
sample was not matched precisely to the TAA sample with respect to either
industry (see below) or time of separation. Only 65 percent of the UI sample
left their jobs in late 1974 or 1975. Several comparison groups other than
comparably located UI recipients were considered, yet seemed like inferior
choices for reasons described in Corson et al. (1979, pp. 191—96).


tested and modified accordingly. Interviewers were trained and continually

supervised. Interview data were cross—checked through subsequent calls and

visits by supervisors. The response rate among TAA recipients was 70 percent,
                                   —21—




and among UI recipients 54 percent. A few known characteristics of non—

respondents (from state unemployment office records) were compared to char-

acteristics of respondents. These suggested little non—response bias, and

no particular reason for believing that biases which remained affected one

group unduly compared to the other. The ultimate survey sample consisted f

                        —— 963 TAA recipients ——

                        —— 538   UI recipients ——

     The TAA sample was stratified by industry, represented in the same pro-

portions that characterized the industry source of 1976 TM payments. Columns

(1) and (2) of Table 2 describe the inter—industry manufacturing distribution

of workers in the survey (only one worker interviewed was in a non—manufacturing

industry) and in the corresponding national population of TAA recipients.

Column (3) suggests that the distribution has some claim to generality, having

not changed significantly during the first five years of the new program. In

late 1979 and early 1980 however, the auto industry's share of TM certif 1—

cations mushroomed. Column (4) describes the matched UI sample in the survey.

     Interviews were conducted in 7 states, 3 chosen for the high proportion

of TAA payments being made there (Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York), and 4

chosen randomly (California, Indiana, Massachusetts, and Virginia) from a set

of 4 industry groupings, with the probability of selection being proportional

to the number of TM payments in each state. 65 percent of the national pop-

ulation of TAA recipients resided in those 7 states. Equal numbers of inter-

views were conducted at each of 10 locations within each state. The locations

were chosen from a random sample of TM petitions classified by industry and

weighted by the number of workers each petition covered. The locations ulti-

mately selected reflected a significant variety of labor—market conditions.
                                      —22—



                                    TABLE 2



                       PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF TAA
              AND UI RECIPIENTS IN MANUFACTURING: BY ThTDUSTRY




                               TAA RECIPIENTS                     UI RECIPIENTS

                       (1)             •(2)         (3)                (4)
                      1976           1976         1975_801            1976
                    Survey       National        National            Survey
                    Sample      Population       9pulation           Sample

Footwear               7.7            8.4        10.3                  0.4



Apparel and
   Other                                                     2
Nondurables          30.3            25.7        22.5 plus            22.8


Automobiles           23.7           28.7        22.6                 12.7



Steel                 20.6           18.1        18.9                 19.2


Other                                                         2
  Durables            17.7           19.1         11.8 plus           44.9


1Fro the start of the program through the first three months of 1980 only.

213.3 percent of TAA   recipients   are unaccounted for in the source cited
 below.




Sources: Column (2) from Corson et al. (1979, p. 192); Columns (1) and (4)
          from data tape underlying Corson et al. (1979); Column (3) from
          Rosen (1980, p. 3).
                                       —23—


       As this was the first comprehensive survey of worker experience under

the Trade Act of 1974, some differences from previous surveys are due to

the changes in the TM     program   from the Trade Expansion Act    of   1962.

       Chief   among them is the dramatic increase in recourse to TM, due
largely to the easing of the eligibility criteria. As a result there is
some reason to believe that this survey is more representative and more
reliable than prior    ones because of   the larger pooi of TM recipients to
sample   and because of the reduction in any systematic bias (e.g., against

small petitioners) caused by excessive petition costs under the old prograxa.

       On the other hand, there are subtle differences between this survey

and   previous ones that arise because of changes in eligibility requirements.
Because   imports need now be only an important cause of injury and not the

major cause, it is almost. certain that       workers   in the current survey will

be   less injured by trade on average than workers in previous surveys. On
the other hand, because TM can now legally be awarded because of trade—
related injury for        reason, whether due to prior government trade con-

cessions or not, the current survey is probably more representative than

earlier ones of workers displaced by imports as a whole, rather than just

that   portion   of imports on which the government negotiated liberalization.


Characterizing     TM Recipients
       The most important information in evaluating the TM program concerns

the characteristics and experience of workers receiving TM. Some of these

characteristics and experiences in our sample confirmed widespread impressions;

many did not. Some are well—known from previous surveys; others have received

little notice.
                                   —24—


     It is known, for example, but undermphasized, that almost all reci-

pients of TAA work in manufacturing industries. Hence, their peers are

most accurately. other manufacturing workers, not U.S. labor at large. It

is also well known that TAA recipients are more concentrated than their

peers in footwear and apparel, as Table 2 reveals. It is less well known

that the auto industry is the source of a much higher proportion of TAA

recipients than of their peers —— even as eaxiy as 1976. These industry

differences between the TAA and UI samples can be argued to be

the sole source of differences between beneficiaries of TAA and others,

without any reference to international trade. But this observation begs

the question of what caused the industry differences ——   to   which a sensible

answer is international trade.

     Among the most important findings of this survey is that TAA recipients

were much more likely than UI recipients to experience temporary unemployment

or reduced hours, as revealed in Table 3. They were only barely more likely

than UI recipients to have worked for a company that closed down, and much

less likely to have changed their industry or occupation between separation

and the interview, roughly three years later. For TAA recipients, worker

experience differed significantly among those on permanent layoff, those on

temporary layoff, and those on reduced hours. Workers on temporary layoff

made up the majority of the TAA caseload. Since most previous commentary on

TAA has focused on permanently displaced workers, it is useful here to

describe the connection between temporary worker displacements, international

trade, and the TAA program.
                                —25—


                              TABLE 3


                    PERCENTAGE DISTRLBUTION OF
              SURVEL'ED TAA AND UI RECIPIENTS (1,976):

                      BY TYPE OF SEPARATION AND
                             ADJIJS TNT



                                  TAA RECIPIENTS         UI RECIPIENTS

TYPE OF SEPARATION:

  —— permanent                          25.2                 56.8
  —— temporary                          58.2                 39.9
  —— reduced—hours1                     16.6                  3.3




ADJUSTMENT:

 Company closed down                    16.0                 15.2

 Changed industry                       15.6                 31.2
   —— permanently displaced             67.5                 68.0

 Changed occupation                     25.1                 39.1
   —— permanently displaced             54.0                 60.8


1The average reduction was from 41 hours per week to 23 hours per
 week, and the average spell of reduced—hours employment lasted
 56 weeks.




Source: Corson et al. (197, pp. ni, 38 42, 68)
                                        —26—



       Temporarily displaced workers have both unique advantages arid unique

problems when compared to the permanently displaced workers usually visu-

alized as being primary recipients of TAA. Relative to permanently displaced

workers, the duration of trade—related dislocations for those temporarily

displaced is likely to be short, and their income loss only moderate. But

if    such short spells of unemployment occur more frequently because of trade,
workers who are prone to temporary dIsplacement may still suffer dispropor-
tionately   from   unpredictable and uncertain   income streams.22 Compensation



     22Thjs possibility rests on the assumption that wages and other provi-
sions of contracts do not vary to offset the unpredictable and uncertain
income streams. If contract terms do take account of this uncertainty, then
there would seem to be no reason to believe that the uncertainty produces
suffering over the long run, and no case for compensation. See note 5 above.
This possibility notwithstanding, uncertainty is precisely the reason why
many policyniakers subscribe to the need to compensate nations (analogously
to workers) for volatile export earnings through the IMP's Compensatory Financ-
ing Facility and the EC's STA3EX. These are self—financing loan programs,
however, which raises the question of whether the TAA program should include
concessionary (but repayable) loans for certain purposes.


for   such volatile incomes and job prospects might be art important justifica-

tion for paying temporarily displaced workers. No clear adjustment (efficiency)

motive exists for TAA in this case because it is not obvious that the workers

should   leave   the industry on economic grounds.

       But why should trade increase the volatility of worker incomes in import—

competing industries? There seem to be a number of reasons. First, in

industries such as steel, dumping is widespread and unpredictable, causing U.S.

business to sag notably some years (even quarters) and rebound itt others.

Second, speculative import purchases may take place when dollar depreciation

threatens, and then may be     offset   subsequent to dollar depreciation by   abnormally
                                           —27—




low import purchases. Domestic business can be correspondingly slack, then
prosperous,23 depending on product durability, substitution patterns, and



     23The opposite phenomenon occurs when dollar appreciation is expected,
and then actually takes place.


buyer loyalty to competing varieties. Employment in domestic industries can

thus be correspondingly slack, then prosperous. The auto industry seems to

be a good candidate for sensitivity to exchange—rate related demand fluctua-

tions.   And speculation       based on changes     in orderly marketing agreements can

have   similar effects.
       But does TAn cause some temporary unemployment while alleviating its
burdens? An unanswered question is whether the liberal availability of TA.A
supplements      to standard unemployment insurance increases incentives that
encourage   employers    to lay off workers temporarily (because such workers are

better acconuuodated), as discussed above. If so, any such additional workers

will be worse off because their TAA payments do not match their straight

salary. And there may be some cost to the economy as a whole if the temporary

nature of a worker's dislocation inhibits job search and if TAA keeps workers

affiliated with a declining industry when more productive positions are

available elsewhere.

       Similar questions arise with respect to the availability of TAn for

workers placed on reduced hours by their employers. Presumably employers use

the option of reducing or increasing hours for the same reasons they use

temporary layoff S.       And fluctuations in hours may      be   related to trade in the

same way    as    temporary   layoffs. But once again, to the extent that TAn      availa-

bility for       reduced hours encourages employer recourse to them, it increases
                                         —28—



the need for compensation while simultaneously satisfying it. TAA availa-

bility may again undermine any adjustment goals of the program by indenturing

workers to a declining industry arid discouraging their job search. 'rom          an
efficiency perspective, it is clearly better to have half as many workers

full—time (with the remainder in other jobs) than the historical work force

all working half—time.

      Some findings from the present survey confirm common beliefs about TAA

recipients,    whether permanently, temporarily, or partially dislocated. Table

4 reveals that they are somewhat older, less educated, more stable in their

employment history, and more likely to be union members, female, minority

status, married, and the head of a household than the average unemployed
          24
worker.



     24l comparisons are to unemployed manufacturing, workers who receive UI
payments. Such comparisons must be treated with caution, however, because of
their one—dimensional nature. Pro—TAA commentary, for example, tempts one
to think of recipients as especially "deserving" because they are both older
and less educated. It is probably more accurate to think of them as less
educated because they are older. Similarly, age may explain marital status,
and both explain stability. Industry mix may explain minority status. Struc-
tural expansions of the regression analysis outlined in the next section of
the paper could in principle control for such internal causality.


       But they are not likely to be poorer. Fewer fall below the poverty line.

And their pre—dislocation incomes (principally for men) exceed the incomes of

their peers, as do household incomes. This finding seems to preclude any

relative—income, "progressive"        motivation for maintaining TAA benefits   that

are   more attractive than UI benefits.
       The conventional belief that trade—displaced workers face more difficult

short—run adjustment problems than a typical          unemployed worker does seem   to


be   borne out   in   Table 5,   especially   for those who are permanently laid off.
                                             —29—

                                           TABLE 4


                            DISTRIBUTION OF SURVEYED
                          TAA AND UI RECIPIENTS (1976):
                      BY PERSONAL AND PRE-SEPARATION
                        JOB! INCOME CHARACTERISTICS

                                                 TAA RECIPIENTS       UI RECIPIENTS

PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS:

    Mean age in   years
                           :1-

                                                      39.9                35.9
                                       2
    Mean years of education                           10.4                11.4

     Percent that had vocational
                                    2                                     27.6
             or technical schooling                   24.8
     Percent female                                   38.5                35.5
     Percent   minority                               20.9                19.7
     Percent married 2                                79.0                68.1
     Percent head of household 2                      94.5                87.7
PRE-SEPARATION JOB/INCOME CHARACTERISTICS:

     Mean years tenure                                11.8                 7.8

     Percent quit or fired
        (not   laid off)                               1.1                 6.8
     Percent   in union                               81.3                65.8

     Mean annual income of
                   recipient                         $11,080              $9,820
     Mean annual income of spouse                     $2,690              $2,820
     Percent of households with
       income below poverty line                        1.9                3.7

     1at separation date
     2at interview date
          separation date, not including workers on reduced hours in the base
     4in year before separation, 1975 dollars
     Source: Corson et           al.   (1979,   pp. 17, 21, 28, 38)
                                     —30—


                                  TABLE 5


                          DISTRIBUTION OF SURVEYED
                        TAA AND UI RECIPIENTS (1976):

                      BY JOB MARKET EXPERIENCE BETWEEN
                          SEPARATION AND INVERVIEW




                                            TAA RECIPIENTS   UI RECIPIENTS
BETWEEN SEPARATION AND INTERVIEW:

   Mean weeks of first unemployment
          spell after separation                21.9             21.9
          —— permanently displaced              41.8             32.8
          —— temporarily displaced              17.4             16.3

   Percent of weeks unemployed                  18.4             20.9
        —— never recalled                       28.0             25.4
        —— recalled at least once               15.6             18.0

   Percent of weeks out of the
        labor force                               8.3            9.9
        —— never recalled                        26.3            20.5
        —— recalled at least once                 3.0            3.1

   Percent of weeks employed                     73.8            69.5
        —— never recalled                        46.0            54.6
        —— recalled at least once                82.0            79.2

AT INTERVIEW:

   Percent unemployed                             7.2            11.6

   Percent out of labor force                    11.9            12.0

   Percent employed                              80.9            76.4

   Ratio of mean weekly wages:
        interview job to pre—separatiOfl
        job 1
        —— permanently displaced                  0.92            1.18
        —— temporarily displaced                  1.22            1.25



   I
       1975 dollars

   Source: Corson et al. (1979, pp. 48, 58, 59, 64 65, 69).
                                    —31—



The duration of their initial unemployment spell is longer than for UI

recipients, and the incidence of recurrent separations is slightly more

frequent. Those TM recipients never recalled to their previous job

between separation and interview spend a larger proportion of weeks

uiployed,    arid are more likely to be out of the labor force than their

UI counterparts. The latter finding may    reflect   retirement or discourage-

ment more than anything else, since TM     recipients   were relatively less

likely to receive training. There is, of course, a potential causality

problem in these findings. Comparatively generous TM benefits may have

encouraged workers to take longer to locate a new job and hence increased

their measured unemployment spells at first. This could be true despite

the lumpiness and unpredictability of TM payments.

      By the interview date, roughly three to three arid a half      years   after

initial layoff, most differences in the adjustment burdens of TM recipients

and typical unemployed workers disappeared. TM recipients are acutally less
likely to be unemployed or out of the labor force (barely) than
                                                                others. But
those who have not returned to their earlier jobs are likely to have          experi-

enced a significantly greater decline in income than the average reemployed
worker (and even the temporarily displaced TM recipients suffer a small

relative decline). They might have been presumed to       lose   rents on accumu-

lated on—the—job skills that    are probably greater than those of the average

unemployed   worker, since TM   recipients have a   longer and   more stable work

history. They may also    have lost some rents that     are   unrelated to skill and
a function of their former industry's political pressure for protection

against imports.

      Some of these findings are surprising in light of previous surveys of
                                      —32--




TAA   recipients   (note 12 above). Part of the explanation can be found in

the rapidly shifting industrial incidence of injury from trade in the early

1970's. The relative importance of the footwear industry and the electronics

industry declined in successful TM petitions; the relative importance of

appare1 autos, and steel increased (apparel has since declined and footwear

has risen again, according to Table 2). This altered worker characteristics

among TM recipients because skill mix, ethnic concentration, job stability,

and average wages differ substantially from industry to industry. And it was

to be expected to the extent that cumulative and ongoing competitive pressures

(many from newly industrializing countries) reduce the industrial importance

of declining U.S. industries such as footwear and textiles by causing marginal

firms to fail.


The Sample as a Reflection of the Effects of Both Trade and AA

       It would have been valuable to be able to measure separately the effects

of import competition on workers and the effects of the TM program itself

(see note 19 above). No continuous measure of the former was employed

besides the certainty that trade had been an "important" cause of dislocation,

as prescribed by the legislation embodying certification requirements.2



     25The same problem exists for Jacobson (1979) and is discussed by him.
The technical counterpart to this staterrient is that the variable TAA (1 for
TM recipients, 0 for UI recipients), which underlies all the tabulations
and regressions in this paper measures the influence on workers of both
injury from trade and TM itself. Tabular information on TM recipients and
regression coefficients, therefore, reflect the frequently offsetting influ-
ences of injury and its policy relief.


It was impossible to know just how important trade alone had been in altering

wages and working conditions before and after TM receipt.       The survey
e


                                          —33—


    measured mixed effects of both tra4e and TAA on      wages and   working conditions.
    Since TAA in   many aspects is   designed   to offset the impact of trade on U.S.

    workers,   it seenis likely that the survey and the analysis below understate
    both   the (presumably unfavorable) effects of import competition on some U.S.

    workers and the (presumably favorable) effects of TM. They do, however,

    probably reflect the net effect of both forces with considerably more

    accuracy. One test of the success of TM in achieving its distributional

    goals would be that these net effects are small.

           Measuring the impact of trade alone on workers is a difficult task.

    Yet it is done subjectively every day in administrative determination of

    certification. A valuable complement to surveys like the one summarized

    would be research on the certification process itself. What economic and

    other variables underlie decisions to approve or disapprove a TM petition?

    Can one determine a set of variables and the weights attached to them that

    predict the yes/no decision on the petition with some accuracy?26 If so,



           See Baldwin (1976) for an attempt to do this with Congressional
    voting patterns on commercial policy.


    one could use those same variables and weights to measure the severity of work-

    ers' injury from trade. One might also be able to explore the budgetary and

    performance implications of changing the weights attached to the criteria

    underlying certification, as is implicitly proposed whenever TM is legis—

     latively reconsidered.
                                     —34—


    III.   TAA EEPIENCE UNDER ThE TRADE ACT OF 1974: JOB AND INCOME
                       RECOVERY IN A REGRESSION APPROACH


     One— and   two—dimensional comparisons of TAA and   UI recipients are
sometimes misleading. Nany comparisons      in Section II are explained   not   so

much by TAA/UI differences in programs, labor markets, or. competitive

pressures as by TAA/TJI differences in age, experiences industry mix, etc.

Cross—sectional multiple regression provides a useful way to control for

less important sample differences among workers while focussing on those

that are most interesting.

     Tables 6 and 7 provide examples of such regressions, each vector of

estimated coefficients being displayed in a column. The dependent variable

explained in Table 6 reflects tiedium—terni employment recovery after initial

separation ——   it   is the percentage of weeks employed in the three to three
                                                          27
and a half years between initial separation and interview.        The dependent




     27Because it is a percentage, the dependent variable is truncated
(limited). Ordinary—least--squares regressions such as those summarized
below may thus be inferior to those run to explain a logit transformation
of the percentage of weeks worked.



variable explained in Table 7 reflects medium—term income recovery in the

same period ——   it   is the log of the weekly wage (in 1975 dollars) of each

individual in their job at the interview date, given (as an independent
                                                                28,29,30
variable) their weekly wage (in 1975 dollars) before separation.



     28The presence of past wages in the regression is what allows the
coefficients to be interpreted as "income recovery coefficients." Each
can be taken to record the impact of the relevant variable on the
individual's change in weekly wage between separation and interview, given
the pre—separation wage. This can be most easily seen by subtracting the
                                                      TABLE     6


                                             JOB RECOVERY REGRESSIONS

                                 DETERMINANTS OF PERCENTAGE OF WEEKS WORKED
                                      BETWEEN SEPARATION AND INTERVIEW

                                               Regression Coefficient
                                                  (Standard Error)
                                                 Significance level

                                    Each column represents one regression


 TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                   PERMANENTLY   PERMANENTLY
  Extra percent—                                                                        DISPLACED     DISPLACED
 age of weeks                    ENTIRE             ALL UI                ALL TAA          UI            TAA
 worked...                       SAMPLE           RECIPIENTS            RECIPIENTS      RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS

SAMPLE IDENTIFIERS

    if individual                —4.56
                                                                                                          —
    received trade                (2.40)
    adjustment                      .06
    ass is lance

    if individual                21.34               19.33                  23.66
                  experienced
                                 (2 01)               (4 40)                (2 40)
    temporary separation
                                    .00                 .00                   .00




ADHINISTRATION OF BENEFITS
  AND SEPARATION:

   for each extra percent that    —0.0481             0.0821                 0.0538      0.156           0.215
   UI and TAA benefits during     (0.0480)            (0.140)               (0.0518)    (0.236)         (0.124)
   first spell of unemploy—          32                  56                    30          51                 09
   ment replaced after—tax
                            2
   income before separation  -
                                                              TABLE     6   ,   Cort.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                                    PERMANENTLY              PERMANENTLY
 Extra percent—                                                                                         DISPLACED                   DISPLACEI)
                                    ENTIRI                     ALL UI                     ALT    TAA       UI                           TAA
 age of wc'k.
 worked                             SAMPLE                   RECIPIENIS                 RECIPIENTS      RECIPIENTS                  RECIPIENIS


    for each extra percent          0.0122                    —0.00433                    0.0212         —0.0155                      0.0152
    that UI and TAA     benefits   (0.00957)                  (0.0355)                   (0.00974)       (0.0510)                    (0.0145)
    during all spells of             .20                         .90                       .03             .76                          .30
    unemployment replaced
    after—tax income before
                  2
    separatIon

    for every week of off!—         0.0400                     0.0685                     0.0527          0.0620                      0.226
    cial employer notifi—          (0.0641)                   (0.120)                    (0.0838.)       (0.187)                     (0.210)
                                                                                                                   ..

    cation       to.
              prior                  .•53                       .57                        .53             .74          .. ..   .       .28
    separation, or  of
    "suspected job loss"
    prior to notification

ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT:

                      was a.                 .                .-3..97
    if recipient                   -4.67                                                -5.94            —4.63                       —7.31
                                             .   .       .
    union member in the            (2 .32)           .        (4 .80)                    (2.85)          (736.)                      (.729)
    pre—separation job                                                                     .04              53                         .32

    if the recipient's              4.19                       7.75                       5.54            0.373                       4.74
    company closed      down       (2.35)                     (5.82)                     (2.66)         (14 43):                     (7.44)
                                     .07                        .19                        .04              .98                        .53




                                                                                          0.199           0.215                       0.319
    for each extra per-             0.216                      0.26.4
                                                                                         (0.292)         (:1.31)                     (0 .793)
    cent of    labor   force       (0.261)                    (0.602)
                                                                 66.                       .49              .87                         .69
               in state              .41
    unempy
    and industry group
                                            TABLE       6   ,   Cont.


                                                                                      PERMANENTLY   PERMANENTLY
TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                    DISPLACED     DISPLACED
 Extra percent—                                                           ALL TAA         U1            TAA
                                 ENTIRE      ALL UI
 age of weeks                                                           RECIP TENTS    RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS
                                 SAMPLE    RECIP
 worked...



INDUSTRY:
                                                                         15.67          17.07         24.80
    if individual worked    in   14.27       15.66
                                                                         (3.72)         16.62         (9.45)
    the jpare1 industry          (3.37)      (9.35)
                                                                           .00            .31           .01
    rather than durables           .00         .10
    (less autos, steel)
                                                No                        8.33            No          15.09
    if individual worked in       6.67
                                             obser-                      (4.76)          obser-      (10.51)
    the footwear industry        (4.63)
                                                                           .08           vations         .16
    rather than durables           .15       vations
    (less autos, steel)
                                                                           No          —13.35           No:
                                 —9.38      —11.80
    if individual worked in                                                                           obser—
                                 (4.34)      (5.47)                      obser-         (9.36)
    other nondurables indus-                                                              .16         vations
                                   .03         .03                       vations
    tries rather than dur—
    ables (less autos, steel)
                                              0.534                        1.96         —7.13          33.61
                                 —0.0268
     if individual worked in                                                                           (9.93)
                                 (2.50)      (5.68)                       (2.88)       (15.05)
     the auto industry rather                                               .50            .64           .00
                                   .99          .93
     than durables (less
     steel)
                                                                                          3.38          0.387
                                  0.216        0.750                       0.249
     if   individual worked in                                                          (10.24)       (11.54)
                                              (5.14)                      (2.80)
     the   steel industry        (2.41)                                     .93            .74           .97
                                    .93          • 88
     rather than durables
     (less autos)
                                                 TABLE      6   ,   Corit.


TAliLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                       PERMANENTLY    PERIANEHTLY
 Extra percent—                                                                             DISPLACED      DISPLACED
                                    ENTIRE        ALL UI                       ALL    TM       UI             TM
 age of weeks
 worked...                          SAIIPLE     RECIPIENTS                   RECIPIENTS     RECIPIENTS     RECIPIENTS


ACE, EDUCATION, AND EXPERIENCE:

 ...   for each year     (X)   of    1.2:0       —3.00                          2.99         —4.74            6.86
                                    (0.826)      (2.05)                        (0.945)       (4.14)          (2.13)
                                      .15           15                           .00            26             .00

                                    —0.03 26X    +0 .0561X                     -0.0714X      +0.134X         —0.117X
                                    (0.0199)      (0.0510)                     (0.0224)      (0.118)         (0 .0 510)
                                                    .27                           .00          .26             .00
                                                                                                                          0
           at   maximum/minimum
       value of dependent           36.8         53.5                          41.9          35.4:           58.6
       variable4
                                     0.311         1.35                        -0.170         1.49           -0.441
       for each year of
       education                    (0.397)       (0.876)                      (0.461)       (1.56)          (0.965)
                                       .74          .16                          .25            .35            .65




                                    -0.182         1.85                        -0.78          0.607          —2.99
       for each year (K) of
       experience in the            (0.548)       (1.31)                        (.621)       (2.51           (1.51)
                                      .74                                        .25            .81
       labor    force3                              .i
                                                  -0.0324X                     +0.02i2X      —0 .044 2X      +0.107X
                                    +0.0102X
                                    (0.0214)      (0.0518)                     (0.0240)      (0.111)
                                      .63           .53                              3:         .69            .O6

       labor force experience
       at maximum/mInimum           17.8          571                          33.9          13.7            27.9
       value    of   dependent
       variabie
                                         TABLE     6   ,   Cont.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                 .                  PERMANENTLY    PERMANENTLY
 Extra                                                                                  DISPLACED      DISPLACED
          percent—
                              ENTIRE     ALL UI                         ALL       TM       UI             TM
 age of weeks
 worked                       SAMPLE    RECIPIENTS                 RECIPIENTS           RECIPIENTS     RECIPIENTS


                              0.408      —0.184                      0.290                —0.161        0.835
    for each year (X) of
                             (0.294)     (0.603)                    (0.385)               (1.21)        (1.04)
    perience in the pre—       .17         .76                              .45             .89           .42
    separation
                             —0.0147x    —0.00832X                  —0.000255X             0.00458X     —0.0288X
                             (0.0160)    (0.0272)                   (0.0228)              (0.0294)      (0.0580)
                               .36          .76                       .98                   .94           .62



    j      experience at
    maximtlm/ffliflimufll
    value of dependent       27.8         0                             >    60           35.2          29.0
    variable4

SEX/MARRIAGE STATUS:

     if married male          3.54        1.68                          3.71               4.05          8.48
     rather than un—         (2.44)      (4.96)                     (2.82)                (9.77)        (8.51)
     married male              .15         .76                              .19             .68           .32


          married female     —8.49      —11.93                      —5.48                —12.28         —7.01
     if
     rather than un—         (3.50)       (7.72)                    (4.00)               (14.48)        (9.85)
     married male

                             —2.70      —12.93                      —2.95                  —9.81       —11.25
     if unmarried female
                             (3.67)       (7.72)                    (4.36)                (12.40)      (10.79)
     rather than unmarried
                               .46          .10                       .50                    .43          .30
     male

 SOCIOECONOMIC:

                             —3.18       —2.32                      —2.10                  —1.61       —21.72
     if   black
                             (2.37)       (6.13)                    (2.64)                (33.46)       (6.66)
                               .18          .71                       .43                    .96          .00
                                            TABLE     6   ,   Cont.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                PERMANENTLY   PERMANENTLY
 Extra percent—                                                                     DISPLACED    DISPLACED
age of weeks                    ENTIRE       ALLUI                     ALLTAA.         Ut            TAA
worked...                       SAMPLE     RECIPIENTS                 RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS


                                —5.07        -7.40                     —5.27          —11.23       —12.99
         if   panic
                                 (3.63)      (7.67)                    (4.22)         (14.10)       (9.37)
                                   .16         .34                       .21             .43          .17



                                —18.21      —59.62                     —3.65          -53.31        11.74
•   ..   if disabled             (7.38)     (17.11)                    (8.42)         (23.70)      (15.90)
                                   .01         .00                                       .03          .46




INCOME POTENTIAL, ASPIRATION,
     AND MOBILITY
                                                                        1.46            1.28         1.57
         for each extra          -0.311      -4.66
                                 (1.38)      (3.79)                     (1.49)         (6.28)       (3.28)
         $100 of                                                                         .134         .63
                                   .82         22                         .33
         weekly recipient
         income before
         separation2

                                  0.932       2.32                       0.211          2.19        -4.41
         for each extra
                                             (1.30)                     (0.891)        (1.97)        (2.66)
         $100 of                 (0.706)                                                 .27           .10
                                   .19          .08                       .81
         weeklytncome of
         other household
         members
                 before
         separation
                                                           TABLE    6   ,   Cont.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                                PERMANENTLY        PERMANENTLY
                                                                                                    DISPLACED          DISPLACED
 Extra percent—
                                     ENTIRE                ALL UI                     ALL   TM         UI                    TM
age of weeks
worked...                            SAMPLE              RECIPIENTS                 RECIPIENTS      RECIPIENTS         RECIPIENTS



     if recipient   was working        9.23                 4.08                       8.04           11.87              3.10
     a second       at time of        (4.81)               (8.73)                     (6.22)         (20.35)           (13.01)
               j
     separat ion                        .06                  .64                         .20            .56               .82

                                      —3.86                -5.33                      —3.50           -6.74               5.13
     if recipient expressed
                                      (2.07)               (4.39)                      (2.39)         (7.82)             (5.60)
     willingness to move
                                        .06                  .23                         .16            .39                   36
     to another area to
     find suitable job
                                      45.47               102.42                      10.17          116.75            -58.37            L
CONSTANT                                                                                                                                 I-.

                                       0.304                0.408                      0.323           0.393                 0.411
R2

                                       8.12(.O0)            2.90(.OO)                  6.70(.00)       l.09(   .39)          1.95(.O1)
CALCULATED F (SIGNIFICANCELEVEL)
                                       589                  152                        437               76                  10
 NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS

                                                                                       407               47                   78
 DEGREES OF FREEDON


 10f the regression coefficient on the hypothesis that its value was zero.

 2A11 nominal magnitudes deflated or inflated to 1975 dollars.

                                                                  and its squared value. Each table entry records the
 3Each regression includes the relevant independent variable (X)
                                                  on the dependent variable, a derivative that varies with the value of
     marginal effect of the independent variable                                           in parentheses) and the lower
     X itself    The upper coefficient is that attached to the linear term (standard error
                                                                    the standard error in parentheses).
     coefficient is twice that attached to the squared term (twice
                                                        for which weeks worked (Table 6) or weekly income (Table        7)    is at
                                                   3)
 4Each table entry is that value of X (see note
     a maximum or minimum value

                                                        variable takes place at infeasible values of    X   (see note 3).
 5Estimaced maximum or minimum value of dependent
                                                      TABLE    7


                                            INCOME RECOVERY REGRESSIONS

                                     DETERNINANTS OF WEEKLY INCOME (LOG) IN
                                             JOB AT INTERVIEW

                                              Regression  Coefficient
                                                  (Standard Error)
                                                 Significance level

                                     Each column representsone regression

 TABIL ENFRTLS GIVI                                                                     PFRMANLNILY   PERMANINIJY
  Extra percent—                                                                         DISPLACED     DISPLACED
  age of income                   ENTIRE            ALL UI                ALL TAA           UI           TAA
  earned                          SAMPlE          RLCIPIFNTS            RECIPILNIS       RFC1PIENIS   RECTPIINTS

SAMPLE   IDENTIFIERS:
... if individual                 —0.831
    received  trade               (0.375)
    adjustment                      .03
    assistance
    if individual experienced      3.09              4.16                   2.99
    temporary separation          (0.312)            (0.625)               (0.370)
                                    .00                .00                   .00




AD1INISTRATI0N OF BENEFITS
  AND SEPARATION:

                                   0.005 27           ).O235                0.00815        0.0501        0.0212
    for each extra percent that
    UI and TAA benefits during    (0.00738)          (0.0200)              (0. 00795)     (0.0386)      (0.0218)
                                    .48                .24                     31            20           .33
    first spell of unemploy-
    ment placed after—tax
                             2
    income before separation
                                                TABLE        7   ,   Cont.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                          PERMANENTLY   PERMANENTLY
 Extra percent—                            .                                                  DISPLACED     DISPLACED
 age of Income                  ENTIRE           ALL   liT                     ALL TAA           UI           TAA
 earned...                      SAMPLE         RECIPIENTS                    RECIPIENTS       RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS

    for each extra percent      0.00144        —0.00485                       0.00322          —0.00868      0.00274
    that UI and TAA benefits   (0.00148)       (0.00504)                     (0.00151)         (0.00822)    (0.00258)
    during all spells of         .33             .34                           .03                .30
    unemployment replaced
    after—tax income before
    separation 2

    for every week of offi-     0.0189          0.0468                        0.0165             0.0874      0.0126
    cial employer              (0.00992)       (0.0168)                      (0.0129)           (0.0296)    (0.0378)
    cation prior to              .06             .01                           .20                .00         .74
    separation, or of
    "suspected job loss"
    prior to notification
ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT:

•.. if recipient   was a       —0.259          -3.20                          0 809            —4.52         0.113
    union member in the        (0.360)         (0.680)                       (0.439)            (1.19)      (1.29)
    pre—separation job           .47             .00                           .07                .00         .93

    if the recipient's          0.429          —1.49                          O.88O            -2.46         1.06
    company closed down        (0.362)         (0.822)                       (0.409).           (2.29)      (1.31)
                                 .24             .07                           .03                .29         .42




                                                                                         -
    for each extra per-        —0.0177         —0.00474                      —0.000795        —0.148         0.0900
    cent of labor force        (0.0402)        (0.0850)                      (0.0450)         (0.208)       (0.140)
    unemployed in state          .66             .96                           .99               .48          .52
    and industry group
                                                TABLE     7   , Cont.

TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                  PERMANENTLY       P ERIIANENTLY
                                                                                                   .
Extra percent—                                                                       DISPLACED           DISPLACED
age of income                        ENTIRE      ALL UI                   ALL TAA        UI                TAA
 earned...                           SA}IPLE   RECIPIENTS               RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS        RECIPIENTS


INDUSTRY:

    if individual worked        in    1.48         1.86.                   0.887        5.46                1.15
    the apparel industry             (0.521)      (1.32)                  (0.573)      (263)               (1.59)
    rather than durables               .00          .16                     .12           .04                .47
    (less autos, steel)

                                      1.81         No                      1.87           No                0.128
    if individual worked in
    the footwear industry             0.714      obser-                   (0.736)      obser-              (1.82)
                                       .01       vations                    .01        vations               .94
    rather than durables
     (lessautos, steel)
                                      0.197        0.935                     No          2.18                No
     if individual worked in
     other nondurables indus-        (0.669)      (0.770)                  obser—       (1.50.)             obser-
                                       .77           23                    vations        .15               vations
     tries rather than dur—
     ables (less autos, steel)
     if individual worked in          1.04         1.32                    0.848         3 . 50             3.53
     the auto industry rather        (0.387)      (0.796)                 (0.445)       (2.39).            (1.81)
     than durables (less               .01          .10.                    .06           .15                .05
                            .
     steel)         .
                    .           .




                    worked in        :0.971        1.29                                  2.92.              0.719
                                                                          (0.433)       (1.63)             (2.05)
     ifthe Individual
            steel
                industry             (0.372)      (0.725)
     rather than durables              .01           .08                    .03           .08                .73
                        .
     (less autos.)   .
                                                      TABLE      7   ,   Cont.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE                                                                             PERMANENTlY     PCRNANENLY
 Extra percent—                                                                                 DISPLACED      DISPLACED
 age of income                          ENTIRE         ALL UI                      ALL ThA         UI             TAA
 earned...                              SAMPLE       RECIPIENTS                  RECIPIENTS     RECIPIENTS     RECIPIENTS


AGE, EDUCATION, AND EXPERIENCE:

      for each year     (X)   of         0.123         —0.248                      0.183          —0.478          0.806
                                        (0.127)        (0.286)                    (0.146)         (0.653)
                                          .33            .39                          21            .47            .04

                                        —0.00 381X      O.00494X                  —O .00532X       0 .0107X      —0 .0232X
                                        (0.00306)      (0.00715)                  (0.0034 5)      (0.0187)        (.00898)
                                          .22            .49                         .12            .57             .01

          at maximum/minimum            32.2           50.2                       34.4            28.1           35.7
      value of dependent
      variable4

      for each year of             :1
                                         0.0886         0.123                      0.0385          0.0166         0.0968
      edu cat Lon                       (0.0608)       (0.124)                    (0.0703)        (0.255)        (0.169)
                                          .15            .32                         .59            .95            .57




                              of         0.0335         0.00335                    0.130           0.0339        -0.07 70
      for   each year   (X)
                        the             (0.0846)       (0.184)                    (0.0956)        (0.396)        (0.266)
      experience in
                                          .69            .99                         .18            .93            .77
      labor force3
                                        —0.00165X        .00023lX                 —0.00570X       -0 .00508X      O.00559X
                                        (0.00330)       (.00728)                   0.00369        (0.0175)       (0.00978)
                                          .62            .97                         .I 2           .77            .57
                                                                                  22.8                           13.1
  -                                     20.3             Zero5
      labor  force experience
      at maximum/minimum
      value of dependent
      variable4
                                               TABLE     7   ,   Cont.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                      PERMANENTLY   PERMANENTLY
 Extra percent—                                                                          DISPLACED     DISPLACED
                                 ENTIRE        ALL      UI                 ALL TAA           UI            TAA
 age of income
 earned. ..                      SAMPLE       RECIPIENTS                 RECIPIENTS      RECIPIENTS     RECIPIENTS


       for each year (X) of     —0.0179        0.137                       —0.0902         —0.129        —0.0500
       experience in the pre—    (0.04 54)    (0.0849)                     (0.0592)        (0.193)       (0.183)
       separation     i23          .69           .11                         .13              .51          .79

                                —0 .000116X   —0 .00626X                    0.00436X        0.00393X     0.00211X
                                 (0.00247)    (0.00382)                    (0.00352)       (0.00468)     (0.010)
                                   .96           .11                         .22              41           .84

                          at       Zero5      21.9                         20.7            3.2.8         23.7
       maximum/minimum
       ien
       value of dependent
       variable4
                                                                                                                     L

 SEX/MARRIAGE STATUS:

       if   married   male        0.615       -1.11                         1.15                          3.58
       rather than un-           (0.376)       (0.699)                     (0.434)         (1.55W)       (1.51)
       married male                .10           .12                         .01                .42        .02

       if married female        i_0•53        —2.32                         0.738          -3.13          1.99
       rather than un-           (0.592)       (1.10)                      (0 .629   )     (2.34)        (1.89)
       married male
       if unmarried female       -0.717       -2.59                         0.0151         -2.43          1.94
 ...
       rather than unmarried     (0.575)       (1.11>                      (0.681):.       (2.03)        (1.89)
       male                         21            02.                        .99                .24        .31

 SOCIOECONOMIC:

                                  0.0755      —o.1r2                        0.162          —9   .09      -l.5L
       if   black                                                                                        (1.20)
                                 (0.366)       (0.866)                     (0.408)          (5.31)
                                                                             .69                .09        .21
                                    .84          .90
                                              TABLE      7   ,   Cont.


TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:                                                                   PERMANENTLY   PERMANENTLY
 Extra percent—                                                                        DISPLACED     DISPLACED
                                 ENTIRE       ALL UI                       ALL TAA        UI            TM
 age of income
 earned...                       SANPLE     RECIPIENTS                   RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS    RECIPIENTS


    if Hispanic                  —0.542       —2.48                       —0.0779       —4.22           0.668
                                 (0.560)      (1.08)                       (0.651)      (2.23)         (1.64)
                                      .33          .02                       .90          .06               .69




     if disabled                 —5 22        —7 52                       —4 50         —4 18          —3 97
                                 (1.14)       (2.43)                       (1.30)       (3.84)         (2.83)
                                      00         00                           00           28                16




 INCOME POTLNrIAL, ASPIRATION,
   AND MOBILITY

                                  0.655        0.982                        1.40         2.92          -0.166
     for every
                                 (0.536)       (1.07)                      (0.637)      (2.0O•)        (1.68)
     extra percent of
                                       22         36                          03           15             92
     weekly recipient
     income before
     separation2

     for every                    0   153      0    657                    —0 226        0 301          0    274
     extra percent of            (0.329)       (0.590)                     (0.397)      (1.06)         (1.29)
     weekly income of                 .64        .27                         .57          .78            .83
     other household
     members before
     separation2
                                                                       TABLE     7   ,   Cont.


                                                           .                                                         PERMANENTLY          PERMANENTLY
TABLE ENTRIES GIVE:
                                                                                                                      DISPLACED
Extra percent—
                                                    ENTIRE              ALL UI                     ALL TAA                                         TAA
 age of income
 earned                                             SAMPLE            RECIPIENTS                 R1'CIPIENTS          RECIPIENTS              RECIPIENTS



      if                was working                 0.938               0.0198                      0.427                3.77
           recipient
      a second   j2 at time           of            (0.742)            (1.23)                      (0.955)              (3.21)                      (2.30)
                                                      .21                  .99                       .65                  .25
      separat ion

      if recipient expressed                         0.602            —0.169                        0.981                0.181                       2.56
      willingness to move                           (0.319)            (0.620)                     (0.368)              (1.24)                      (0.988)
      to another area to                              .06                  .79
      find suitable job

                                                     2.61              10.63                        2.37                15• 50                     —13.33
 CONSTANT

                                                     0.33               0.51                        0.37                 0.56                        0.48
 R2

                                                     9.20(.0O)          4..33(.OO)                  8 .14< .00)          2.17( .01)                  2.55(.00)
 CALCULATED F (SIGNIFICANCE LEVEL)

                                                     589                152                         47                   76                          107
 NUMBER OF OBSERVATIONS
                                                     558                122                         407                  47                           78
 DEGREES OFFREEDON

 0f   the regression coefficient on the hypothesis that its value was zero

       nominal magnitudes deflated or inflated to 1975 dollars.
                                                                 and itssquaredvalue.    Eachtable entry records the
 3Each regreèsion Includes the relevant independent variable (X)                                                     of
                                                 on the dependent variable, a derivative that varies with the value
     marginal effect of the independent variable              linear term (standard error in parentheses) andY the lower
     X Itself. T1ie upper coefficient is that attached to the
                                                       term (twice the standard error in parentheses)
     coefficient is iwice that attached to the squared

                                                of X (See note   3)   or   which weeks     woed    (Table    6)o   weekly income (Table 7) is            at
 4Ech taI1 entry is that value
    a maximulnorflhiflilflumvalue.

                                     minimum   value of dependent variable takes place           at infeasible values of x      (see   note   3)
  5Fstlmaied     m'ixi.irtuni   or
                                  —49—



(log of) pra—separation weekly wages from both sides of the regression
equation.
     290ther dependent variables could be exairted itt the same fashion to
discern other differences in TM and UI experience, e.g., labor—force
participation, search behavior (measured, say, by the ntber of job
contacts), and adjustment to initial separation.
     30
       More precise descriptions of independent variables than provided in
Tables 6 and 7 are available from the author.



     Employment and income recovery were selected for emphasis   in   this

section because they are thought to be the most important ways in which

trade—displaced workers would suffer compared with others in the absence

of the TM program. The upper left entry in each table suggests

that even with the TM program, though, trade—displaced workers have less

favorable experience than others. A TM recipient who was identical to a

UI recipient in age, experience, industry, socioeconomic status, etc. —

and even in the proportion of pre—separation income replaced by UI/TM

payments —— would nevertheless have worked 4.56 percent fewer weeks over

the three—year period, and be earning almost 1 percent (0.831) less per

week, than the otherwise comparable UI recipient.

     The direction of these differences squares well with intuition,

although it is not clear what variables that are excluded from the

regression might account for it. But neither the direction nor quanti-

tative size of these differences squares with the one— and two—dimensional

comparisons of Table 5 —— an anomaly that reveals the advantage of a

regression—based approach that holds all other things comparable (ceteris

paribus). The left—hand regressions of Tables 6 and 7 suggest that the

comparative employment recovery of TM recipients was less favorable than

suggested by Table 5, and that t1ir comparative income recovery was much

less unfavorable.
                                        —50—



       The left—hand   regressions   of Tables 6 and 7 were run over a sub—sample

of both UT and TAA     recipients31     But such a regression forces the



     31912 workers were excluded from the regression sub—Sample because of
missing or inconsistent data on some of the variables. Details are
available from the author.



responses of each group to control variables to have the same         magnitude.
One might hypothesize     to the contrary that trade—displaced workers have
quantitatively different responses because trade dislocation is somehow
different from disloeatons for other reasons. For example, one could
argue that TAA recipients might be more responsive to advance notification
than   others   because of their firm!s   more   precarious market position. Or
TAA recipients    might be less   successful per dollar of income support

because   they   typically have had   less experience   than Others in job search.
       Columns (2) and (3) of the tables permit such      differential responsiveness by

allowing regression coefficients to differ between a UI sample of workers

and a TAA sample, as do columns (4) and (5) for further sub—samples of

permanently displaced UI and TAA recipients.32 The results do not strongly



          the 152 UI recipients in the sample underlying column (2), half
were working for the same employer at the interview as when they were
separated. Of the 437 TAA recipients in the sample underlying column (.3),
76 percent were only temporarily displaced in this fashion.



support the hypothesis of differential responsiveness. The complementary

hypothesis that the regression over the UI sample (column (.2)) is the same

as that over the TAA sample       (column (3))   could be definitively rejected

only   for wage recovery.33    The    hypothesis of identical   responsiveness of
                                      —51—




     33me calculated value of the relevant F statistic was 2.22, versus
critical values of 1.46 for a 5% significance level and 1.70 for a 1%
significance level. In the employment recovery regressions of Table 6,
the calculated F statistic was 1.48.



permanently displaced UI recipients (column (4)) and TAA         recipients
(column (5)) was    never   rejected.34 The appropriate conclusion seems to be



     34me calculated values of the relevant F statistics for Tables 6
and 7 were 1.08 and 1.42, respectively, compared again to critical values
of 1.46 (5% significance) and 1.70 (1% significance). Note that the job
recovery regression run over the permanently displaced UI sample was not
itself significant at conventional levels.



that   although   trade—displaced workers and others do differ in job. and

income   recovery   as summarized above, this difference is due primarily to

unidentified variables. Their employment/income experience might otherwise be

largely determined by the same conventional list of variables in a

quantitatively similar way.

       No attempt was made to test more subtle hypotheses, specifically that

while responses     were comparable to most independent variables, that          the
t groups of workers responded differently to one or more. Along these

lines,   there is at least some    suggestion   in   colunms (2)—(5)   of   Table 7


that wage   recovery among UI recipients,    but not among TAA     recipients,        was

hurt   by being married, female, Hispanic, unionized, or        an employee of a

company   that closed.35 Among TAA recipients, by contrast, wage             recovery



           these relationships appeal to intuition except that between
marriage and wage recovery. The negative impact f unionism other
                                                             in the former
                                                                  things
job is sensible if union members are paid more than others,
being comparable, since some union members will be forced to take
subsequent   jobs that are
                         not unionized.
                                          —52—


seemed importantly        and positively determined by their willingness to move
geographically,        whereas that of UI recipients was, not.

     Most      previous   research has focussed on workers w1 are permanently

displaced by trade, and the regressions corresponding to this focus are itt

the right—hand column of each table. Some of the more interesting findings

are summarized below.          But caution in generalizing is strongly encouraged
given   the    small   size   of the worker sample (107).


For permanently displaced TAA recipients
        (1)    The   larger the proportion of pre—separation wages that   UI and TAA

benefits replaci, especially at the beginning of unemployment experience,
the larger the proportion of weeks ployed in the subsequent three or
three and a half years, and the stronger the income recovery path. The
latter finding is familiar; the former much less so. •Thile the former is
quantitatively tiny and questionably          significant, it suggests a possibility

worthy of      further investigation. It is well established that generous
benefits      lengthen first spells of unenipioyment.36 Yet      they may also


        36Harnmerinesh (1977) provides a summary.



thereby       reduce the incidence and duration of subsequent spells by
increasing the "efficiency" of initial job search. The first job taken
after    separation may more likely be a 'tgood match."

        (2) Advance notification of an impending separation bad a small and

positive influence on job and income recovery, but the coefficients are not

very significant by conventional standards.
                                    —53—


     (3) TAA   recipients   in apparel, footwear, and the auto industry bad

much more favorable employment experience than TAA   recipients    in other

industries (from 7 to 17 weeks per year more work). It is hard to account

for this finding. One   might   sensibly have conjectured exactly   the
opposite, especially in apparel and footwear, since industry variables in

the regressions might have been supposed to measure    the   inter—industry

intensity of import competition on workers.     Perhaps   in. 1976 displaced


garment   and shoeworkers were sufficiently protected by orderly marketing
agreements at the product level that their job recovery was faster than
elsewhere despite the long decline of their industries.
     (4) TM recipients in the auto industry had much more favorable
income recovery than TM recipients in other industries (3.5 percent more
growth in the weekly wage given what it used to be).
     (5) Rather than being a liability, the combination of greater age
and labor-force experience was favorable to employment recovery. Compared
to an otherwise identical 40 year old TM recipient with 20 years of labor
force participation, a 50 year old with 30 years of participation worked
   weeks per year more between separation and interview, and a 30 year old
with 10 years of participation worked 7 weeks per year less.
      (6) The combination of greater age and labor—force experience was
favorable   to income recovery only up to a critical level, represented by

persons in their inid—30's with 13 years of labor—force participation.

Compared to them, 50—year—old workers with 30 years participation. recovered

2 percent less of their prior income stream.

      (7) Being black or Hispanic impeded job recovery, and being black or

disabled impeded   income recovery.
                                      —54—



      (8) Job recovery was inversely related to labor—market incomes of

other members of a household, and the quantitative response was

surprisingly large (more than two weeks less work per year by the TAA

recipient   for every $100 of other family income).

      (9) The incomes of those workers who expressed willingness to pull

up stakes and move to find suitable employment were 2.5 percent higher

than the incomes of those who were not willing, whether or not a move

actually took place.

      It bears repeating that    these   nine conclusions are for permanently

displaced TAA    recipients   only, representing less than one quarter of the

TAA   sample.   Similar studies mightprofitably be carried out for
temporarily     displaced TAA recipients, although intuition regarding their
experience is much less well developed. Finally, a great deal more         work

needs to be done along these lines before any assessment       can   be made   of

the   robustness of the conclusions of this paper.
                                    Ri

                                REFERENCES



Aho, C. Michael   (1980), "Comment" on this paper, in Bhagwati and Srinivasan,
     forthcoming.
Baldwin, Robert B. (1976), "The Political Economy of Postwar U.S. Trade
     Policy" New York University, Graduate School of Business Adminis-
     tration, Center for the Study of Financial Institutions, The Bulletin,
     1976—4.

Baldwin, Robert E. (1979), "The Political Economy of Protectionism," in
     Bhagwati and Srinivasan, forthcoming.

Baldwin, Robert E. and Malcolm D. Bale (1980), "North American Responses
     to Imports from New Industrial Countries," presented at a Conference
     on Old and New Industrial Countries, University of Sussex, England,
     January 6—8, 1980, processed.

Baldwin, Robert E.; John H. Mutti; and J. David Richardson (1980), "Welfare
     Effects on the United States of a Significant Multilateral Tariff
     Reduction," Journal of International Economics, 10 (August), pp.

Bale, Malcolm D. (1973), Adjustment to Freer Thade: An Analysis of the
     Adjustment Assistance Provisions of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962,
     University of Wisconsin doctoral dissertation and Report No. DLNA
     91—55—73—05—1 of the National Technical Information Service
     (Springfield, Virginia).
Bale, Malcolm D. (l979) "Adjustment Assistance: Dealing with Import—
      Displaced Workers," in Walter Adams et al., Tariffs, Quotas, and
     Trade: The Politics of Protectionism, San Francisco: Institute
     for Contemporary Studies.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and T. N. Srinivasan, eds., C   ),   Import   Competition
     and Adjustment: Theory and Practice, forthcoming.

Cline, William R.; Noboru Kawanabe; T. 0. N. Kronsjo; and Thomas Williams
     (1978), Trade Negotiations in the Kennedy Round, Washington: Brookings
     Institution.

Cordes, Joseph J. and Burton A. Weisbrod (1979), "Compensation for Economic
     Change when Lump Sum Transfers are not Possible: A Framework for
     Evaluating Alternatives," processed.

Corson, Walter; Walter Nicholson; David Richardson; and Andrea Vayda (1979),
     Final Report: Survey of Trade Adjustment Assistance Recipients, a
     final contract (J9K70010) report by Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
     (Princeton, New Jersey) to the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of
     International Labor Affairs, Office of Foreign Economic Research.
     December.
                                   R2



Corson, Walter and Walter Nicholson (1980), "Trade Adjustment Assistance
     for Workers: Results of a Survey of Recipients lJnder the Trade Act
     of 1974," processed.

Dewald, William C., ed. (1978), The Impact Qf International Trade and
     Investment on Employment, Washington: U.S. Government Printing
     Office for the U.S. Department of Labor.

Feldstein, Martin S. (1975), "The Importance of Temporary Lay—offs: An
     Empirical Analysis," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1975:3,
     pp. 725—745.

Feldstein, Martin S. (1976), "Temporary Lay—off s in the Theory of Unem-
     ployment," Journal of Political Economy, 84 (October), pp. 937—957.
Feldstein, Martin S. (1978), "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on
     Temporary Lay—off Employment," American Economic Review, 68 (December),
     pp. 834—846.

Fooks, Marvin M. (1971), "Trade Adjustmet Assistance," in U.S. Commission
     on International Trade and Investment (the "Williams Report") (1971).

Frank, Charles R., Jr., (1973), "Adjustment Assistance: American Jobs and
     Trade with the Developing Countries," Washington: Overseas Development
     Council Development Paper 13 (June).

Frank, Charles R., Jr., with the assistance of Stepharde Levinson (1978),
     Foreign Trade and Domestic Aid, Washington; The Brookings Institution.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. (1977), Jobless Pay and the Economy, Baltimore: Johns
     Hopkins University Press.

Jacobson, Louis (1979), "The Earnings and Compensation of Workers Receiving
     Trade Adjustment Assistance," processed, December.

Jenkins, Glenn P.; Graham Glenday; John C. Evans; and Claude Nontmarquette
     (1978), Trade Adjustment Assistance: The Costs of Adlustrnent and
     Policy Proposals, contract (93/810—936—3) report by Econanalysis
     Incorporated to the Department of Industry, Trade, and Commerce,
     Canada, June.

Jonish, JaTnes (1970), "Adjustment Assistance Experience Under the U.S. —
     Canadian Automotive Agreement," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
     23 (July), p. 557.

Laudicina, Paul A. (1973), World Poverty and Development: A Survey of
     American Opinion, Washington: Overseas Development Council Monograph 8.

Magee, Stephen P. (1972), "The Welfare Effects of Restrictions on U.S. Trade,'1
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3:1972, pp. 645—707.

McCarthy, James E. (1975a), "Adjustment to Import Competition," ew England
     Economic Review, July/August, pp. 3—15.
                                   R3


McCarthy, James E. (1975b), "Contrasting Experiences With Trade Adjustment
     Assistance,t' Monthly Labor Review, June.

McCarthy, James E. (1975c), Trade Adjustment Assistance: A Case Study of
     The Shoe Industry in Massachusetts, Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of
     Boston Research Report No. 58.

Metzger, Stanley D. (1971), "Adjustment Assistance," in U.S. Commission on
     International Trade and Investment (the "Williams Report") (1971).

Neumann, George R. (1978), "The Direct Labor—Market Effects of the Trade
     Adjustment Assistance Program," in Dewald, ed. (1978).

Neumann, George R.; Morgan V. Lewis; and Gerald P. Glyde, with the assis-
     tance of Steven H. Sheingold, (1976), The Evaluation of the Trade
     Adjustment Assistance Program, processed, September.

Rosen, H. (1980), "TAA—Administrative Information," processed, May.

U.S. Commission on Foreign Economic Policy (the "Randall Commission") (1954),
     ReDort to the President and the Congress, Washington: U.S. Govern-
     ment Printing Office.

U.S. Commission on International Trade and Investment (the "Williams Com-
     mission") (1971), United States International Economic Policy in an
     Interdependent World, Compendium of Papers, Volume I, Washington:
     U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Labor (1979), "Management Information Report: Worker
     Adjustment Assistance Under the Trade Act of 1974," Bureau of
     International Labor Affairs, Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance,
     processed, November 30.

U.S. General Accounting Office (1979), Considerations for Adjustment
     Assistance Under the 1974 Trade Act: A Summary of Techniques Used
     in Other Countries, Report to the Congress, the Comptroller General,
     January.

U.S. Public Advisory Board for Mutual Security (the "Bell Commission")
     (1973), A Trade and Tariff Policy in the National Interest, Washington:
     U.S. Government Printing Office.

Weisz, Iorris (1978), Strategies for Adjustment Assistance: Experience in
     the U.S. and Abroad and Implications for Future U.S. Programs, manuscript
     presented at a U.S. Department of Labor Conference on the Employment
     Effects of International Trade, November 15.

Wilcox, Clair (1950), "Relief for Victims of Tariff Cuts," American Economic
     Review, 40 (December), pp. 884—889.
