                   NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              TESTS OF EQUILIBRIUM MACROECONOMICS
              USING CONTEMPORANEOUS MONETARY DATA


                        John F. Boschen

                     Herschel I.     Grossman


                     Working Paper No. 558R




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Carribridge   MA 02138

                         October 1981




The National Science Foundation and the John Simon Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation have supported this research. James Burgess
provided valuable research assistance. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #558R
                                                              October 1981




                   Tests of Equilibrium Macroeconomics
                   Using Contemporaneous Monetary Data


                                 ABSTRACT



     This paper uses contemporaneous monetary data to carry out econometric

tests of the "equilibrium" approach to modelling the relation between monetary

disturbances and macroeconomic fluctuations. The theoretical analysis intro-

duces into an equilibrium macroeconomic model the availability of preliminary

data on current monetary aggregates and the process of accumulation of revised

monetary data. The econometric analysis tests two hypotheses derived from

this extended model. One hypothesis concerns the neutrality of perceived

monetary policy. The other hypothesis concerns the nonneutrality of errors

in preliminary monetary data. The econometric results imply rejection of

both of these hypotheses. These tests provide strong evidence against the

reality of the equilibrium approach.




John F. Boschen                             Professor Herschel I. Grossman
Board of Governors of the Federal           Department of Economics
 Reserve System                             Brown University
Division of Research and Statistics         Providence, Rhode Island 02912
Washington, D.C. 20551
                                            (401) 863—2606
     This paper uses contemporaneous monetary data to carry out
econometric tests of the "equilibrium" approach to modelling
the relation between monetary disturbances and macroeconomic
 fluctuations. The adjective "equilibrium," in our terminology,
 denotes the class of macroeconomic models that assume that
 expectaticns are rational, in the sense that private agents
 behave as if they know the economy's relevant stochastic structure,
 and that markets clear, in the sense that transactions realize
 all perceived gains from trade, and that focus on incomplete
 information about monetary disturbances as the main explanation
for the association of fluctuations in real
 macroeconomic variables with monetary disturbances.
The essence of incomplete information about monetary dis-
turbances in equilibrium models is that private agents cannot
perfectly anticipate the behavior of monetary aggregates and,
also, do not observe contemporaneously either the actual
values of monetary aggregates or the values of other macro-
economic variables such as average prices and aggregate
output.
     With regard to direct monetary information, the classic
equilibrium models--for example, Lucas (1972; 1973) and
Barro (1976)--assume, specifically, that monetary policy is
partly stochastic and that available data provide no
informatiori on current monetary policy, but provide full
and accurate information on past monetary policy. The
starting point of the present paper is the observation that
this specification of monetary information is unsatisfactory
for at least two reasons.
     First, it is an unrealistic abstraction that seems
contrary to the strategy of equilibrium modelling. Since the
early 1950's, the Federal Reserve Board has issued preliminary
monetary data with a lag of no more than one or two months.
Since 1965, this lag has been only eight days. Revisions of
this data, however, appear over a period of many months or
years. These revisions result from such factors as computational
                             —2—
corrections, benchmark changes reflecting fuller reporting, and
conceptual changes reflecting financial innovations. The
classic equilibrium models abstract from both the ex3bence of
contemporaneous preliminary monetary data and the process of
gradual accumulation of revised monetary data. The neglect of
contemporaneous data implies that private agents act as if
they ignore readily available and apparently relevant informa-
tion, an implication that seems inconsistent with the idea of
rational expectations. The neglect of the process of data
revision implies, in contrast, that private agents act as if
they have an unrealistically large amount of information.
     Second, abstracting from information about current
monetary policy causes the analysis to focus on the predict-
ability of monetary policy. Specifically, the main testable
hypothesis that emerges from the classic equilibrium models
is that only unanticipated monetary policy affects real
variables. Although some existing econometric results suggest
that the evidence is consistent with this hypothesis--see,
for example, Barro (1977)  and Barro and Rush (1980)-—the
hypothesis itself does not provide a strong test of
equilibrium models. Specifically, as some authors, such as
Barro and Hercowitz (1980) and Fischer (1980) , have
recognized, this hypothesis does not discriminate between
equilibrium models and an alternative class of models that
also assume rational expectations, but allow markets to
fail to clear.
     The theoretical analysis in the present paper introduces
into an equilibrium macroeconomic model both the availability
of preliminary data on current monetary aggregates and the
process of accumulation of revised monetary data. This
generalization permits the derivation of a set of readily test-
able hypotheses that are specifically associated with the
equilibrium approach to macroeconomic modelling. The
econometric analysis in the present paper tests two of these
hypotheses.
                              —3—
     One hypothesis concerns the neutrality of perceived monetary
policy. Specifically, the model implies that the innovation
in aggregate output and employment is uncorreLted both with
the contemporaneous measure of money growth implied by the
difference between the currently available estimates of current
and past money stocks and with lagged values of this measure.
The econometric results imply rejection of this hypothesis.
     The other hypothesis concerns the nonneutrality of errors
in preliminary monetary data. Specifically, the model implies
that the innovation in aggregate output and employment is posi-
tively correlated either with the revision in the current
measure of money growth implied by the difference between the
preliminary contemporaneous measure and the finally reported
measure or with such revisions in past measures of money growth.
The econometric results fail to reject the contrary of this
hypothesis. Each of these two tests provides strong evidence
against the reality of the equilibrium approach to moaelling
macroeconomic fluctuations.
     The theoretical analysis underlying these tests builds on
earlier work reported in King (1981) and Boschen and Grossman
(1980) .   Our models, like King's model, include a contemporaneous
estimate of the money stock, but instead of King's assumption
that this estimate is corrected in the next period, we assume
that developing the finally reported value of the current money
stock involves more than one revision and takes more than one
period. The present model extends our earlier work by allowing
for positive correlation in the subsequent revisions of current
estimates of current and past money stocks. This correlation
provides a source of persistence in the effects of monetary
disturbances on real variables, because it enables private
agents to use information about past monetary policy to draw
inferences about current monetary policy. Random factors in
past monetary policy influence this inference process and,
consequently, affect current real variables.
      Our models also extend King's model by allowing explicitly for
                             —4—
systematic monetary policy in the form of a target monetary
growth rate that responds to the past behavior of aggregate output.
The present model introduces as well a production technology that
includes a direct effect of past levels of aggregate output on
the current level of aggregate output. This extension sharpens
the analysis by focusing attention or the relation between
contemporaneous measures of money growth and the innovation in
aggregate output, rather than, as in earlier work, on
aggregate output itself. Taken together, the effect of past
output on current output through the production technology
and the effect of past output on current monetary policy can
create a spurious correlation between aggregate output and
contemporaneous monetary data.
     In what follows, Sections 1—3 set up the theoretical model,
solve the model, and interpret the solution. Section 4 derives
the two hypotheses to be tested.   Section 5 sets up and
reports the results of the econometric tests of these hypotheses.
Section 6 discusses general conclusions.
1.   Setup of the Model

     In the existing literature, the development of equilibrium
macroeconomic models has involved various, but mutually
consistent, stories about information. The following setup
is based on the story told by Friedman [1968] in which the
representative producer infrequently purchases many of the items
that he consumes and, hence, infrequently observes their prices.
Consequently, he does not know precisely the extent to which a
change in the nominal value of his product involves a change
in his terms of trade between leisure and consumption.   His
subjective belief about consumption prices and, hence, about
the relevant real value of his productive services is the
critical expectational variable in the model. The assumption of
rational expectations means that this subjective belief is equal
to a true mathematical expectation conditional on available
information.   The structural equations of the model describe
                                —5—
the supply and demand for a representative good, the market-
clearing condition that determines the output and price of this
good, the behavioral pattern of the monetary authority, the
nature of available monetary data, and the formation of rational
expectations about average prices.
     The production technology for representative good z
makes current output of the good an increasing function of
productive services currently provided by producers of this
good. The current supply of these productive services depends
on the subjective belief of the representative producer
about the current relative price of this good and, because of
adjustment costs, on past levels of employment of these
productive services. Specifically, we assume the log—linear
form

(1)      y(z) =    a Ipt(z) —              +
                                Et(z)pt]       a(L)y1(z)
where   y(z) is the log of the current supply of good z,
        pt(z) is the log of the current money price of good z,
        Et(.z)pt     is the current subjective belief of the
                  representative producer of good z about the
                  average of the logs of money prices,
        a         is the positive and constant elasticity of
                  supply with respect to the difference,,
                  pt(z) — Et(z)pt,
        a(L)      is a polynomial in L such that
                  a(L) = a + a L + a     +
        L         is a lag operator such that LJy_1 =           and
        Yt_1(z)      is the log of output of good z in period t-l.
     The current demand for good z depends on the value of
aggregate money balances deflated by pt(z) and on random
disturbances to aggregate demand and to the relative demands
for the various goods. Specifically, we assume the log-linear
form
                                      —6—
(2)       y(z) = Mt        pt(z) +    Vt +
where     yCz) is the log of the current demand for good z,
                   is the log of the current money stock,
          Mt
                   is a random variable distributed according to
          v.
                   v      N(0,Q) ,    uncorrelated   serially and uncorre—
                   iatd with the other random variables in the
                   model, and
          Et(z). is a random variable distributed according to
                   c(z)     N(0,c), uncorrelated serially, uncorre—
                   lated with the other random variables in the
                   model, and summing to zero across all goods, i.e.,
                       c(z) = 0.

        The specification of the relevant subjective belief,
Et(z)pt, in equation (1) as involving current, rather than
future, consumption prices represents an abstraction from
the intertemporal considerations that are implicit in the
story about infrequent purchase of consumption goods.   The
specification of the monetary aggregate, Mti in equation (2)
abstracts f rpm the distinction between the finally reported
value of the current money stock and the true value of the
current money stock——for more on this issue, see Boschen and
Grossman (1980) .     A more general formulation of the
supply and demand functions would include the terms,
pt(z) -          and Mt —
           Et(z)pt                 in both of the functions
                                     pt(z),
and would      allow for random disturbances to supply. These
and other      possible generalizations would complicate the
algebraic      analysis of the model without changing the conclusions
regarding      the role of monetary information.
                                          —7—
        The market-clearing condition for good z is that
adjusts to satisfy the equality,

                =     s          =    d
                     y(z)            Yt(z),
The rest of the model involves specification of available
information, of the determination of Mt, and of         the   formation
of Et(z)pt.
     Currently available monetary data include a series of preliminary
and revised estimates of finally reported values of monetary aggregates.
These estimates are obtained by sampling from the balance sheets of
the Federal Reserve Banks and of other financial institutions. We
assume log—linear estimating relations. For the current money stock,
we have the preliminary estimate,

(4.1)     tMt = Mt +

where tMt is the estimate of Mt reported in period t and
              is a random variable distributed according to
                —
                     N(O,cy).
For the last period's money stock, we have one revised estimate,

(4.2)     tMt_1 =            +
                     Mt_i
where tMt_1 is the estimate of Mt_1 reported in period t and
                is a random variable distributed according to
                11        N(O,ci2),

in addition to the preliminary estimate,

(4.3)     t_iMt_i =              +
                      Mt_i
where
         __          is    the estimate of Mt_i reported in period t—l.
For Mt_2, we have two revised estimates in addition to the
                                      —8—
preliminary estimate, and so forth for earlier periods.
     The data on preliminary and finally reported money stocks
used in the econometric analysis below indicate that errors in
contemporaneous estinates of money stocks are correlated. Specifi-
cally, the covariance between    and     denoted      is highly
positive. The data also indicate that            and        are not correlated
with the difference, given by               - t_iMt_i   =         - _' between
the preliminary and revised estimates of Mt_i               nor      with the
differences between preliminary and revised estimates of the money
stocks of period t—2 and earlier. Specifically, none of the
correlation coefficients for such pairs of variables is larger
than 0.2.   Finally, to simplify the calculations necessary to
obtain an explicit solution of the model, we assume that    and
are uncorrelated with the errors in current estimates of the
money stocks of period t—2 and earlier. It is easy to relax
this last assumption in the implementation of the econometric
tests of the model.

     Monetary policy involves a target monetary growth rate,
which reflects a systematic response to past aggregate output,
and a random factor. Specifically, we assume a log-linear
relation of the form,

               =           +
                   tMt_i       b(L)yt 1 +
where   b(L)  is a polynomial in the lag operator, L,
        t—l is the aggregate across all goods of the logs of
              output last period, i.e.,      =   yt_i(z), and

                   is a random variable distributed according to

                   g   N(0,ci), uncorrelated serially, and
                   uncorrelated with the other random variables in
                   the model.
                                    —9—
       Within the context of equation (5), the random variable,
      has at least two possible interpretations, corresponding
to different monetary policy processes. One possible process is
that Mt results from adding the term, bCL)yt_i, and a rndojn
variable, x., directly to tMt_i—-that is,

                          +
           Mt =   tNt_i       b(L)yt 1 +
In this case,        is equivalent to x. A second possible
process is that Mt results from adding b(L)y1 and x. to
Mt_i__that is,
                      + b(L)yt       +     =           +                     -
         Mt = Mt_i
                                               tMt_i       b(L)y1   +
                                                                        x.
In   this case,      is equivalent to the difference,         x —            In
general, these two processes have different quantitative
implications for the behavior of y. These two processes,
however, have the same implication for the relation between
                                                            y.
and contemporanous monetary data.

     The assumed rationality of expectations prescribes that
the subjective belief, Et(z)pt, is equal to the true mathe-
matical expectation of Pt conditional on the information
currently known to producers of good z. Specifically,

6)        Et(z)pt = E

where I(z) is the assumed information set. This set contains
useful knowledge about the structure of the economy that
includes the form of the structural equations (1) - (6), the
values of relevant parameters, and the joint distribution of
the stochastic variables. The information set also contains
useful data that includes the current price of good z, the
past levels of average prices and aggregate output, and
the available monetary data. The potentially useful information
that is not in It(z) includes the current average of prices,
                                     — 10 —

the current level of aggregate output, the finally reported
values of current and recent past money stocks, and the realiza-
tions of current and past stochastic variables.

2.    Solution of the Model

      The explicit derivation of testable hypotheses from
the model specified by equations (1) — (6) requires a,
solution for aggregate output that satisfies the market-
clearing condition, given by equation (3), subject to
the assumption of rational expectations, given by equation (6).
We employ the method of undetermined coefficients to
calculate this solution. The first step is to combine
equations (.1), (.2), and (3) to obtain useful expressions for
pt(z) and y. Equating supply to actual output of good z
gives

                 =               —
                        [pt(z)       Et(z)pt)       +
                                                        a(L)yti(z).
Equating demand to actual output of good z gives

           yt(z) = Mt -      pt(z)   +
                                         v.   +
                                                  c(.z).
Equating these two expressions for y(z) and solving for pt(z)
gives

                =    (a+l)   cLEt(z)pt + Mt +            v + c(z)     —
                                                                          a(L)yti(z)].
Aggregating the equation of demand and output across all goods
gives

(8)
           yt=Mt_pt+vt.
        The second step is to conjecture a solution for pt(z)
that is a linear combination of a constant term, which allows
for known variables, and each of the relevant stochastic
disturbances. Taken together, equations (.4.1), (5), and (7)
imply that pt(z) is related to Et(z)pt, other known
                                         — 11 —

variables,        and the unknown stochastic disturbances,
                                                                      v, 6'
and e(z). The rational expectation, Et(z)pt, in turn should
involve joint inferences about the values of these stochastic
variables. These joint inferences, as shown below, depend
partly on known linear combinations of these variables. In
addition, because    is correlated with the unknown stochastic
variable, r these joint inferences are related to an
inference about                 This inference, as also shown below,
depends, jointly with inferences about the unknown stochastic
variables,      and vi, on known linear combinations of
        vt_i, and               As indicated above, in calculating an
explicit solution of the model, we ignore possible correlations
between    or    and errors in estimates of the money stocks
of period t-2 and earlier. A fully general solution would
have to include these erro'rs as well as other stochastic
disturbances in period t—2 and earlier.
      The above discussion suggests that an appropriate form
for the conjectured solution is

(9)          pt(z) = nt0 +            + flv +       + fl1 + fl5v_1
                            +         + flct(z),

where   II    ,   ..., IT       are the coefficients to be determined.
Averaging equation (9) across all goods, given                           0,

yields a solution for the average price in the form,

(10)      Pt = II      +          + flvt + fl3tSt + iT_1 + ll5v_1 +

The assumed rationality of expectations means that the
subjective belief, Et(z)pt, is equal to the true mathe-
matical expectation of equation (10) conditional on
This expectation is given by
                               — 12 —

(11)    Et(z)pt = no + II E(z)g + II E.(z)v + flEt(Z)c5t

                  + llE(z)g_1 + ll5Et(z)vt_i + ]TEt(z)flt,

where the terms of on the right—hand side are true mathematical
expectations of the respective stochastic disturbances condi-
tional on It(z).
     The third step is to organize the information that is
relevant for inferring these expectations. This process
involves combining equations (7) and (8), derived from the
market—clearing conditions, with the known structural
equations describing monetary information and monetary policy.
Starting with the current period, substituting equations (4.1)
and (5) separately into equation (7) to eliminate Mt, after
rearranging, yields two equations between linear combinations
of
       v.,     and ct(z) and linear combinations of known
variables,

             + v + ct(z) =                 -               —
(l2)                          (l-i-)p(z)       Et(z)pt         tMt
                               + a(L)y1(z) and
             + Vt ÷ Et(z) =                —               —
(13)
                              (l+a)p(z)        ctEt(z)pt
                               - b(L)yti       + a(L)yti.(z).

Equations (12) and (13) indicate that producers of good z
know the values of the sums, —& + Vt + ct(z) and
   + v. + c(z).
     Turning to last period, substituting equations (4.2)
and (4.3) and equation (5), applied to period t—l, separately
into equation (8), applied to period t-l, to eliminate Mt_1,
after rearranging, yields three equations between linear
combinations of
                        v1, t-l' and fl. and linear combinations
of known variables,
                                               — 13 —


(14)       —

           —
               t   +
                       v_1
                       +
                               =
                                   nt_i
                                   =
                                           +

                                                +
                                                         -
                                                              tMt_i
                                                              —
                                                                              and
(15)
                                                                  t_iMt_i,
                                                          -
(16)
                       vt_i    =
                                   pti +                      t_iMt_2
                                                                        -
                                                                             b(L)y_2.
Equations (14) - (16) indicate that producers of good z know
the values of the sums,     +           +
                                                v_1,
                                                 and      +
                                                                      v1,                   v_1.
Equation (14) involves relevant information because                                 is
correlated with               and equation (16) involves relevant informa-
tion because               +
                               vt_i       is correlated with                   +
                                                                                   v1.
                                                                               and fl are
Equation (15), however, is not useful, because
uncorrelated with the difference,                                             Subtracting
equation (14) from equation (15) shows that the addition
infoanation contained in equation t15) amounts to



                           =              -
           nt -    st_i        tNt_i           t_iMt_i
       The fourth step is to calculate the expectations that
appear on the right-hand side of equation (11). Given the
linear normal structure of the model, the relations between the
conditional expectations and the known linear combinations of
stochastic variables have the form of regression equations,

               E(z)g
                                                     +
               Et(z)vt                                   Vt + 6t(Z)
(17)           Et(z)5t         =   ER]               + V + t(z)
               E(z)g_1                        _llt   + v._1
                                                         +
               Et(z) t_1                       _]             v_1
               Et(z)nt


where ER] is a 6x4 matrix of population regression coefficients
given by
                                — 14 —

          o a2g        0    0                                                        —1

         a2                 0 a2 + a2 + a2
                                         V a2C + a2V
          V a2V        0
                                    C
                                                                            0

        a2.     0 —a        0 a2 + a2       a2 + a2 + a2
                                                       V     0              0
IR]=                            C   V        g     C

          0     0      0   a2   a              0           a2-i-a2V         a2
                            g       Sr                                      V
          0     0   a2     a2       0          0              a2       a2 +
                                                                        g        V
                0—a2n       0




Appendix A lists the calculated elements of the matrix, [R).
       The fifth step is to determine the coefficients, U, ...,
The procedure is to substitute into equation (11) for Et(z)pt
the values of the expectations given by equation (17). Then,
substitute into equation (7) for pt(z) the value of Et(z)pt
given by equation (11) and the value of        given   by equation (5).
(An alternative would be to use equation (4.1) to eliminate Mt.)
Equation (7) then gives an expression for pt(z) that is a
linear conibination of the predetermined and exogenous variables,
where the weights involve the undetermined coefficients,
II, ...,   , and the variances of the stochastic variables.
Equating each of these weights to the corresponding coefficient
in the trial solution given by equation (9) yields a system
of eight simultaneous equations that we can solve for II, ...,          7

Appendix B lists these equations. The solutions to these equations
are

          =
              tMt_1 + b(L)yt_1 — a(L)y_1(z)1
       U = l—a2[a2(a2a2
              C      5 g + a2a2
                           nv + gv
                                a2a2) — a
                                          &nn (a2
                                                a
                                                g
                                                  + a2)]
                                                     V   II A1,    2
                                                             — 15 —

                 = II       = {1+cta2[(a2 ÷                 a2)(a2a2 +
       II
            2           7           C              CS
                                                             g g iv gv        a2ci2 + a2a2)

                            —
                                (cy2                    + a2)] _1}_1,

                 =
                            cg ng÷ a2a2
                                    iv+ Y2c12)
                                         gv II2
       It        =   -aa     a2a2cY2 II
            I.              SflCgv      2

       11 = cw               a2a2a2 11                        and
            5               CSCgg    2
                 = —cw       a2a2(a2           + a2)
                                                  V II A1,
       II
            6               CSCg   g                          2



where A =            (c         + cici + a[a(c ÷ ci + c) + a( +
                                — a    a                    + a2)     (a2 +   ci2 + a2)
                                      CSCS         (a2
                                                        g      v       g            -v

       The final step is to write out a solution for ôurrent
aggregate output in terms of predetermined and exogenous
variables. Substituting into equation (8) for y. the value of Mt
given by equation (5) and the value of Pt given by equation (10)
yields

(18)              y = a(L)y_i                  + (l-rI)g + (l—ll)vt -
                                                                                          113CSt

                                               —                                —
                                                        11_1 — rt5v_1               II6ii,
where the values of                    II ,
                                           1
                                                        ..., H    6
                                                                      are as calculated above.
Straightforward                 algebraic manipulation reveals that the coefficients
of                               and    are all positive and that the coefficients
of       and v_1 are both negative. All of these coefficients
are less than unity in absolute value.
                              — 16 —

3.    Interpretation of the Solution

     Equation (18) indicates that current aggregate output
equals a linear combination of past levels of aggregate
output, ct(L)yt_i, and the realizations of the exogenous random
variables that represent the unanticipated part of current
monetary policy,     the current disturbance to aggregate
demand, v, the currently unperceived part of current monetary
policy, S, the unanticipated part of past monetary policy,
       the past disturbance to aggregate demand, v_1, and
the currently unperceived part of past monetary policy, n.e.
The coefficients of these random variables are functions of
their variances and covariances and the variance of the random
disturbance to relative demands.
      The interpretation of the coefficients of               v, and
is familiar from the discussions in King (1981) and Boschen
and Grossman (i980). Current aggregate output is positively
related to    and to vt because producers of good z mistake
some of the increase in the price of good z that results
from positive values of   or v. to be an increase in. the
relative price of good z. Current aggregate output is nega-
tively related to   because a high preliminary estimate of
the current money stock causes the expectation of producers of
good z about average prices to be too high and their expecta-
tions about the relative price of good z to be correspondingly
too low.                            -                     -

      The solutions for the coefficients,   II
                                                 0
                                                     ,   ..., II   7

indicate that, if the covariance,       between the errors in
the current estimates of current and past money stocks were
equal to zero, equation (18) would reduce to the same expression
for y. derived in King (1981) and Boschen and Grossman (1980).
Most importantly, in this case, the coefficients of 1' v1,
and     would be zero.   This result brings out the point that,
                                — 17   —




as suggested above,          v_1, and        affect    in equation (18)
only because       is correlated with        and, hence, the known
linear combinations, -n.e + v_1 and         +
                                              v_1, convey
information about     and       Current aggregate output is
positively related to     because a current estimate of the         past
money stock that is high relative to the known past values of
aggregate output and average prices causes producers of good z
to raise their expectations about ó and, hence, to lower their
expectation about current average prices. Current aggregate
output is positively related to     and negatively related to
v_1 because a high value of            or a low value of v_1 causes
the expectations of producers of good z about            to be too
high.
        The presence of the term,          in equation (18) means
that unanticipatQd monetary policy affects aggregate output over
more than one period. This channel of persistence, which
results from the structure of monetary information, operates in
addition to the separate persistence effect that results from
the production technology and causes the term, a(L)y_i to
appear in equation (18). As discussed above, a more general
version of the present model would allow for additional
correlations of the errors in monetary data. For example,
the plausible assumption that    is correlated with errors in
estimates of the money stocks of period t—2 and -earlier
would imply a solution for current aggregate output that
includes these errors as well as unanticipated monetary policy
and aggregate demand disturbances from period t—2 and earlier.
     The dependence of aggregate output on both monetary policy
and aggregate demand disturbances described by equation (18)
requires that producers of good z be unable to distinguish
these aggregate factors from disturbances to relative demands. To
see this conclusion, suppose that ct(z) were a deterministic
                                                  — 18 —

and, hence, known variable, rather than an unknown random vari-
able, and, accordingly, set a equal to zero in the solutions
for the coefficients,   II
                             1
                                 ,        ..., II               7
                                                                    .   In       this case, II
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                     and II
                                                                                                              2

would equal unity and II ,           TI       ,    II       ,       and H would equal zero.
                        3                 L             5                    6

Consequently, y. would simply equal a(L)y_1.
     Of more immediate interest is the crucial role played by
incomplete monetary information in determining the relation
between monetary policy and aggregate output. Consider how
equation (18) would change if 6 and n were deterministic
and, hence, known variables, rather than unknown random variables.
                                                                —
Referring back to the information stmunarized by equations (12)
 (16), we observe that knowledge of 6 and r) would enable
producers of good z to calculate exactly the values of
and v_1. Using these five known values, instead of the
expectations given by equations (17), to calculate the
coefficients, II ,  ..., II
                          ,  we would obtain the results that
                                 7

II   equals unity and that II, H, II, and II                                            all equal zero.

(The coefficient, II, would still be less than unity.)                                                  This

result indicates that aggregate output depends on monetary
policy if and only if monetary policy is at least partly
unperceived. This observation underlies the testable hypotheses
that are explicitly derived in the next section.

4.     Derivation of Testable Hypotheses
      The first hypothesis to be tested involves the neutrality of
 perceived monetary policy. The innovation in the output of
 representative good z arid, hence, the innovation in aggregate
 output depend only on the subjective belief of the representative
 producer about the current relative price of good z. The model
 implies that this belief is uncorrelated both with the contemporaneous
 measure of money growth implied by the difference between the
 currently available estimates of current and past money stocks and
 with lagged values of this measure. This implication is not
                                     — 19 —


trivial,   because, as we have seen, these monetary data——
tnt'            t-t—l' t_iMt_2, etc.—-play a critical role in the
model as part of the relevant infcrmation on which producer
decisions are based. An essential result of the assumptions of
market clearing and rational expectations, however, is that the
behavioral response of producers to this information neutralizes
its effect on beliefs about relative prices and, hence, on
aggregate output. The general principle involved is that these
assumptions imply neutrality for the known part of any disturbance
that would be neutral under complete information.
     Derivation of the hypothesis that perceived money growth is
neutraf7rK&strating that the covariances between y. -
                                                         a(L)y_1
and      -        and between y -
               tMt_i                           a(L)y1
                                              and
           -
               t_iMt_2     are zero. Rearranging equation (18) gives
the following expression for the innovation in aggregate output:
   —
       a(L)yt_i   =
                       (l—fl)g    + (l—ll)v —            —
                                                                     — llv_   —

Combining equations.- (4.1) and (5) gives the following expression
for the contempoianeous measure of money growth:

       tMt -   t-i t   =
                             + g + b(L)y1.

To handle the term, b(L)yti, apply equation (18) to period t—l
to obtain

                  =   b(L) [a(L)y 2 + (l—fl1)g_1 + (l112)vt1 —
                              —         —            —
                                            rI5v_2
which can also be written as:

       b(L)yti =      b(L){a(L)yt2    + (i—il )g1 + (l—ll)vti +
                              +
                                            —) — lit]    —
                                                             11t—2
                                                                     —
                                                                         llv2— 116—1•
Finally, combining equation (4.3) and equation (5) applied to
period t—1 gives the following expression for the contemporaneous
measure of past money growth:
                                      — 20 —


t_iMt_i        t_iMt_2 =        -
                                     t-l      +           ÷                       + b(L)yt_2.

     These expressions imply that the hypothesis involves
evaluating the following covariances:

coy        —
               a(L)y1         + g] =
                                            (l—rI1)a
                                                                —
                                                                         3 6fl'        —

coy [y. —
               a(L)y1      't—]) =   —(1—11        )Tt a2 —             (l—ll)llc
                                            + II
                                                   3
                                                       (II3aSfl         + II
                                                                                  6 Ti
                                                                                            and

coy   [y   -
               a(L)y_11         - 6t-l        +           + g + b(L)yt_2]
                                =    ft a
                                      3fl
                                                   — II   a
                                                          6fl
                                                                    —    ft
                                                                              kg
Substitution      of the calculated values for                           II
                                                                              1
                                                                                  ,    ..., II   6
                                                                                                     into these
expressions reveals, after some algebraic manipulation, that each
of these covariances equal zero. Using these results, and an
immediate generalization to estimates of money growth in period
t-2 and earlier, we have the testable hypothesis:

CI)   coy [y —     a(L)y1       t_Nt_± —            t_iMt_i_±]                        = 0

           for all values of i,              i     = 0,1,2,

     It is worth recalling that the models in King (1981) and
Boschen and Grossman (1980) imply the stronger hypotheses that
aggregate output, rather than the innovation in aggregate output,
is uncorrelated with the contemporaneous measures of money growth.
To obtain this stronger hypothesis, it is necessary to assume
that either b(L) or a(L) are equal to zero. Otherwise, y. and
    -       are correlated through the covariance of a(L)y_1
with b(L)y1. The essential point is that, withput a control
for the persistence effect on aggregate output that results from
the production technology, the effect of past aggregate output on
current monetary policy can create a spurious correlation between
aggregate output and contemporaneous monetary data.
     The second hypothesis to be tested involves the effects of
errors in preliminary monetary data. The model implies that
the innovation in aggregate output is positively correlated either
                                           — 21 —

with      the revisions in the current measure of money growth implied
by the differences between the preliminary contemporaneous measure
and the finally reported measure or with such revisicns in past
measures of money growth. The essential idea is that these revisions
measure   the extent to which monetary policy is unperceived.
     Derivation of this hypothesis involves calculating the co-
                                  and (Mt-Nt1) -         -
variances between y. -
                                    a(L)yti                                                     (tMt         tMt_i)
and between y, — a (L)                  and (Mt_i -
                                                        Mt_2)
                                                                       _
                                                                               —]'-i               t_iMt_2
Combining equations (4.1) and (4.2) implies
            -      -        =
(Mt -      Mt_i)      (tNt    tMt_i)           nt
Combining equation (4.3) and equation (4.2) applied to period
t—2 implies
                                           —
(Mt_i — Mt_2)   (t_iMt_i t_lMb_2) =                         nt-i
which can also be written as
      —       —          —          =      +     —       —
(Mt_i   Mt_2)   (t_iMt_i                 t_iMt_2)           nt—i
           expressions imply that the hypothesis involves
          These
evaluating the following covariances:
coy          —
                  a(L)y1,       —          =
                                                    3   +
                                                                 6
                                                                     —
                                                                               36fl
                                                                                            —
                                                                                                              and
coy          —
                  a(L)y_1, —1 +          (n - &i)            —
                                                                              = lla +                  6fl
Substitution of the calculated values for II                                  and II            into these
                                                                          3             6
expressions yields, after some algebraic manipulation,
             —
                  a(L)y_11    (Mt —     Mt_i)
                                                -            -
             6g2 1[2(22
          aa2a2ll
                      rigCS
                                    +   a2a2
                                         nv + a2a2)
                                               gv
                                                             —
                                                                      CSn
                                                                                  2
                                                                              ( cSrig       +   aCSv
                                                                                                  a2 + gv
and
             - a(L)y1,        (Mt_i —     Mt2)
                                                    -
                                                        (t_iMt_i
                                                                              -
                                                                                  t_iMt_2)]
      =   a2a2ll
            cg2        a a2a2
                         c5gv
If,       as seems   to the case, the term, positive, the second of
                                                        a6f          is
these calculated covariances is positive, but the sign                                             of the first
one is ambiguous. If, alternatively,      were not positive, the
second covariance would not be positive, but the first one would
be unambiguously positive. Using these results and an immediate
generalization to errors in preliminary estimates of money growth
in period t-2 and earlier, we have the second testable hypothesis:
                                  — 22 —

(II)    coy     —
                    a(L)yti,   (M_ —       Mti.)   —
                                                       (t_Mt_   —
                                                                    t_Mt_i_)]   > 0

               for at least one value of i, i =          0,1,2,
     These two hypotheses do not exhaust the possible ways to
use contemporaneous monetary data to test thá equilibrium
approach to macroeconomics. However, given the nature of the
econometric results discussed below, explicit derivation
and examination of additional testable hypotheses does not seem
worthwhile.

5.      Econometric Analysis
        To test Hypothesis I econometrically, we estimate
regression equations of   on lagged values of y, to control
for the effect of a(L)y_1, on current and lagged values of
the contemporaneous measire of money growth__M —

           - t_iMt_2,   etc.——and on seasonal dummy variables. To

simplify notation, denote              -       as       and

t_iMt_i —     t_iMt_2   as      etc.       The zero vector of

covariances invol-ving yt —      a(L)y_1      contained in
Hypothesis I implies that the covariances of y with the vari-

ables, a(L)y_i,           etc., are equal to the respective
covariances of a(L)yti with these same variables.
Consequently, as we can readily confirm by computing the
population regression coefficients, Hypothesis I implies that
the estimated coefficients of m, me_i, etc., in the calculated
regression equations should be zero.

     The data are for the United States foi' 1953 through
1978. As measures of     we use both the log of the Federal
Reserve Board's industrial production index, denoted I' and
the log of the ratio of employment to population, denoted Nt.
In both cases, we take four seasonally unadjusted observations——
for the months of February, Nay, August, and November--for each
year.
                             — 23 —

      The contemporaneous measure of money growth, '' corresponding to
    is the difference between the latest seasonally unadjusted estimate
of the money stock, Ml, published prior to the month of the observation
of    and the revised seasonally unadjusted estimate available at
the same time of Ml three months earlier. The construction of this
time series involves three different procedures because of three
different episodes in the publication of monetary data. For the
period from the middle of 1965 through 1978, the Federal Reserve
Board published in weekly statistical release H.6 preliminary monetary
data with an eight-day lag. For this period, our measure for       is
the last weekly average of daily estimates of Ml issued during the
months——either January, April, July, or October——prior to our
observation of y. For the period from the last quarter of 1960
until the middle of 1965, the Federal Reserve Board published in
semi-monthly statistical release J.3 preliminary monetary data with
a lag of from one to tw weeks. For this period, our measure of
tMt is the last semi—monthly average of daily estimates of Ml issued
during the month prior to our observation of      For the period
from the beginning of 1953 until the last quarter of 1960, the
Federal Reserve Board published preliminary monetary data on a
monthly basis with lag of one or two months. For this period our
measure of tNt is the latest daily estimate of Ml given in the
Federal Reserve Bulletin dated the month prior to our observation
c       For all three periods, our measure of tMt_i is the revision
of the previous estimate, t—lt-1' available contemporaneously with
      Experimentation suggests that the econometric results are not
sensitive to the precise timing of the four annual observations of
the variables.
     The choice of seasonally unadjusted data reflects the idea
that private agents respond to the unadjusted changes in variables
and that the use of seasonally smoothed data may distort the
measurement of these responses. In particular, seasonally unadjusted
money growth is the appropriate data for proper testing of
Hypothesis II, because seasonal adjustment factors are themselves
subject to revision and because these revisions introduce differences
between preliminary and revised seasonally adjusted monetary data
that are not related to changes in information about the money stock.
                              — 24 —

It remains important, however, to control for possible seasonal
correlation between variables that is unrelated to business cycle
phenomena.   The inclusion of seasonal dummy variables and the
length of the dependent variable lags seem to control adequately
for the seasonal variation in the dependent variables. The
correlograms calculated from the residuals obtained from the
regressions of    and Nt on their respective lagged values and
the seasonal dummies showed the aut.ocorrelation at lag four to
be within two standard deviations of zero for both variables.
Appendix C lists the time series of monetary data. The specifica-
tion of the series, Nt, is discussed below.
     The main reason for not using all of the monthly observations
of the measures of aggregate output involves the problem of construct-
ing corresponding measures of money growth. Experimentation indicated
that the measurement of money growth over monthly intervals intro-
duced severe problems of dealing with seasona-lity and of serial
correlation in the residuals. Money growth over short intervals,
moreover, might not b large enough to have the potential to produce
measuab1e effects- on aggregate output. An alternative procedure of
measuring money growth monthly over longer overlapping intervals
would create a severe problem of multicollinearity. Moreover, the
taking of only four observations annually captures the cyclical move-
ments of aggregate output and money over the sample period and,
hence, does not seem to sacrifice any significant information about
the relation between these variables.
      The reported regression equations involving industrial produc-
tion,      include four lagged values of the, dependent variable,
whereas the reported regression equations involving employment, Nt,
include six lagged values of the dependent variable. The choice of
these specifications reflects experimentation with different lag
lengths. The criterion for selecting the number of dependent vari-
able lags was a likelihood ratio test for serial independence of
the residuals. The test statistic, distributed asymptotically x2--
see Geweke (1979)—-is
         X(K) = n log (cY/cy.),

where     is a maximum   likelihood   estimate of the variance of the
                                                — 25 —

residuals     from a regression of                      or Nt on a distributed lag of
dependent variables and the seasonal dummy variables,
         is the maximum likelihood estimate of the variance of
the residuals from a Kth order autoregression using the residuals
from the regression that generated ci,, and ,
      n   is the number of residuals computed from the Kth order
autoregression.
The dependent variable lag length in the reported regressions is
that number of lags which, based on the likelihood ratio test,
rendered a serially independent residual series. For example,
regressing Nt on six rather than four lags of itself and the
seasonal dummies reduces the value of A(12) from 30.3 to 12.9.
The critical levels for these values of A(12) are .003 and .38
respectively. These critical levels indicate that the null
hypothesis of independent residuals can be rejected for the four
lag Nt equation but not the six lag Nt equation. The value of
A(12) for I. regressed on four lags of itself plus the seasonal
dummies was 6.67. The associated critical level of .88 indicates
we cannot reject the hypothesis of serially independent residuals.
     The selection of the number of independent variable lags is
based on the results of experiments using four, six,and ten lags
of the independent variable. Since the main conclusions from the
econometric analysis did not seem to depend on the number of
lagged variables, the results using four lags of the independent
variable are shown below.
     The results of calculating the two regression equations
or testing Hypothesis I are as follows:
(i)   't =      .17 + 1111t—l —   291t—2
                                         —
                                            41t—3 +
              (3.1)   (9.9)   (—1.8)      (—0.9)    (0.1)
          +                +                    +                +               —
                .6Srn            .7Orn1               .24rn2           .15rnt3       .l2rnt4
              (.2.8)           (3.1)                (1.0)            (0.6)       (—0.5)
          —     .03S       —     .02S       —         .O1S
                       1                2                    3
          (—2.7)           (—1.6)               (—1.0)
          R2 =         .993             F5
                                         86
                                            =         3.5
                                             — 26 —

(ii)   Nt =     —.01     +
                               .93Nt_i
                                         -
                                              .l4Nt2      +
                                                                .O9Nt3      +                —
                                                                                  .51Nt4         .61NtS
              (—0.7)         (8.3)       (—1.0)               (0.8)             (3.9)        (—4.5)
                        +                —            +
                               .2ONt6         .Olmt             .22m1+            .18mt2 +       .l3m3
                             (2.0)       (—0.1)               (3.2)             (2.5)         (1.7)
                        +      .02m — — .01S          —         .OOlS       +     .O1S
                                   t4        i                          2                3
                             (0.3)       (—2.1)           (—0.1)                (1.3)
          R2 =         .982          F5 = 4.2

The numbers in parentheses under the coefficients are t—statistics.

     The important conclusions from equation (i) for industrial
production are that the t—statistics imply rejection at the
99% confidence level of the hypothesis that the coefficients
of    and m1 are zero, and that the F—statistic implies
rejection at the 99%'confidence level of the hypothesis that
the joint effect of the variables, ''             is zero.
The important conclusions from equation (ii) for employment
are that the t—statistics imply rejection at the 96% confidence
level of the hypothesis that the coefficients of
                                                                            m1i m_2,
and mt..3 are zero, and that the F—statistic again implies
rejection at the 99% confidence level of the hypothesis that
the joint effect of the variables, m        mt_4, is zero.
In sum, these regression equations indicate that current
and lagged values of the contemporaneous measure of money
growth have statistically significant effects on industrial
production and employment, a result that implies rejection
of Hypothesis I.

     An appropriate inference from this finding is that the
equilibrium model from which Hypothesis I derived is not consistent
with the facts—-specifically, with the observed relations between
preliminary monetary data and industrial production and aggregate
employment. Although this conclusion that the equilibrium model
is not realistic stands independently of tests of other
                                 — 27 —


implications of the model, empirical analysis of Hypothesis II
brings to bear additional data--specifically, the finally
reported money stock——and, in addition, can generate inferences
about the quantitative importance of unperceived money growth
as a channel of monetary nonneutrality.   Specifically,
failure to reject the contrary of Hypothesis II both reinforces
the conclusion that the equilibrium model is not realistic
and indicates that incomplete monetary information is not a
significant source of monetary nonneutrality.

     To analyze Hypothesis II econometrically, we estimate
regression equations of I. and Nt on lagged values of
the dependent variables, on current and lagged values of
revisions on the current measure of money growth-— (Mt —                   —
                                                                  Mt1)
     -               -
                         Mt_2)
                                 -
                                     (t_iMt_1
                                                -
                                                    t_1Mt_2)   etc.-—and
on seasonal dummy variables. To simplify notation, we denote
                                  — 28 —



      —           -               as Rt etc.    Hypothesis II implies that
(Mt       Mt_i)
at least one of the estimated coefficients of the series, Rt, Rt_ii
in these regression equations should be positive.

          The time series for the finally reicorted money stock, Mt, is
defined to be the log of latest reported weekly average of daily
estimates of Ml for the final weeks of January, April, July,
and August over the sample period, 1953 through 1978, as of
January 1980. Appendix C includes this time series. This
constructed time series for Mt differs from the constructed
time series for            in three ways. First, Mt reflects all of
the historical revisions in monetary data, which involve
pr•imariiy such factors as computational corrections, benchmark
changes resulting from fuller reporting, and conceptual
changes involving repecification of the components of Ml.
Computational corrections and benchmark changes clearly
represent new information. Conceptual changes, however,
represent new informaicn only to the extnt that they
incorporate previously unavailable data rather than merely
rearrange previously available data. As Barro and Hercowitz
(1980) point out, revisions in measures of money growth
are largely independent of conceptual changes,
which mainly alter the overall level
of the reported money stock. Second, Mt measures a weekly
average of daily estimates of Ml, whereas, for the period prior
to the last quarter of 1960, tMt is an estimate of Ml for a
single day. Third, Mt is a reported value of Ml for the
week indicated, whereas      is an estimate published during
the week indicated of the value of Ml for an earlier week or
day. Over the sample period this reporting lag declined
from one to two months to eight days.
     The results of calculating the two regression equations
relating to Hypothesis II were as follows:
                                                    — 29   —




 (iii)   It ='    .07      +       l.27I —              431t—2
                                                                  +      161t—3
                                                                                   —

                (1.8)       (12.4)              (—2.5)                (0.9)        (—0.2)

            —
                  .l3Rt
                               —
                                   .57Rt_l
                                                    —
                                                        . 002R_2 + .l7Rt_3 +             .39Rt_4
            (—0.5)             (—2.2)           (—0.01)               (0.7)            (1.5)

            —     .02S 1       — .02S 2         — .02S 3
            (—1.8)             (—2.2)           (—2.5)
            R2 =        .994              F5 = 2.0
                                            86

                                                    —                              +
 (iv)    Nt =     .02       + 1.O9Nt_l                  .20Nt2    +
                                                                        .O6Nt_3          .61Nt4
                (1.1)           (9.9)           (—1.4)                (0.5)            (4.9)

            —                       +                      +                  —
                  . 81N._5                .27Nt_6                 .O6Rt           .O8Rt_i
             (—6.0)                     (2.6)                   (0.7)         (—0.9)
            —                       —                      —
                  .O7Rt_2                 .O2Rt_3                 .lORt_4
             (—0.8)                 (—0.2)                     (—1.1)
            —     .01s              +     .01s 2           +      .01s 3
                           1

             (—1.9)                     (0.9)                   (1.5)

            R2 =        .978               F5 = 0.6
                                            83




     The important conclusions from equations (iii) and (iv)
are that none of the t—statistics imply rejection of the
alternative hypothesis that the coefficients of the variables,
Rt, . Rt_4, are not positive, and that neither of the
F—statistics imply rejection of the alternative hypothesis
that the joint effects of these variables are zero. These
conclusions accord with the results from similar equations
reported by Barro and Hercowitz (1980). Their regression
equations used annual averages, used unemployment and GNP
as dependent variables, and did not include lagged dependent
variables. All of these results support the conclusion
that errors in preliminary monetary data do not have statistically
significant effects on real variables, and imply that we cannot
reject the contrary of Hypothesis II.
                             — 30 —


6.   Conclusions

     The basic assumptions of equilibrium macroeconomic models——
namely, market clearing and rational expectations——imply that
the known part of a monetary disturbance that would be neutral
under complete information does not influence aggregate output
and employment. In this same context, the assumption of
incomplete information about macroeconomic variables implies that
such a disturbance is nonneutral if, but only if, it is at least
partly unperceived.   Hypotheses I and II, thus, seem to be
inescapable implications of the equilibrium approach to
modelling the relation between monetary disturbances and
macroeconomic fluctuations, once the thecy takes into account
the existence of preliminary data on current monetary aggregates
and the process of accumulation of revised monetary data.
This extension of the classic equilibrium models provides a
rich framework in which current aggregate output depends on
both the unanticipated and currently unperceived parts of
current monetary policy as well as on both the unanticipated
and currently unperceived parts of past monetary policy. The
extended model, however, also generates the above econometric
tests, which are apparently fatal to the equilibrium approach.
     The rejection of Hypothesis I and the failure to reject
the contrary of Hypothesis II underscore the unsatisfactory
state of the theory of macroeconomic fluctuations. The
research program associated with the equilibrium approach
has raised essential questions, but has not provided empirically
convincing answers. The assumptions of market clearing and
rational expectations seem to be compelling elements of a
unified theory of economic behavior.   Moreover, theory and
evidence from a variety of contexts suggest that these assump-
tions cannot be easily dismissed as unrealistic. Indeed,
thanks mainly to equilibrium theorizing, we are no longer
satisfied with explanations for the apparent short-run non-
neutrality of money that rely on biased expectations or on
                             — 31 —


widespread   failure of economic agents to realize perceived
gains from trade.   The results in this paper, however,
indicate that equilibrium theorizing does not provide an
alternative explanation of macroeconomic fluctuations whose
implications accord with the apparent facts. The business
cycle, consequently, seems mysterious. We do not have at present
a theory of fluctuations in aggregate output and employment
that is consistent both with maximizing behavior and with
econometric evidence.
                                                      — 32 —


                                                    Appendix A
     The elements of the matrix, [R], are as follows, where
each element has to be divided by the determinant,

              =    (y22 + 0202 + a2a2) [02(02                  + 02 + cy2) + a2(a2 + cy2)]
                                  gv g S                               v      S   c    v

            SS (2g + a2)V g + 02 + 02)V
                   —                                (02


R
  ii = —g(02 + V(0202
                 ng + 0202
                        C liv
                              + a2a2)
                                 gv
                                  02)


R
    12
          =   02[(02
               g   S
                     +            2C    +   02)
                                             v    (0202 a2a2 + 0202) — a a (a2 + 02)
                                                    g +liv      gv    SSri. g     V

R
    13
          = a      02(02C +            02)(02
                                        V g + a2)
                                               v

R =           —a
                   5gv a2a2(02c + 02)
                                   v

R21 = o2a2(a2a2
       gv lig-+ 0202
                   liv
                        + 0202)
                           gv
R22 = Q2v[a25(0202
                g + 2a2 + a2a2)
                            gv                            —      a. (2   + 02)]
                                                                            V
                                                               5-5-  g
R         =   —0    0202(02             + 02)
    23             Sngv   g                v

R         = 0    020202
    2L+         Sngvv
R31 =         _(02 +
                   g
                            a2 + 02) [02 (a2a2 + a2a2 + 0202) —
                                  v    S ng      liv
                                                                      a 0 (02
                                                                   gv SS   g + 02)1
                                                                                V

R32 =         (02£ + 02)
                      v [a2(a2a2 + a22 S g liv + 0202)
                                                  gv — a SliSli
                                                           a (02 +
                                                                g
                                                                                  02)]
                                                                                   v

R =           _Sng
                a           (02
                              C
                                   + 02) (a2 + 02)
                                            Vg  V

R         = a    0202(02c              + 02)
                Sngv                      v

R = a Sngv
       0202(02
             g
                                       + 02 + 02)
                                               v

R         =   —a    0202(02             + 02)
    '+2            Sngv            C       V
                                             — 33   —




         = —a2a2fa2(a2 + a2 + a2)            + a2(a2
R
              gv g 6           v                6  c + a2)]
                                                        v
R = a{(a +                 a2)   [a2(a + a2 + a) + a(a +
                       a a 6r       (a2 + a2c + a2)}
                                      g          v
Rsi = a 6gv    g + a2c + a2)v
          a2a2(a2

     = a a2a2(a2 + a2)
R
  52    6ngv c v
R
              gv[ci2(a2
         = a2a2
                 g 6 + a2 + a2)
                             v + a2(a2
                                     c + a2)]
                                          v    6


R
    54        v n [a2g (a2
         = a2{a2
                        6
                           + a2
                              c
                                + a2)              6c v
                                   v + a2 (a2 + a2)] —        a     a (a2g+ a2C+ a2)V }
                                                                  6fl6fl

R61 = flgva2ci2(a2 + a2 + a2)
             —a6
                g          v       C


R62 = a gv   fl + a2)V
         a2a2(a2

R = —(a2 + a){a(a(a + a + a) + a(a + at)]
                   —   a    a
                                6 (a2
                                   g +a2 +a2)}
                                         C     V


R        =
             a{a2Ici2Ccy         + a2 + a2) + a(a2 + a2)] —   a6
                                                                    a6 (a2 + a2 + a)}
                                                      — 34


                                                     Appendix B

     The equations between the weights in equation (7) and
the corresponding coefficients in equation (9) are as
follows:

known variables:                II     =   (ct+l)1[cll             +     +            —
                                                                                          a(L)yt_i(z)].
        II       =   (l+a)[l          + cL(IIR            + HR + HR+ HR + HR
                                      + HR  1.
                                         6 62


Vt: H                Cl+a){l + ctfll (R +R ) + II (R +R                           )   +   H(R+R)
                                      +11Li (RLii +Rk2) +11 5 (.R
                                                                51
                                                                   +R) +11 6 (R61+R 62)]}.
                                                                    52

                 =   —(1+c)          ct(IIR          ÷ HR + HR + HR + HR
                                                     + II R ).
                                                          6   61


                 H = (l+c)1 a(HR                      +   HR + HR + HR + HR + fiR).

vt_i:
                     = (l+ct)         x[il (R +R ) +               H(R+R) + 1I(R+R)
                         +11I. (RLi3 +R ) +H 5 (R53 +R51) +H 6 (R63+R 6k)].
                                              LiLi




 t      H
             6
                 = —(l+c)            a(ll R
                                           113
                                                     + H R
                                                          223
                                                                   + H R + II R + H R + H R ).
                                                                      333     '+3
                                                                             Li    553   663

 t
                 H7 =11.
                       2
                                — 35 —


                               Appendix C
                   Tirue Series of Monetary     Data

           Mit        tMlt      tMlt_i                  Mit    tMit tti
1953:1   130.5        126.8     122.1       1966:1     175.9   173.4   166.0
     2   126.7        125.2      i.26.8          2     176.9   173.7   173.4
     3   127.0        124.5      125.2           3     172.1   168.4   173.9
     4   128.8        124.8      124.5           4     175.2   170.3   168.4
1954:1   132.3        128.1      124.8      1967:1     178.4   175.8   170.3
     2   127.2        126.6      128.1           2     178.2   174.6   1'75.7
     3   128.8        125.5      126.5           3     180.2   175.6   175.3
     4   131.5        126.3      125.5          4      185.5   181.0   176.2
1955:1   136.4        131.7      126.3      1968:1     189.5   190.1   181.1
     2   132.8        131.5      131.0           2     192.4   189.7   189.7
     3    1.33.4      130.3      131.4           3     193.6   188.4   .i.89.8
     4    135.1       131.2      130.1           4     198.8   189.3   188.5
1956:1    139.1       134.4      131.1      1969:1     203.9   198.4   189.3
     2    135.2       132.8      134.8           2     204.1   199.4   198.3
     3    134.6       131.6      132.8           3     204.8   192.4   199.4
     4    136.2       132.0      131.6           4     207.0   199.2   196.5
1957:1    140.3       136.2      132.0      1970:1     210.8   206.8   199.1
     2    136.1       134.1      136.2           2     210.8   205.1   206.8
     3    135.6       132.7      134.4           3     211.6   200.9   205.1
     4    136.3       132.9      132.7           4     215.9   206.4   200.8
1958:1    138.8       135.7      132.9      1971:1     221.2   221.4   213.3
     2    136.4       132.8      135.7           2     224.4   223.3   221.2
     3   .137.0.      133.6      133.0           3     228.5   225.8   223.5
     4    140.1       135.6      133.6           4     231.7   226.7   225.8
1959:1    144.6       140.4      135.5      1972:1     236.6   235.9   226.7
     2    143.2       137.6      143.1           2     240.8   238.0   236.0
     3    143.8       138.9      138.2           3     243.1   238.3   238.0
     4    143.8       139.8      139.0           4     249.6   242.9   238.3
1960:1    145.5       144.9      139.9      1973:1     255.8   256.0   242.7
     2    143.6       136.9      144.8           2     259.0   262.5   259.2
     3    142.6       136.3      136.9           3     262.6   264.    262.4
     4    145.2       137.6      136.1           4     265.6   265.8   264.5
1961:1    147.5       144.0      139.8      1974:1     268.7   273.5   265.7
     2    146.5       141.1      144.0           2     275.8   283.0   273.6
     3    145.3       140.7      140.9           3     276.0   282.6   284.6
     4    148.6       144.0      140.6           4     278.3   281.1   281.4
1962:1    150.8       148.2      142.8      1975:1     278.8   287.2   280.8
     2    151.2       146.6      146.8           2     281.1   289.5   287.8
     3    148.3       144.4      146.4           3     288.3   292.2   288.6
     4    151.2       146.8      144.7           4     289.9   293.8   291.4
1963:1    153.6       152.7      145.8      1976:1     293.0   300.5   292.4
     2    154.3       151.1      152.8           2     300.2   307.3   300.5
     3    153.4       149.9      148.8           3     302.0   305.0   303.2
     4    156.8       152.9      148.8           4     308.0   308.5   305.7
1964:1    159.7       158.6      151.8      1977:1     312.8   320.6   308.5
     2    158.4       155.8      158.9           2     321.9   325.6   320.9
     3    159.1       155.3      154.5           3     326.4   329.4   324.7
     4    163.7       159.1      154.9           4     332.6   333.4   329.5
1965:1    167.0       165.0      158.4      1978:1     340.8   346.0   333.4
     2    15.7        161.2      165.4           2     349.Q   350.9   345.9
     3                161.1.     11.9            3     351.7   353.5   346.5
     4    170.0       166.0      161.4           4     355.7   364.6   356.1
                             — 36 —


                           REFERENCES

R.J. Barro, "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary
     Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, January, 1976,
     1—32.
R.J. Barro, "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in
     the United States," American Economic Review, 67, March,
     1977, 101—115.
R.J. Barro and M. Rush, "Unanticipated Money and Economic
     Activity," in Rational Expectations and Economic Policy,
     S. Fischer, ed. (Chicago, 1980).
R.J. Barro and Z. Hercowitz, "Money Stock Revisions and
     Unanticipated Money Growth," Journal of Monetary Economics,
     6, April, 1980, 257—267.
J. Boschen and H.I. Grossman, "Monetary Information and Macro-
     economic Fluctuations," NBER Working Paper No. 498,
     July 1980.

S. Fischer, "Cn-Ac±vi3t No anoy I. olicy with Rational Expec-
     tations," in Rational Expect-:ons and Economic Policy,
     S. Fischer, ed. (Chicago, 1980)
M. Friedman, "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic
     Review, 58, March, 1968, 1—17.
J. Geweke, "The Approximate Slopes of Some Tests Used in Time
     Series Analysis," unpublished manuscript, 1979.
R. King, "Monetary Information and Monetary Neutrality,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 7, March 1981, 195-206.
R.E. Lucas, Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"
     Journal of Economic Theory, 4, April, 1972, 103—124.
R.E. Lucas, Jr., "Some International Evidence on Output—
     Inflation Trade—Of fs," American Economic Review, 63, June,
     1973, 326—334.
