NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TWO NOTES ON EXCHANGE RATE RULES
AND ON THE REAL VALUE OF EXTERNAL DEBT

Rudiger Dornbusch
Working Paper No. 561

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

October 1980

Financial

support was provided by a grant from the
Science Foundation. The research reported here is
NBER's research program in International Studies.
expressed are those of the author and not those of
Bureau of Economic Research.

National
part of the
Any opinions
the National

NBER Working Paper #567
October, 1980

Two Notes on Exchange Rate Rules
and on the Real Value of External Debt

ABSTRACT

This report presents two unrelated, short papers on exchange rate rules
and on the real value of the external debt. The paper on exchange rate policy
uses the Taylor model of overlapping, longterm wage contracts to ask whether
accommodating or PPP oriented exchange rate policies tend to stabilize output.
In earlier work I had shown that exchange rate indexing, while
destabilizing
prices enhances the stability of output. The result is qualified here by
showing that the exchange rate not only affects aggregate demand directly

but operates also, through the cost of imported intermediates, on the price
level. It is shown that unless monetary policy is sufficiently accommodating
this latter effect may dominate with the consequence that increased exchange
rate indexation reduces output stability.

The paper on the real value of external debt poses the question how to
integrate external debt holdings in the traditional framework used to evaluate

the effects on real income of changes in world prices. It is shown that integrating debt service liabilities in a comprehensive income measure makes real
disposable income equal to the value of output less the real value of real

interest payments on the external debt. Furthermore, with the CPI being the
appropriate deflator for foreign debt, a rise in export prices raises income
in proportion to exports while a rise in import prices lowers real income in

proportion to Imports. The proper accounting of debt in a comprehensive
income framework, noting the intertemporal budget constraints, thus restores
the conventional treatment of the income effects of price changes.

Rudiger Dornbusch
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology
Cambridge, Massachusetts
02139

(617) 253—3648

PPP EXCHANGE RATE RULES AND MACROECONOMIC STABILITY

Taylor (1979) developed a model of longterm overlapping
wage contracts where, under rational expectations, disturbances

have persistent effects on output and prices because relative and
absolute wages exhibit shortterm stickiness. This stickiness arises

because labor, in setting the money wage, is not only concerned with
enployment but also with the relative wage position compared to ongoing
and anticipated future contracts. This tendency for relative wage fixity
is reinforced if the government pursues an accoodating monetary

policy that dispenses with the need for wage—price discipline. In
Dornbusch (1979,1980) the Taylor model was extended to the open economy
to demonstrate that purchasing power parity (PPP) oriented exchange rate
rules operate in the same direction as accommodating monetary policy. They
stahilie output at the cost of increased instabilIty of prices.
The present note takes up once more the question of exchange rate
rules in the context of the Taylor mcdel. We show here that the exchange
rate rule affects the output--price level stability trade—off through two
seperate channels. On one hand a PPP oriented exchange rate rule tends tc
maintain the real exchange rate constar; ,thereby stabilizing demand. Th
other channel, introduced here, considers the effect of exchange rate ru:s
throuzh the supply side on the price level, The exchange rate affects Costs
and prices through the domestic currency cost of imported intermediate goods.
To the extent that wage disturbances that tend to raise prices are accoma—
nied by exchange depreciation, because of a PPP rule, the impact of wage
movements on prices is amplified. Thus the second channel introduces the
pcssbility for e:change rate policy to dampers or amplify the impact of wage
disturbances on prices and output.

This second channel, operating through the cost side of the eccno—y,
introduces the possibility that increased exchange rate accommodation lowers
rather than raises the persistence of disturbances while raising the impact

—2—

of

unanticipated wage disturbances on prices and output. These results

are of interest in view of the

widely

shared belief that a PPP oriented

ec-iange rate policy is good policy advice for small countries. We now
pursue these issues in the context of the extended Taylor model.

1. The ModeL
The

model is stated in terms of the deviations of output and prices

from their given trend. All

variables

are expressed in logs. The level of

output, y, is demand determined with demand depending on the real money
supply,

(1)

m—p, and on

the

real exchange rate, e—p:
a,b> 0

a(m—p) + b(e—p)

y

A rise in the real money stock raises demand as -does a depreciation
of the real exchange rate or a rise in e—p. A real depreciation raises
demand, given the elasticity condition which is assumed to be satisfied
with b positive, because it shifts demand from foreign goods to home output.
ionetary and exchange rate policies are specified by rules which :he
authorities follow in setting nominal money and the nominal exchange rate:
=

(2)

p

The coeffjcients and

ep

0<

.< 1

measure the extent to which monetary and exchange

rate policies are. accommodating. Unit values imply that output is maintained

constant because real money and the real exchange rate are held constant.

Values of and $ that are less than unity imply less than full accommodation
so

that a rise in prices lowers real balances and appreciates the real

exchange rate thereby inducing a fall in demand and output.
which a rise in prices leads to a contraction in demand and

The extent

to

output is

suarized by the parameter G
(3)

y = —êp

8

a(l-

)

+ b(l- )

1Foraign pric€s are assumed given and any repercussion effects from abroad
are ne5iectec.

—3-.

We now turn to the. wage—price process. Pricas are determined by

wage costs and the costs of imported intermediate gcods, the price of the
latter being given by the exchange rate:
(4)

(c/2)(x+x1) + (i—$)e

p

The price equation reflects the assumption that there are at any time two

overlapping or concurrent wage contracts in force. They stipulate respectively
x as the current wage in the first year of our contract and x_1 as the
current wage on a two—year contract entered into last year. Current wage
costs are taken as the average of the two contracts. The terms $ and l—$
represent the cost shares of labor and intermediate goods. In combination
with the exchange rate rule in (2) we can rewrite the price equation as:
(5)

p

k( x +

x—l)

$12

l—(l—$)
It is apparent from (5)

that

a more acconodating exchange rate

policy—— a value of B more nearly equal to unity—— tends to raise the
impact of wage disturbances on prices. Conversely, maintaing a constant

nominal exchange rate in the face of wage disturbances tends to dampen
their impact on the level of prices, but raises the impact on the real
exchange rate. The extent to which the exchange rate can serve a stabili-

zing role on the supply side depends on th share of intermediate goods
in costs,l—$

1

We complete the model by locking at wage formation. The current
wage is set by reference to ongoing and anticipated future contracts but

depends also on expected employment during the currency of the contract;

(6)

x =

dx_1

+

(l—d)1

+

,( d +

(l—d)1

)

+

;d,l—d,1 >0

where a tilda denotes an expectation and uis a white noise error term.
Applying rational expcotations,by using (3) and (5) to generate the expectations, and collecting terms yields:
(6)

cx =

ox1

(l—d)x1

c —

l+Gyk
_______

1-Gyk

1.An alternative interpreat±on takes p to be the price level with (l—$)
the direct share ci importables in the consumer price index.

—4-.

with a solution, assumed stable: £

x px1 + u

(7)

p——c

(c4d(1-d))

—

2(l—d)
Using (7) in (5) yields the equation for the price level:
(8)

p p p_1 +

k(u+u1)

and for output:

y =

(9)

—Gp

=

py1 —k(u+u)

We now turn to a discussion of the effects of exchange rate

indexation on the stability of output and prices, We remind briefly
of the results in Taylor (1979) nd Dornbusch (1979,1980). In these
models the term k was equal to k=.5, Therefore it is clear from the
definitions of c and p in (6)' and (7) that increased monetary or

exchange rate accoodation would reduce G and hence raise the inertia
or persistence of wages and prices as measured by p.With more acccodá—
ting policies output is more stable and that stability of output is taken
into account in wage settlements and is reflected in a more protracted
phasing out o. disturbances. From here we proceed to the effect of
increased excl.ange rate indexation in the extended model that allows for

exchange rat. .ffects both on the supply side and the demand side as reflected in a value of k=($/2)/(1— (l—$))

2. The Effects of Exchange Rate Indexing

In this section a investjate

the implications of an increase
in exchange rare indexation—— a rise in —— when
the exchange rate plays
a.. role in determinjn
aggregate demand but also exerts direct cost effects.
Given the definitions of
k,c and owe observe that a rise in 6 affects the
extent of persistence as follows:

1To arrive at (6)' we take the expectaticn across (6) noting that E(u)=0
. To proceed from (6) co (7) we define the difference
and,substitucing in (s)' obtain a çuadratic in p
operaor:x1

and x=, x =
cpx_1

=

dx_1

+ (1—d) px_1 .Soivthg forp yields the expression in (7).

—5—

(10)

=

{

b — a(j-. c)(i—$) }

5>

0

where 6 is a (messy) positive

function of the parameters.
Equation (10)
then implies that increased exchange rate accommodation
may raise or lower
the persistence of disturbances
depending on the relative size of the two
channels through which the exchange rate operates.

Suppose the elasticity of demand with respect to the real exchange
rate is large and the share of labor
costs is large. Under these Conditions
the term in brackets in (10) is
likely to be positive and we have the conventional result, in the spirit of Taylor's analysis, that increased
accommodation
raises persistence. The other
case, by no means unlikely, arises when the
exchange rate exerts a substantial effect
on the cost side and demand is
relatively unresponsive to the real exchange rate. Unless monetary accommodation

is complete we then have

a case where higher exchange rate indexation will

reduce persistence.

This latter case arises when the

gain in stability of output

achieved by real exchange rate

stability is more than offset by the indexation
effect on the cost side that tends to reduce demand unless
money is fully
accommodating. This interpretarion becomes appar nt when we look at the effect
of a wage disturbance on output: dy/dx —k and ask how that effect
varies
with the extent of exchange rate accommodation:

(11)

4v/dx)

k
1 —f(1—6)

b -(l-q)(b +

a(l-a)}

Labor, in setting wages, takes into account the output effects of
wage settlements. If higher exchange rate indexation
implies a larger adverse effect of
high wage settlements on
output then relative wages will be more flexible and
persistence will be reduced. It is
interesting to note that (10) and (11) show
the interdependence of monetary and exchange rate accommodation
once the
exchange rate operates also through the supply side. The increased cost
indexation following from a higher
implies a larger adverse effect on real
balances and hence on output the smaller is the extent of
monetary accommodation.
Ccnvcrsely, if monetary accommodation
is relatively complete the increased cost
effects of a high
do not have impcrtarit effects on demand and persistence.

-.f-

The analysis suggests that
can,

in

monetary

and exchange rate policies

certain cases, be coordinated to reduce both the impact of

price disturbances on output and at the same

time

reduce the persistence

or inertia in wages. If b—(l—)a is negative then is it apparent from
(10) that increasing indexation can be accompanied by some increase in

mcnetay accoodation and still not enhance persistence.
An lirportant difference between the Taylor model and our analysis

here arises from the impact of changes in exchange rate indexation on the
impact of unanticipated disturbances. This is apparent in (8) and (9)

where the unanticipated wage movements (u+u_1) are multiplied by k which
now is not a constant but rather a function of

From (9),in conjunction
with (l1) it will be noted that a policy that reduces persistence will
also raise the impact of unanticipated disturbances on output. It therefore
appears that we cannot discuss the policy trade—off merely in terms of

persistence and the coefficient & but rather should look at the asymptotic
variances of output and prices. With prices and output following an ARNA(l,l)
process the variances are:
2

(12)

=

2(1+ 2)k2 2

i—pa

U

=

y

e22

p

A numer: :al exercice, shown in Table 1, reports how the variances

behave as a function of the extent of exchange rate indexation. The two
cases reported correspond to different signs for the expressions in (10)

and (11). The table reveals that independently of the sign in (10) and (11)
an increase in exchange rate indexation raises the variability of prices.

As regards the variability of output there are two possibilities. With
the cost channel of exchange rates dominating the variability of output
is increased by a move toward more full indexation. Conversely, if the

aggregate demand role of the real exchange rate dominates more accommodation
implies a more stable behavior of output.

1The term u1 is a wage disturbance unanticipated when the contract x_1 was
set. It represei.ts an unanticipated compenent of the price level as of period
t—i.

—I—

TABLE 1

8 =.l

81

8

Case I

2
cp

.23

.35

.75

a2

.48

.55

.75

y

Case II
2

a

p
2

a

y

.23

.38

.44

.38

Note: Casel: a=2,b=.5 ==d= =.5

.96

; Case II: a=b=l

Wc nDtd above the interdependence

rate policies

in

determining

=5

;al

of monetary and exchange

the effectiveness of increased exchange

rate indexatiorL. Equation (11) suggests that with the possibity of an

adverse effect of exchange rate accoodation on output stability it becomes
important to recognize that these effects can be dampened o averted by
a comrnensurate increase in the extent of monetary accooéation. Of coure

this stabilizing role of monetary policy comes at the cost of increased
instability of prices.

3. Concluding Remarks

PPP oriented exchange rate policies have been widely adopted
ong developing countries as a way of isolating the foreign trade sector
frorn the vagaries of the macro economy. By and

large

the profession has

accepted such policies as sensible, impliicly placing high cost on the

—8—

variability of real exchange rates. Such policy advice is questioned
here by drawing atrention to the macroeconomic costs of higher exchange
rate indexation: increased instability of prices and potentially increased
instability of output. The analysis also draws attention to the fact

that higher monetary accommodation stabilizes output not onlydirectly,
but also by offsetting or dampening the adverse effects of exchange
rate indexati.on working through the cost side of the economy.

The analysis then suggests that the search for optimal stabili—
sation poloicies should not take the target of a constant real exchange

rate as given hut rather consider the problem in broader context that
evaluates the relative costs of real instability, price instability and
target instability.

References

Dornbusch,R.(1979) '1Exchange Rate Policy and Macroeconomic Stability."

in J.'iil1250n (ed.) ExchaneRatepules:TheocTeg$ and

and Prospects tar the Crawin rig. 1acMi11an,London,1981.
Dornbusch,R.(1983) Open Economy Macroeconomics, Basic Books, N.Y
Taylor,J.(1979) " Staggered
Wage Setting in a MacrModel ". American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, pp.108—118.

CONSUMPTION OPPORTUNITIES AND THE REAL
VALUE OF THE EXTERNAL DEBT

—1—

Repeated oil price increases lave led developing countries to
build up large external debts and world inflation has reduced the real
value of these debts. Renewed shocks to the terms of trade will require
adjustments in trade flows to finance the debt service obligations. In

this setting the question of the appropriate deflator for foreign debt
has arisen. Suppose import prices rise. As debtors we are better off
because of the reduced real value of our debts, but as importers we are
clearly worse off. What is the deflator that strikes the balance between
these two effects and provides a meaningful measure of the welfare effects
of price changes ? Alternative deflators have been proposed. One would
be a weighted average of export and import prices reflecting in the
weighting the marginal shares of exports and imports in the adjustment
process. We argue here for a different measure, namely the consumer expenditure deflator, and show that in combination with the comprehensive
income measure this deflator gives a very conventioRal statement of the
welfare effects of price changes.

1.

I

The Concept of Income

The center of the analysis is the proper concept of income.
We use the traditional Hicks -Bailey definition of comprehensive income
as the value of consumption that can be maintained without impairing

future consumption opportunities. Defining as c this value of sustainable
consumption or real disposable income it is equal to:

(I)

=

V -

i ED

- ED

(e-)

p

where

P =

home consumer price index

V =

home nominal value of output

D =

external

E =

exchange rate, cruzeiros/$

debt in dollars

i*= world nominal rate of interest
=

rates

of depreciation and home inflation

The definition of real disposable income in (1) recognizes
that debt service is a charge against resources and that capital losses,
if consumption opportunities are to be maintained, likewise diminish the
consumption level afforded by a given level of output.

—2—
Equation (1) is readily transformed into an alternative
and suggestive form. For that purpose we define the home and foreign
real interest rates, r =
and rk
. We also assume for
the present that nominal interest rates, adjusted for expected depre-

i-

ciation are equalized, or i =

i

+ é.

These relations are summarized

in (2):

r=i-j;

(2)

r*=i*_ ; i=i*+

Using these definitions, adding and substracting j5

in (1), and re-

arranging terms uields our expression for sustainable consumption or
real disposable income as;

(W

c = V/P -

rd

where d ED/P is the real value of the external debt. Real disposable income thus equals the real value of output less the real value

of real interest.payments on the external debt.

Let x and m denote the real value of exports and imports
both measured in terms of the consumer price index. We can then write
consumption as equal to output, less exports, plus imports:

(3)

c=Y/P-x+m

which in conjunction with (I) •

implies

that the sustainable current

account must be balanced, with a trade surplus equal to the real debt
service:

(Li)

x

=

m+rd

Equations (1)' and (13)

describe

the average behavior of

consumption opportunities and the current account. They are therefore
the appropriate benchiiuark by which to judge the effects of changes in

the levels of prices in world trade. We now proceed to that analysis.

2. Geometry

Before moving to an algebraic statement of the effects of
price changes we provide here a geometric interpretation. In Figure 1 we

show consumption of importables and exportables (CmCx) as well as pro-

duction m'x Initial production equilibrium is at point A. (We take
the case of a fixed production point, although the algebra and the footnote
show that we could also look at an equilibrium on the transformation curve).
The line QQ through A indicates the value of output at the initial relative
prices. From the value of output we subtract the real value of debt service,

being rD/P* in terms of exportables and rD/P in terms of importables. Subtracting these quantities from point A yields points on the consumption
frontier CC. Point B is the preferred consumption point with imports BE
equal to exports FA less debt service GA, both measured in terms of importables at the prevailing relative price.

Suppose now a rise in the absolute world price of importables.
In Figure 2 we show that the value of production changes as the budget line
rotates through point A.' To determine what happens to consumption opportuni-

FIGURE 1

Cin,Q in

Q

C

I—
F

C,Q

-4-

ties we have to construct the new budget line C'C'. It is apparent
that the value of debt service measured in terms of exportables does

not change. Hence point G remains a point of the new budget line C'C.
Through point G we draw a line with the slope given by the new relative
price ratio. The value of debt service in terms of importables,of course,
is seen to decline as shown by the reduced vertical distance between QQ
and C'C'. The new consumption point will lie on the budget line C'C'.

FIGURE 2
Cin,Q m
Q

C

C

A

0

C ,Q
C

Q

C'

x c

Now we can ask hot/ much of an increase in income we would have to

give the consumers to allow them to buy the initial consumption basket B
at the new prices. Measured in terms of importables the compensating varia1The argument neglects movements along the transformation
curve in response

to price changes. For small

price changes this effect is second order;for
large price changes the geometry and the algebra below overestimate the
income effect of price changes.The

same applies to the treatment of consumer

adjustment below where the Slutzky approximation is exact for small changes.

-5-

tion in income is indicated by the vertical distance between C'C' and
a parallel through point B,HB. It is readily shown that this compensating variation is equal to:

HB = BF - HF

=

P*(Q_rD/ -c)/ -(Q-rD/-C)/'

=

where rn denotes the phyical level of imports and P and

are the initial

and new levels of import prices. Thus the change in real income, measured
in terms of importables, is equal to imports times the percentage change
in import prices.1

As shown in the diagram a rise in import prices reduces
welfare, a measure of the reduction in real income being the compensating
variation HB. It is apparent that we can use the same technique to show that

a rise in export prices raises welfare. (Cc' now rotates through a point

on CC vertically below A, becoming steeper). Finally, an equiproportionate
change in export and import prices will only reduce the real value of debt

service thus shifting CC upward, coming closer to QQ
Having established an intuitive interpretation for our results
we now proceed to brief algebraic derivation of the change in real disposable
iincome induced by world price changes.

P the price index we can define the change in consumption measured in

terms of the index,rather than in terms of importables, as (P/p) F= m
where m denotes the real value of imports.

3. The Algebra of Price Changes

To determine the effects of price changes on real disposable income we start with the definitions of the value of output, the
consumer price index and import prices, all measured in home currency:

= xx

+

mm

;

r =

a 1-a

m=

EP *

Equations (5) reflect the assumption that the home

country

produces both importables and exportabies. In Lhe world market for
iinpoi-tables we are price takers, but not necessarily in the export market.

The price index is an expenditure weighted index of importable and
exportable goods prices.

Using (5) the change in real disposable income is given by:

(6)

A c =

xx"

x +

p

-

(y/p)p

-

rd(E-P)

which simplifies to the following expression:1

(6)'

A c = x(P
x

-

P

m) + rd

where x again equals the real value of exports.

Price changes in world trade have two effects on real

disposable income. A terms of trade improvement raises real consumption
opportunities by the real vdlue of exports times the terms of trade

change. This is the converitiona income effect of a terms of trade
improvement. A rise in the world dollar price level, Ps', raises real
disposable income by reducing the real value of the debt and hence real

debt service. This is represented by the second term in (6)'

obtain

sixrlification by rxtiny that= (Y/P)P= a(Y/P)P +
cbsere
that a(Y/P) = a(c+rd) ard+PCjP where
Next
notes cansp1ic-i of carrtodity i. Further igte that the last term
in (6) can be written as rd ( - = rd P '+ ard
and that on average the current acunt is ba1aiicd so IhaL real exports, x, equal
real itrports, m, plus real interest paynErits: x=mfrd. Using all these

.Ern (6) we

+ (1-a) (y/p)P.

the

sthstitutior in (6) yields the final form in (6)'.

-7Another way of looking at the effects of price changes is

to distinguish the role of export and import prices. This is done in
(7) where we have substituted for the change in import prices m =E+P*
and rearranged Lerrns to obtain:

Ac =

(7)

x(P-E)

-

mP*

In equation (7) the term P-E measures the change in the dollar price of

our exportables. The equation shows that a rise in the dollar price of
exportables raises real income in proportion to exports. A rise in the
dollar price of imports lowers real income in proportion to the level

of imports. There is thus a complete symmetry that is assured by the
fact that on average the inflation adjusted current account must baldnce

or x=m+ rd.
Extensions

The analysis so far has made two assumptions that are
easily relaxed. The first is that depreciation adjusted nominal interest

j

rates are equaiized. An alternative is to assume a risk premium p such
that j =

(1)"

+ è + p. With this assumption
c = YIP -

(r+)d

is our defnitioi of real disposable income, the risk premium or uspreadll
p reduces the level of real disposable income for a given level of debt.
It does not, though, affect the result derived in (7) above.

A second generalisation concerns the role of home goods.
Suppose that in addition to exportables and import competing goods the

home country produces nontraded goods. This, of course, changes the

definitions of nominal income and the price index. Ii is readily

shown that the effects of price changes as derived in (7)
remain unaffected. This is so because the home country neither exports
nor imports nontraded goods.

I

-8-

5. Concluding Remarks

This note has shown how to

integrate the presence of an

external debt in the conventional

treatment of the income effects of
a price change. The analysis has shown that a rise in export prices
raises real income in proportion
to exports and that a rise in world
prices of our imports reduced real
income in proportion to imports.
The income effects of changes in
the real value of the debt service
liability are implicit in these results since the difference between
exports and imports is equal to the debt service. As noted earlier
these measures are only
approximate. They are exact for small changes,
but provide an overestimate when
price changes are large and hence
substitution along the transformation
curve and along the indifference
curve become important. Bearing this qualification in mind our measure
provides an upper estimate of the income effect.

From p.7

The

valus of hone output and the price index rx are defined as

fOflows:

Y = P()

+

mSn +

b
PQ and P= P m1-a-b

where the subscript n denotes riontraded goods. The definition of
sustainable oDnsusption remains c=Y/P-rd. A thange in prices in
world trade yields as an effect the ternE de1.?e1od
in (7). This
is so Since:

tc =

+ mRP ' + (P/P) P - a (Y/P) - b (YtP) -(1-a-b) (Y/) - rd(4) =
- xm+(1)Pn)_rd
xP =

x(P_E)_

m(Pr-i)

where we hae used the definition of the expenditure share to note that
CP/P= a (Y/p-rd) and likewise for the other real irrociity dennds.
We also use again the equation for current acoourit balanon,
rdx-m,
and the definition of the price index.

-9-

BIBLiOGRAPHICAL NoTE:

For a discussion of the comprehensive income measure used here see:

Hicks, J. Value and Capital, Oxford University Press, 196.

Bailey, fl. National Income and the Price Level, McGrawHili, 1972

Tdylor, C.T. and Threadgoid, A.R. "Real National Saving and its Sectorai
Co,i,position. "Bank of England, 1979.

For inflation adjusted balance of payments and budgel accounting see:

Freedman, C. "A Note on Interest Payments to Foreigners Under Inflationary

Conditions. Canadian Journal of Economics, 1979, pp.291-299.

Siegel, J. "inflation induced Distortions in Government and Private

Statistics:' Review of Economics and Statistics, 1979,
pp 83-90

