                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PRIVATE PENSIONS MrD INFLATION



                       Martin Feldstein


                     Working Paper No. 568




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         October 1980




This paper was presented at the annual meeting of the American
Economic Association, 6 September 1980. It is part of the NBER's
projects on Pensions and Inflation. This work has benefited from
discussion with other participants in that study, especially Zvi
Bodie. I am grateful to the National Science Foundation and the
NBER for support. The views expressed here are my own and should
not be attributed to any organization.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #568
                                                                 September 1980




                       Private Pensions and Inflation



                                   ABSTRACT




     Much of the recent discussion about the relation between pensions and
inflation has emphasized the adverse impact that,the unexpected rise in
inflation had on pension recipients and on the performance of pension funds
during the past 15 years.   In contrast, the present paper focuses on the way
that pensions are likely to evolve in response to the expectation of
continued inflation in the future and the uncertainty about the rate of
inflation.   The analysis concludes that continued inflation is likely to
alter the form of private pensions (in the direction of partial indexing)
and the nature of pension funding (away from long-term bonds) but that
continued inflation is also likely to induce pensions to finance a growing
share of retirement consumption.



                                                          Martin Feldstein
                                                          National Bureau of
                                                            Economic Research
                                                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                          Cambridge, Massachusetts
                                                                             02138

                                                          (617) 868-3905
                           Private Pensions and Inflation

                                 Martin Feldstein*


          Private pensions playa central role in capital accumulation in the

United States.   Like every other aspect of capital accumulation, the pension

system can be profoundly affected by inflation.      Even fully anticipated inflation

is far from neutral in its effects because of the fiscal environment within

which pensions function.     The uncertainty of future inflation can have major

additional effects.

          Much of the recent discussion about the relation between pensions and

inflation has emphasized the adverse impact that the unexpected rise in infla-

tion during the past 15 years has had on pension recipients and on the perfor-

mance of pension funds.     In contrast, the present paper focuses on the way that

pensions are likely to evolve in response to the expectation of continued

inflation in the future and to the uncertainty about the rate of inflation.       The

first section discusses how expected inflation will influence the size and com-

position of pension assets.     The second section considers the relation between

inflation and the structure of pension benefits.      The implication of the

uncertainty of future inflation is the subject of the third section.

          Unlike the pessimism of much of the recent discussion of the effect of

inflation on pensions, my own conclusion is that the private pension system can



* Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President, National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper was presented at the annual meeting of the
American Economic Association, 6 September 1980. It is part of the NBER Study
of Private and Public Pensions. This work has benefited from discussion with
other participants in that study, expecially Zvi Bodie. I am grateful to the
National Science Foundation and the NBER for support. The views expressed here
are my own and should not be attributed to any organization.
                                       -2-

continue to function effectively in an inflationary econornlf.l   The unfortunate

effects that occurred when inflation,caught pensioners and pension fund managers

by surprise should not be confused with an inability to adjust to future

conditions, even uncertain future conditions. 2   As I shall explain, the persistence

of a high rate of inflation is likely to increase the share of total saving that

goes into private pensions.   Since the tax treatment of pension contributions

allows individuals to save in this way for retirement on the same terms that

they would under a consumption tax,3 the existence of the private pension system

may be one of the few things that prevents the national saving rate from going

even lower in the current inflationary environment.


1.   Expected Inflation, Asset Yields and Pension Saving

          Although inflation reduces the real net return that portfolio

investors as a whole earn for supplying capital to nonfinancial corporations,

different classes of portfolio investors are affected very differently.4     In

previous papers, I stressed that it is important to distinguish households and



1 More specifically, the private pension system can function effectively in an
inflationary environment unless the inflation rate is so high or so uncertain
that the financial markets themselves no longer function.

2 When Alicia Munnell (1979, p. 26) compares the rates of return earned by pen-
sion funds with the inflation rate and concludes that the pension funds cannot
keep pace with inflation, she fails to separate the effect of unexpected infla-
tion increases that have depressed total portfolio yields from the permanent
effect of expected inflation.

3 This is true only if the limits on pension contributions or pension benefits
are not binding.

4 S~e Feldstein and Lawrence Summers (1976) for evidence on the effects of
inflation on after-tax rates of return in general and the variety of individual
tax rates.
                                       -3-
tax-free institutions in a general equilibrium analysis of the effect of infla-

tion on asset prices (Feldstein, 1980a, 198ob).    Now I want to look at the other

side of that coin:   the implication of investor diversity and yield differences

for private pensions.

          More specifically, this section examines how the interaction of

expected inflation and taxes influences (a) the real yield that pensions can

expect to earn; (b) the desirability of pension saving vis-;;;'-vis direct saving

by households; and (c) the mix of assets held by pension funds.    The emphasis in

this section is on steady state analysis in which expected asset yields are

constant and expectations are fulfilled.

          The impact of expected inflation on pension funds depends on the rux

of assets that are available and in which pension funds invest.    Currently, pen-

sion fund assets are divided approximately evenly between corporate equities and

nominal credit market instruments.   It is analytically useful, however, to begin

by considering the "pure equity" and "pure debt" cases separately.


1.1   An Equity-Only Economy

           Consider first an economy in which there is no debt.   Corporations

finance their investments by issuing equity and reinvesting retained earnings.

Pension funds invest only in corporate equities.

           With the existing U.S. tax rules, inflation would unambiguously reduce

the return that firms could earn on equity.l   Although this extra inflation-



1 This results from historic cost depreciation and the rema1n1ng use of FIFO
inventory accounting. The mitigating effect of deducting nominal interest
payments is temporarily ruled out by assumption.
                                        -4-
induced tax at the corporate level affects both households and pensions, the

after-tax yield to households is further depressed by the tax that must be paid

on nominal capital gains. l   Thus inflation unambiguously reduces the yield on

equities to pensions by less than the reduction in the yield on equities held

directly by households.

          This difference is independent of the short-run capitalization effect

and the longer-run capital accumulation effect.    A rise in the expected infla-

tion rate reduces the net-of-tax earnings per unit of capital.    Since the share

price per unit of capital falls to capitalize this reduction in earnings, the

yield per dollar of equity capital falls much less. 2   In the longer run, the

lower share price per unit of capital induces a reduction in the size of the

capital stock, thereby raising the pretax (and post-tax) rate of return per unit

of capital.   Since both of these effects apply equally to households and pensions,

the net yield differential caused by the tax on nominal capital gains remains.

          Even in the absence of inflation, pensions can earn a higher yield on

equities than households can.    The fact that pensions attract a substantial part

of personal saving but not all of it suggests that there is a positive but less

than infinite elasticity of substitution between pension saving and direct

saving.   The increase in the yield spread in favor of pensions should therefore

cause pensions to have a larger share of the total private saving.    Of course,


1 An explicit analysis of the effect of inflation on equity yields of households
and pension funds is presented in Feldstein (1980a,b).

2 In the extreme case, the yield per dollar of equity capital might remain per-
manently constant. Munnell (1979) apparently ignores the capitalization effect
and therefore concludes incorrectly that the equity yield per dollar of invested
funds will fall by as much as the decline in the equity yield per unit of
capital.
                                           -5-
because the effective tax rate on capital gains is relatively small, the

advantage of the switch is also small and the redistribution of assets would not

be large. l     It would nevertheless be in the direction of increasing and

strengthening the role of private pensions.


1.2   A Debt-Only Econ0sY

              Consider now a debt-only econoIDlf, or at least an econoIDlf is which all

marginal corporate investments are financed by debt,2 and pension ~lnds invest

exclusively in debt.      The effect of a change in inflation in such an econoLW is

both roore complex and more dramatic than in the all equity              econor~.   The precise

nature of the effect depends on the way that the interest rate responds to

inflation.

              The stylized "fact" that the real interest rate remains constant is a

useful starting point. 3     Since pension funds are not taxed, a constant real

rate of interest implies that they earn a constant real net rate of interest.

In contrast, the real net yield earned by households drops sharply for each per-

centage point rise in the rate of inflation.        If the rate of tax paid by house-

holds is 0, the real net interest rate is rh       =   (1-0) i -   'If   where i is the nomi-



1 The inflation-induced growth of the assets of pension funds would also be
reduced to the extent that households save less in response to the lower real
yield on saving or divert saving into nonportfolio assets like housing and land.

2 Joseph Stiglitz (1973) develops an analysis which shows that under certain
conditions such debt-at-the-margin behavior is optimal under U.S. tax laws.

3 Although Irving Fisher's (1930) theoretical support for the independence of
inflation and the real interest rate is no longer valid in an econoIDlf with a
complex tax structure, the combination of tax rules and government debt policy
can achieve an approximately constant real rate of return; see Feldstein (1980c).
                                            -6-

nal rate, n is the rate of inflation, and the h subscript refers to the return to

households.     Thus drh/dn   =   (l-e)(di/dn) - 1 - - 0 when di/dn   = 1.     If the indi-

vidual tax rate averages 30 percent (0=.3), the real net interest rate would fall

from 2.8 percent when there is a       4 percent nominal interest rate and no infla-
tion to     1.0 percent when there is 6 percent inflation and a 10 percent interest

rate.     The yield difference between pension funds (earning a real         4 percent in
both cases) and direct saving nearly triples from 1.2 percent to 3.0 percent.

             In this "Fisherian" econoIl\Y, inflation again strengthens the relative

position of pension saving.        The absolute real yield remains unchanged and the

relative real yield encourages the substitution of pension saving for regular

direct saving.

             An alternative simple view is that the nominal interest rate is deter-

mined as the yield that corporations can afford to pay with a fixed real return

on capital(f,).l     The firms' first-order condition is readily shown to be: 2




1 This ignores the influence of noncorporate borrowers, government debt policy,
and international capital flows.

2 This is a special case of the result derived in Feldstein, Jerry Green and
Eytan Sheshinski (1978).
                                                      -7-


The nominal pretax return per unit of capital (f'                     +~)    is exhausted by the tax

on the real return on capital (              T   f' where   T    is the corporate tax rate) plus the

tax on the nominal gains that results from historic cost depreciation (T~~ where

~   measures the increase in taxable profits on a unit of capital per percentage

point increase in inflation),l plus the maximum net yield on debt ((l-Th).

Thus the nominal interest rate is given by



           i   =   f'     +         ~    .

With f' constant, di/ d ~       =   (1   -llT )    /(1-   T ).   The value of ~ depends on the rate

of inflation but a reasonable approximation is II                    = 0.5   (see Feldstein, 1980b,

especially the appendix).           Thus with the current 46 percent corporate tax rate,

di/d~    = 1.43.        The nominal interest rate rises by more than the increase in

inflation, implying that the real yield rises by.43 basis points per percentage

point of inflation.

               In this case, inflation actually raises the real yield that pension

funds can earn.         Although this effect also reduces the inflation penalty on

household investors, the impact of inflation on the                     ~     between the household

return (rh) and the pension return (rp) is increased.                        Since r p   =   i-~   while



1 This is a linear approximation and also subsumes the excess taxation of nomi-
nal investory profits.
                                                 -8-
rh   = (1-0)    i - 1T, d(rp - rh)/d1T   =   e(di/d1T).      With di/d1T   = 1.43   and e   = 0.3,
the real yield spread rises by more than 40 basis points per percentage point of

inflation.

               In an all debt   econo~,      the truth would probably lie somewhere between

the Fisherian constant-real-yield assumption and the alternative positive effect

of inflation on the real interest rate.                Whatever the exact value, a higher rate

of inflation probably raises the real return that pension funds can earn and, by

widening the gap between household and pension yields, encourages a greater role

for pensions in private saving.


1.3    An Economy with Debt and Equity

               In a more general   econo~      with both debt and equity capital, the

effect of inflation on pension funds is essentially a mixture of the results of

the two simpler analyses. l        It is now also possible to examine the effect of

inflation on the mix of assets that pensions will want to hold. 2                    To simplify

the analysis, I will examine only the 'Fisherian' case in which inflation leaves

the real interest rate unchanged and will ignore the long-run effect on the real

return on capital (f') of induced changes in the capital stock. 3


1 This assumes that pension funds behave as separate entities. Fisher Black
(1980) and Irwin Tepper (1980) have noted that, if pension fund decisions are
made as part of the overall corporate financial strategy, it is optimal for the
pension fund to hold only debt while the rest of the corporate financial struc-
ture is adjusted to achieve the desired debt-equity mix for the corporation-cum-
pension as a whole.

2 See the previous footnote.

3 Inflation can be expected to reduce capital intensity (under existing tax
laws) and therefore to raise the real return on capital. But whatever happens
to f' does not change the conclusions of this section about the relative attrac-
tiveness of debt and equity or of pensions and direct saving.
                                        -9-

          In such an economy, a higher rate of inflation reduces the real net

rate of return on equity for both households and pensions but the reduction for

pensions is less. l   The real return on debt remains unchanged for pensions but

falls substantially for households (drh/d~ =-8).    Thus inflation slightly lowers

the overall yield on pension funds but, by widening the yield differential in

favor of pensions, induces a switch in private saving in favor of pensions.

          The relative yields on debt and equity move in opposite directions for

households and pensions.    For pensions, the real yield on debt is maintained

while the real yield on equities falls slightly.    For households, the real yield

on debt falls sharply while the real yield on equities talls by less.

Households thus sell debt to pension funds and hold more equity directly.

          On balance, it is clear that a positive expected rate of inflation

would not be a problem for the private pension system.    The real net return

earned by pension funds is relatively insensitive to inflation and might

actually increase.    In any case, the incentive to save through pensions would be

strengthened by the increased differential between the yields on direct saving

and pension saving.


2.   Inflation and Pension Benefits

          The typical private pension plan provides a retiree with a 'defined

benefit', usually some fraction of his average earnings during the five years



1 Feldstein (1980b) presents explicit calculations with realistic values that
imply that the equilibrium real net yields on equity (with a constant f' = .112)
fall from .0966 for pensions and .0770 for households with no inflation to .0861
for pensions and .0648 for households with a 6 percent inflation.
                                        -10-



before retirement with the fraction proportional to his number of years as an

employee of the firm.     After retirement, benefits are fixed in nominal dollars;

some firms make periodic voluntary adjustments for inflation.     Retirees of

course find that the real value of their monthly pension benefit is continually

reduced by the rising price level.

            Constant nominal benefits were obviously designed for an economy with

little or no inflation.     For an economy with a constant expected rate of

inflation, the constant nominal benefits should be replaced by constant real

benefits.    If the real return earned by the pension fund is unaffected by the

rate of inflation, fully indexed benefits would leave the real present-value

cost of the pension independent of the inflation rate. l

            The switch from nominal pensions to indexed pensions would require

either a reduction in the starting value of the pension or a reallocation of

employees' lifetime incomes from wages to pensions.     The amounts are significant;

for any given benefit, indexing a single-life annuity for a man age 65 with a 6

percent inflation rate would raise the cost of the pension by approximately 50

percent.    This could be financed by a one-third reduction in the starting value




1 In the absence of an indexed pension, a retiree might try to substitute a
constant real stream for the constant nominal stream by saving some of the pen-
sion benefit in early years. However, since the retiree must pay tax on the
interest and dividends that he earns on any such saving, he cannot achieve the
equivalent stream. This could be remedied by allowing retirees to "rollover"
any part of their pension income into an account where interest and dividends
accumulate tax free.
                                        -11-

of the pension, or roughly a 5 to 10 percent decrease in wages, or some com-

bination of the two.

          Although employees and firms have not yet faced and resolved this

choice, an increasing use of (partially) indexed pensions is likely to evolve

in future years.     Some reduction in the starting value of the pension would pro-

bably be used, especially for long-service employees, to avoid

over-pensioning. I   But on balance the move to indexing is likely to increase

the total size of pension saving. 2


3.   Uncertain Inflation

          The uncertainty of inflation influences the optimal extent of pension

indexing and the likely composition of pension assets.      It is important

to distinguish unanticipated changes in the price level from unanticipated

changes in the expected future inflation rate.     A one-time rise in the price

level (with no change in expected inflation) lowers the real value of nominal

assets but leaves the real value of e~uities unchanged. 3    In contrast, a rise

in the expected future rate of inflation leaves the value of short-term bills

unchanged but lowers the nominal (and therefore the real) values of bonds and



I An employee with 30 years service now generally receives a pension e~ual to
60 percent of his final five-year average earnings. For a retiree with average
earnings, social security adds another 46 percent of final year's pay plus 23
percent more for a dependent spouse. The total easily reaches or exceeds 100
percent of real lifetime earnings at a time when family responsibilities,
mortgage payments, and the like are relatively low.

2 Partial indexing and a tax-free rollover of pension income as outlined in
footnote 18 of page 8 would provide more flexibility and avoid the difficult
problem of reducing the initial pension value. Partial indexing of pensions
would also increase pension saving by reducing the postponement of retirement.

3 See Feldstein (1980a).
                                        -12-

stocks. 1

             Without indexing, the vested pension obligations are nominal long-term

liabilities of the firm.     The firm can hedge these liabilities by holding long-

term bonds. 2    Of course, firms may nevertheless invest in equities because they

believe that the equity yield is high enough to compensate for the reduced

hedging. 3    But, since the extra risk of equity investment is borne by the firm's

shareholders, the employees who participate in the pension plan should earn an

implicit nominal return on their forgone wages that is only equal to the nominal

return on riskless bonds.


             A fully indexed pension would make all pension obligations real.

Long-term bonds are clearly an inappropriate investment for funding such real

obligations.     Stocks can provide a hedge against price level uncertainty, but

only by accepting substantial general uncertainty.     Zvi Bodie (1980) has empha-

sized that a portfolio with a minimum-variance real return would be invested

almost completely in short-term debt (with a small amount in commodity futures)

and that the expected return on such a portfolio is approximately zero.     If

employees are so risk averse that they choose a fully indexed pension, the




1 See Feldstein (1980a) for an explanation of why stocks respond in this way to
changes in the price level and the rate of inflation.

2 Jere~ Bulow (1980) emphasizes the very sharp distinction between vested and
other anticipated pension liabilities, although not in relation to the current
issue.

3 For the reasons given by Black and Tepper, this equity investment might be
done in the corporation itself with offsetting corporate borrowing. I shall
not, in the remaining paragraphs, distinguish investment in the firm from
investment in the pension portfolio.
                                        -13-
implicit real return that they earn on forgone wages should therefore also be

approximately zero.     Again, firms may invest in equities, but the shareholders

rather than the pensioners should receive any extra yield in return for bearing

that risk.

             If employees choose a partially indexed pension, i.e., one in which

benefits rise less than one-for-one with the price level or in which benefits

depend on the return on the pension fund assets, the firm can invest in a way

that permits giving a higher return to pension participants while compensating

shareholders for any additional risk that they bear.     The optimal extent of pen-

sion indexing depends on the risk aversion of employees and the cost, in terms

of the reduction in the expected yield, of investing pension assets to produce a

constant real return.

             As Paul Samuelson (1958) noted years ago, an unfunded social security

program can provide an annuity with an implicit real rate of return equal to the

real growth rate of the econoIDlf, probably about 3 percent a year over the next

decade or longer.     Although 3 percent is substantially less than the real return

of more than 10 percent that the national as a whole earns on additions to the

stock of plant and equipment (Feldstein and Poterba, 1980), the political

pressure to substitute unfunded social security benefits for private pensions

(or vice versa) is likely to depend on the real after-tax yield that partly

indexed pensions can offer and on the associated risk.     If employees were

completely risk averse, the low 3 percent yield on social security would look

good in comparison to Bodie's zero yield on a minimum-variance real return

portfolio.     But if employees are willing to accept the risk inherent in a par-
                                      -14-

tially indexed pension, they can expect to receive an implicit yield that is

much greater than three percent. l

          In summary, the form and funding of private pensions will probably

change in the coming decade if inflation continues at recent levels but, unless

employees become much more risk averse, private pensions are likely to continue

to finance a growing share of retirement consumption.


Cambridge, Massachusetts
August 1980, Revised September 1980




1 This yield will of course depend on both the performance of the econo~ and
the changes in tax laws. In particular, indexed depreciation would reduce the
riskiness of equity investment (by reducing the sensitivity of share prices to
the expected rate of inflation) and increase its expected return.
                                       -15-

                                    References


Fischer Black, "The Tax Advantages of Pension Fund Investments in Bonds,"

           NBER Working Paper No. 533, 1980.

Zvi Bodie, "Purchasing Power Annuities:       Financial Innovation for Stable

           Real Retirement Income in an Inflationary Environment,"       NBER

           Working Paper No. 442, 1980.

Jeremy Bulow, "Analaysis of Pension Funding Under ERISA,"       NBER Working Paper

           No. 402, 1979.

Martin Feldstein, "Inflation and the Stock Market,"      American Economic Review,

           forthcoming, 1980a.    (NBER Working Paper No. 276).

_________, "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Stock Market,"              Journal of

           Monetary Economics, Vol. 6., pp. 309-31, 1980b.       (NBER Working Paper

           No. 403).

---------,        "Fiscal Policies, Inflation and Capital Formation ,"

           American Economic Review, forthcoming, 1980c.

--------- ,       Jerry Green, and Eytan Sheshinski, "Inflation and Taxes

           in a Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal of

           Political Economy, April 1978, 86, No.2, Part 2, S53-S70.

_________ and James Poterba, "State and Local Taxes and the Rate of

           Return on Non-Financial Corporate Capital," NBER Working Paper

           No. 508, 1980.

--------- and          Lawrence Summers, "Inflation and the Taxation of Capital

           Income in the Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal, December 1979,

           Vol. XXXII, No.4, 445-70.

Irving Fisher, The Theory of Interest, New York, 1930.
                                        -16-

Alicia H. Munnell, "The Impact of Inflation on Private Pensions," New England

           Economic Review, March/April 1979, 18-31.

Paul A. Samuelson, "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or Without

           the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy,

           December 1958, 66, 467-82.

Joseph Stiglitz, "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of

           Capital," Journal of Public Economics, February 1973, Vol. 2, No.1,

           1-34.

Irwin Tepper, "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy," mimeo., 1980.
