                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT DETERMINATION
           UNDER TRADE UNIONISM: THE INTERNATIONAL
                      TYPOGRAPHICAL 1JNION


                        J. N. Dertouzos
                        J. N. Pencavel
                     Working Paper No. 510




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         October   1980




We are indebted to James N. Rosse for sharing with us his deep
knowledge of the newspaper industry. Also, we have benefitted from
comments on a preliminary draft of this paper received from Orley
Ashenfelter, Henry Farber, Michael Hurd, Kathie Krumm, Tom MaCurdy,
Robert Michael, Daniel Mitchell, Sam Peltzman, Finis Welch, and an
anonymous referree. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program iii Labor Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper 1/570
                                                               October, 1980




       Wage and Employment Determination Under Trade Unionism:
                the International Typographical Union


                                 ABSTRACT


    This paper represents the first empirical application of a model of

trade union behavior that has been discussed in the literature for over

thirty years. The wages and employment o typographers are examined

to see whether they can be usefully characterized as the outcome of a

process by which the union maximizes an objective function containing

wages and employment and is constrained by a trade—off between these two

variables as represented by the employer's labor demand function. Our

functional form assumptions permit investigation of some familiar special

cases of union behavior. We find the parameter implications of both

the wage bill maximization hypothesis and the rent maximization hypothesis

to provide inferior explanations of the movement of wages and employment

of these workers compared with our more general formulation.




J.N. Dertouzos                              J.N. Pencavel
The Rand Corporation                        National Bureau of Economic Research
1700 Main Street                            204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
Santa Monica, California 90024              Stanford, California 94305

(213) 393—0411                              (415) 362—7160
      WAGE AND EMPLOYMENT DETERMINATION UNDER TRADE UNIONISM:
               THE INTERNATIONAL TYPOGRAPHICAL UNION*

                                  by

               J.N.   Dertouzos   and J.H. Pencavel

1.     Introduction

       Although empirical studies measuring the effects of trade unions

have multiplied in the last few years, the behavioral underpinnings of

unionism remain poorly understood. This is because the issues raised

in the literature on trade union goals and wage determination have been

mired in fruitless methodological debates or simply have not been pursued

at an empirical level. Consequently, although a variety of plausible

models of unionism have been proposed, an evaluation of them in terms of

their correspondence with observed behavior would rest today on barely

more reliable information than was available to Dunlop (1944) when he

wrote his seminal work almost forty years ago. This dearth of research

is all the more remarkable when contrasted with the abundant theoretical

and empirical work by economists on the behavior of firms and of families.

And yet, as Farber (1978) ably demonstrated with his analysis of the

United Mine Workers, there is nothing about the trade union as an insti-

tution that makes it central features impossible to characterize in a
                               -2-




framework analogous to purposive models in economics.'

      The model of the trade union analyzed in this paper is by no means

original; it is usually associated with the work of Feilner (1947) and

Cartter (1959) among others. It characterizes the union as maximizing a

function in which wage rates and employment are arguments and as being

constrained by a trade-off between these two variables represented by the

employer's labor demand function. The novel feature of this paper is

that we have identified a setting that seems suitable for the operation

of the model and have estimated the wage and employment functions that

result from this characterization. Therefore, this represents the first

empirical application of a model that has been widely discussed in the.

literature. Moreover, several models of trade union behavior are nested

as special cases in our framework so that we are able to provide formal

tests of some popular hypotheses. Our purpose is not to champion a specific

model, but simply to examine whether, in fact, the particular purposive

model that is comor in the literature provides a viable framework for

analyzing union behavior, Only through a careful documentation of a number

of empirical studies will the profession be in a position to evaluate

the relevance of this model.

       The outline of this paper is first to describe some basic features

of the newspaper industry and of the International Typographical Union

(ITU) which is theunion with which this paper is concerned. As is well

known, this is a powerful closed shop union that operates in an industry

whose technological features have changed considerably over the last 10
                                -3—



to 15 years. This paper focuses on a period (the years from 1946 to 1965)

before the drastic changes in the nature of newspaper composition and during

these years the model is less likely to have experienced structural change.

We provide reasons for believing that bilateral monopoly is not an apt

description of the market for typographers, but we cannot claim that our

results vindicate this judgment since a bargaining model is not outlined and

the estimates are interpreted in terms of the Fellner-Cartter model. Since

this model seems to have escaped formal description, we offer such a

description in Section III and also introduce our particular functional

form assumptions. In Section IV we present our experiences with estimating

the model first with an excellent data set from Cincinnati and then with

data on seven other unions. Some conclusions follow in Section V.



II.    Institutional Setting

       The organization, structure, and traditions of the ITIJ suggest

several features relevant to an analytical model of union behavior. The

structure of the ITU parallels that of the printing industry which mainly

consists of geographically segmented product markets. Today, there exist

approximately 1000 chapters of the union which negotiate individual con-

tracts with local printing establishments, the most important being

newspaper firms. Members are employed in the crafts associated with the

mechanical composition of text and display copy which is ultimately repro-

duced and distributed to consumers.

       Officers of the ITU on both the national and local levels appear

to be extremely responsive to the wishes of their constituent typographers
                                -4-




and the union is frequently described as the most democratic trade union

in the United States. Two active political parties compete and a rather

frequent turnover of officers occurs through the electoral process. Indeed.

a survey of the largest ITU local, New York #6, revealed that over one-

half of the membership, at one time or another, held some union office.'

Thus, the rank and file consists of individuals with the political and

administrative skill and experience required to monitor and, if necessary,

oppose any activity deemed not in their best interest. Referenda are con-

ducted on all sorts of issues with voter participation reaching 60 to 70

percent even when the outcomes have marginal impacts on individual members.

       Moreover, the union leaders have few incentives to entrench themselves

in office. Financial remuneration, even at the highest level, differs little

from journeyman wages. In fact, local officers are most often workers who

perform union duties in their spare time. No particularly high status or

reward is associated with the positions. The chairmanship of a local chapel

is viewed as an obligation to be passed around and shared, often to be held

by the individual who made the least vigorous protests. Thus, negotiated

settlements are as likely to affect their own financial status as that of

the "rank and file'. The dichotomy between the interests of officers and

of members that assumes importance in some unions appears less relevant

to the ITU.   For large locals, leadership amounts to a full-time job and

a divergence of interests is possible though presumably tempered by the

democratic procedures of the organization. Local contracts are constructed

and negotiated as prescribed by union laws which have existed for decades

and which require membership participation and ratification at each stage.
                               -.5-




      A further characteristic of the ITU is the rather remarkable

homogeneity of its membership. Printers consider themselves to be skilled

craftsmen and all members of the ITU share a similar status. All undergo

the same training; there is no observable prestige differentiation, and

education levels and other demographic characteristics are quite uniform.

In contrast to most industrial unions which consist of workers of different

vocations and varying income levels, the ITU is internally homogeneous.-'

      Over the years, the central organization of the ITU has been concerned

with broad issues which have relevance to the union as a whole. These have

focused on the union's jurisdiction over printing occupations and the proprietary

right of members to employment.—" By contrast, issues concerning remuneration

are negotiated at the local level which in these matters operates largely

independently of the national office. The wage scale negotiated is applied

to all journeyman printers. Within locals, the importance of the negotiated

wage rate compared with employment considerations probably varies among

union members. Local hierarchies within the union membership do exist and

are institutionally based. Printers are hired and fired according to a

priority system which is based on seniority. All vacancies are filled from

substitute lists of irregularly employed workers on this basis. Reductions

in the size of the work force are completed in the same fashion. Employment

considerations are likely to be more important to substitute members

although the regular employees tend to dominate in sheer numbers.

Moreover, there is evidence that the regular employees are not indifferent

to the welfare of the "marginal" or substitute workers. Indeed, as early as

1890, the general laws of the ITU contained provisions which attempted to
                                -6-




distribute work evenly to all employees. (See ITU (1964, pp. 312-313).)

Thus, all time accumulated in excess of the amount of hours constituting

a regular daily or weekly shift is posted as overtime. When this overtime

becomes equivalent to a day's pay, the regular is required to take a day

off and engage a substitute as long as one is available.' Finally,

union mnbership is sometimes viewed as a legacy to be passed from genera-

tion to generation so that family ties among the union members provide

a further reason for the typical journeyman to take account of the employ-

ment effects of his union's policies..1

       Therefore, the'ITIJ is a union with a remarkable democratic tradition,

with no clear divergence of interests between different groups within the

union, and with an' apparent concern both for the employment of its mbers

and for their remuneration. A further attribute deserves mention:

although strikes in the newspaper printing and publishing industry as a

whole are not uncommon, those involving the ITU are infrequent. For

instance, in 1945 (the year before our data begin) only 32 of 1,000

locals engaged in any strikes and all but one of the struck firms resumed

publication within a few          More recently, strikes have become even

more unusual. The relative unimportance of strikes is consistent with

those models that account for strikes in terms of incomplete information

either within the union or between the union and the employer: rates of

concession are unknown and the negotiation process reveals information

about what to expect from the opposition. However, in the newspaper

 industry, negotiations have been taking place between the same unions and

newspaper firms for many decades, the ITU trade journals regularly publish
                                -7—




wage scales for each of the 1,000 locals, and what is sometimes described"

as a "mature" collective bargaining relation obtains. Indeed, for the

ITU locals whose data we use below, no strikes occurred during the 1946-65
       9/
period.—

       The rarity of strikes reflects in large part the relative vulnerability

of the local newspaper firm to a prolonged interruption of production.

In particular, the firm's product, the prompt delivery of up-to-date infor-

mation, cannot be stockpiled to withstand a shutdown so that advertisers

and subscribers are apt to turn to alternative media as a result. Once

a firm closes down, it is expensive to regain former customers especially

advertisers who provide an average of about 75% of all newspaper revenue

and who can turn to ready alternatives (television, weekly newspapers,

direct mail, billboards, radio) for their purposes. By contrast, the ITU

maintains a defense fund to aid striking local unions and members have

the opportunity to work elsewhere in the event of the newspaper firm being

driven out of business. Hence, with the newspaper firm facing a number

of immediate competitors in its product market and with the typographers

able to draw upon a sizable strike fund and to arrange for work in other

cities, the setting is not a confrontation between two equally powerful

adversaries: the union is clearly in a dominant position vis-—vis

the firm. This provides some support for interpreting the pattern of

typographers' wages and employment over time as tracing out the union's

preferences.
                                  -8-



III.   The Conceptual Framework

       A. A General Statement

       From a description of the institutional setting, we turn now to a

formal statement of the union maximizing model. The union is characterized

as behaving as if it possesses a twice continuously differentiable, strictly

concave, objective function:


             U =
(1)
                   g(,L)
where w measures the wage rate, p the price level of commodities con-

sumed or the "cost-of-living", and      L   union emp1oiient. This union is

assumed to be involved in producing such a small part of the economy's

total output that any effect of its decisions upon the overall price level

(p) may be neglected. Hence p is taken to be exogenous to the union

while w and L are endogenous. The union consists of many members so

that an issue arises of whose utility function is represented by equation

(1). This has been a recurrent theme in the literature on trade union

goals although formally the problem is no different in kind from economic

models of family decision-making where the family consists of more than

one individual orfrom the theory of the firm where there is more than one

owner.1" The typical ITU local has already been described as one with an

unusually homogeneous membership and where conflicts of interest between

the union leadership and the rank-and-file are not pronounced. Therefore,

the objective function above is "the" union leader's and "he" is assumed

to integrate the welfare of all the union's members.
                                     —9—




      The employer's cost-minimizing labor demand function is given by


             L =
(2)                 f(w,r1,r2,. .. ,r,X)

where r represents the unit price of input I             and X is the level

of output produced with n +      1   inputs by the firm.11' As is well known,

L is a negative function of w, L must be increasing with respect to

at least one other input price, L increases with output (provided labor

is not an inferior input), and this labor demand function is homogeneous

of degree zero in all input prices.

      The union is assumed to select w and L to maximize equation (1)

subject to the labor demand function given by equation (2). This yields

the following first-order condition:



(3)
               g2



where g1 =   BU/(w/p)    > 0   and g2 = aU/L   >   0:   the marginal rate of

substitution of wages for employment in the union's objective function

equals the cost—of-living normalized slope of the employer's labor demand

function with respect to the wage rate.?i This first-order condition

together with the employment demand function (2) may be solved to derive

the reduced form equations of the system:


             w =
(4)                 (p,r1,r2,... rX)
             L =
(5)                 (p,ri,r2,...,rn,X)
                                 -10-




Since an increase in the cost—of-living reduces the real value of the wage

rate without disturbing the employer's structural labor demand function (2),

the effect of an increase in p on the wage rate will be opposite in sign

to its effect on employment. Other than this, without further restrictions

on the form of the union's objective function and the labor demand function,

these wage and employment equations are devoid of any unambiguous sign

implications.-' This dearth of qualitative predictions seems to have escaped

notice in the extensive literature on this simple maximizing model.

       If the reduced form equations (4) and (5) are substituted back

into the union's objective function (1), then an expression is derived

that relates the maximum value (call it v) of the union's objective func-

tion to the exogenous variables of the system:


             V =
(6)                V(p,r1,r2,.. .,rn,X)

Through the envelope theorem it is straightforward to show that V

decreases with respect to p and with respect to the price of any input

that is complementary with labor and that V increases with respect to

output and with respect to the price of any input that is substitutable for

union labor. Moreover, the trade-off in the union's optimizing objective

function (6) between increases in the prices of any two inputs is simply

represented by the ratio of the derivatives of the employer's labor demand

function with respect to each of the input prices:--'



             V/ar —— _______
             _______
                        sf/Br.
                                 —11—




Since these derivatives of the labor demand function are related to the

question of the degree to which this labor is substitutable for (or comple-

mentary with) other inputs, this illustrates the relevance of the production

technology in constraining the union's opportunities.



        B. Particular Functional Forms

         In order to implement this framework, at some stage in the analysis

some explicit functional forms have to be introduced. These functions

should be consistent with the institutional features of the newspaper

industry, they should be straightforward to interpret, and they should be

computationally manageable. The approach in this paper is to specify

particular forms for the union's objective function (1) and for the firm's

employment demand function (2) and then to use the first-order condition (3)

to solve for the corresponding reduced form system (4) and (5). Thus,

the   union's objective function defined over real wages and employment is
specified as follows:

(7)            u(,L) = ( - y)(L - )16

This function, the Stone-Geary, claims an excellent pedigree in empirical
work on estimating systems of consumer demand equations though this repre-

sents its first application to union behavior.    In fact, it possesses a

number of attractive features for our purposes. Though it is not necessary

to adhere to this interpretation, following Samuelson (1948), y and

may be thought of as "reference" or "minimum" or "necessary" values with
                                         —12—



the function being homothetic to the point (-y,) and w/p -            ' and
L - 6     represent "supernumerary" real wages and employment respectively.

The value of e indicates the relative importance attached to supernumerary

wages versus supernumerary employment; only when y = 6 = 0            may 8     be

interpreted as measuring the relative weight of wages and employment in

the union's objective function.

          One appealing feature of equation (7) in this context is that it

nests other models of union behavior as special cases. For instance,

Dunlop's model of "maximization of the wage bill for the total membership"

(1944, p. 44) is equivalent for the closed shop ITU to specifying S = .5

with -y      6 =   0   in the objective function.i!" Or the rent maximization

hypothesis (Rosen, 1970; de Menil, 1971) implies 8              .5,    0, and

y equal to the competitive wage. Dynamic elements may be introduced by

relating    -y and            to lagged values of real wages and employment so that

the union's objectives are those of wage growth and employment growth)-"

Where a union designs its wage policy with reference to what another

union has attained or to a nonunion wage, then y assumes the value of

this comparison wage rate.-'-7-" Hence the Stone-Geary function can accommodate

a number of alternative hypotheses that have received attention in the

literature on union objectives.

        The union's opportunity set is defined by the newspaper firm's

labor demand function, the expression for which is as follows:


                                                r
                   L =        +          +          +   + a4D
(8)
                         aO       ai(r
                                              —13—




where, as before, the r's indicate the prices of nonlabor inputs and

X is the firm's output. The negatively-sloped labor demand function
                                                                                        >
requires c 0 and, if labor is not an inferior input, then

During our estimating period (1946-65), there was considerable merger
activity in the newspaper industry-1 so, to allow for such mergers causing

a shift in the labor demand function, equation (8) includes a dichotomous

variable, D, that takes the value of unity when a newspaper merges with

another. This parameterization is consistent with a merger resulting in

an entirely different cost function for the newspaper, different in its

intercept and different in its slope with respect to each of its arguments.

This linear-in-the-parameters labor demand function, equation (8),

generates tractable estimating equations and yet conforms to what is known

about the production technology in the newspaper industry.-1-'

         The first-order condition for a maximum of (7) subject to equation

(8) is e/(l - a) =               -[(w   -
                                            p-)c1/(L   -
                                                           o)r1]    which may be solved for the

reduced form wage equation expressed in real terms as


                                        r        r            X.r          D.r
                            0l                                  p1)+4( 1)

where          =
                   (l   -               =        -              =           5    =

and                              Correspondingly, the reduced form emDloyment equation
        54 =   -Oc4a'.
is




(10)                L =
                            55
                                 +           + 7() +       8x   +
                                                                    9D
                                           -14-



where        =         + e( —           6 = cxiy(l   -   0),                                  -
                  a0            cxO),
                                                                      (1 —
                                                                             0)a2,    8           8)cx3
         =         -        Observe that, since 0 <
and          (1                                                 e <      1, a > 0 and a1 < 0,
these equations imply a positive correlation between wages and employment

on the one hand and firm size on the other hand.-' These particular

functional form assumptions yield reduced form employment and real wage

equations that are homogeneous of degree zero in p, r1, and r2. By

substituting equation (9) and (10) into the union's objective function (7)

we derive an expression that relates the maximum value of this function to

the exogenous variables of the system:



(11) V(p,r1,r2,X) =
                                 081 O)rD +                          -          +
                                                               (aO       6)r1       a2r2 + a3Xr1 + a4Dr1]



which is also, of course, homogeneous of degree zero in p, r1, and r2.

        With the equations of the system described, we turn now to the

estimation of the model first with a data set on the ITU in Cincinnati

and then with other union locals.



IV.     Empirical Results

        A. Estimating Methods

        The structural parameters of our system were estimated by two pro-

cedures. The first exploits the fact that the cost-of—living, p, enters

the system through the union's objective function (7), but is excluded

from the firm's structural demand equation (8). Thus, using p as an

instrumental variable to predict values for (w/r1), a conventional instru-

mental variable procedure was applied to equation (8) which provides
                                 -15-



estimates of the cx's. These cx's thus estimated were then imposed in

estimating the reduced form wage equation (9) which yields point estimates

of the parameters of the union's objective function (namely, e, y, and    S).


The second estimating procedure involves the simultaneous estimation of

the stochastic form of equations (8) and (9) by full information maximum

likelihood.--" Conditional upon the specification of the model being

correct, this estimator is consistent, asymptotically efficient, and

asymptotically normally distributed. In fact, the point estimates derived

from applying the two procedures were invariably similar and consequently

only the maximum likelihood estimates are reported.



       B. The Cincinnati Local

       These procedures were first applied to an excellent data set

collected for a Cincinnati newspaper, the Post, for the years from 1946

to l965.--" In estimating the stochastic form of equations (8) and (9),

w. is measured by the hourly wage scale for journeyman printers employed

by the Post in year t, Lt by the number of full-time typographical

workers in the Post composing room, Pt by the BLS consumer price index,

X. by the amount of advertising linage (in thousands) sold annually by

the Post, r1 by the price of newsprint (in hundreds of dollars per short

ton) quoted in national markets, and r2 by the BLS wholesale price index

for machinery and equipment.-' In 1958, the Post merçed with one of

its two local competitors, the Cincinnati Times-Star and, as a result,

a larger and more efficient plant was occupied. ITU members of the Times-
                                   -16-



Stars chapel were absorbed into the Post composing room so that the

employment of typographers rose from 145 averaged over the years 1946 to

1957 to 232 averaged over the years 1958 to 1965. Thus the merger

dummy variable, D, in equations (8) and (9) takes the value of zero

from 1946 to 1957 and of unity for the later years. The full information

maximum likelihood estimates of the structural parameters of equations

(8) and (9) are given in line (a) of Table 1.

         With respect to the parameters Qf the union's objective function,

the estimate of e     is   significantly less than .5 and greater than 0; the

union values both employment and wages. The estimate of y is significantly

greater than zero suggesting that it is not merely the level of wages that

matters to the union, but rather the excess of wages over some reference

level.    In fact, the estimate of y of around 2.1 ranges from 26 to 47%

below the real wage actually received by these workers over these years.

By contrast, the point estimate of o      is   negative though insignificantly

different from zero. According to the estimates in line (a), the elasticity

of the maximum value of the union's objective function with respect to

wages (.55) is slightly greater than the elasticity with respect to

employment (.45) when evaluated at the sample mean values of the variables.

The implied elasticity of substitution of wages for employment at this

point is .69. Using a conventional likelihood ratio test, the null

hypothesis that the nonwage arguments of the labor demand function (namely,

r1, r2, X, and 0) are jointly insignificant in the real wage equation (9)

may be rejected at the 5% level of significance. These results are

consistent with the notion that the union takes account of the employment

effects of its wage policy.
                                                                            Table   1
                Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the Structural Parameters for the Cincinnati Post 1946-65
                                (estimated asymptotic standard errors in parentheses)
        1   i        a        y                                                                                                      3          4           I.
                                                                                                  ——
                                                                                                                -8.72      1.236      3.472     81.86    -57.20
        (i)         .215     2.134          •                    -129.75                               204.2
                                                                                                       (60.6)   (21.30)    (1.4c)    (2.467)   (16.16)
                    (.02)    (.716)                              (225.36)
                                                                                                                            1.018     5.567     60.88    -82.23
        (b)         .5         0                                   0                                   159.1    -75.61
                                                                                                                           (1.402)   (1.513)   (10.99)
                                                                                                       (72.8)    (3.78)
                                                                                                    332.2         22.66     4.374     2.554    133.22     64.61
                                                                    0*
        (c)           5'                  2.4           -.035
                                          (.)           (.470)                                     (144.4)       (23.40)   (2.350)   (4.108)   (28.33)
                                                                                                                            1.610     3./18     1/.95    -52.65
        (o           .05-1                1.456     .    .872    -326.92                            135.4        -70.21
                    (.079)                (.65)         (.363)   (860.25)                          (123.2)       (23.31)   (2.363)   (1.967)   (21.81)
                                                                              191.31     37.30         201.0     -59.07    -2.268     5.099     77.05    —47.92
            ()       .90                   3.9(5         .491
                                                                              (49.69)   (14.93)        (71.5)    (39.59)   (1.431)   (2.634)   (1e.oa)
                    (.206)                (2.156)       (.720)
                     .135                 L43            .829                   0        73.50      147.1        -71.67     1.185     4.855     71.95    —51.27
            (f)
I-
r—.                 (.039)
                                      •
                                          (.3/1)        (.323)                          (27.27)    (110.6)       (28.17)   (2.213)   (1.065)   (18.02)
      Note:       Constrained parameters are indicated by an asterisk. L denotes the maxiiiium value of the
                  likelihood function. The mean values of the variables over the estimating period are as follows:
                                                                                             = 1.378.
                  L = 172.3; w = 2.880; p = .813; r1 = 1.203; r9 = 77.485; X = 18.82; and v            The
                  typographers wage data are taken trom selected issues of the ITU Bulletin amd the advertising
                  linage data from April issues of Editor and Publisher. As explained in the text, the employment
                  data were obtained from the research department of Scripps-Howard Newspapers, owners of the
                  Cincinnati Post. Published Bureau of Labor Statistics and Department of Commerce publications
                  provided the sources for p, r1, r2, and v.
                                 -18-



         As for the parameters of the labor demand function, the implied

wage elasticity of employment ranges from about -1.8 to -1.0 with an

elasticity of —1.23 at the mean values of the variables.?I The elasticity

of   employment with respect to output is   estimated at .38 at the mean

values   of the variables.' The estimates imply that newsprint and
machinery are each substitutes for labor for all observed values of the
variables. At sample iiean values, the elasticity of the demand for labor

with respect to the price of newsprint is estimated to be .77 and that
                                               26/
with respect to the price of machinery to be .46.— The esLimated

coefficient on the merger dummy (a4 =    87.9)    is virtually identical to

the difference between the average number of typographers employed after

the merger and before the merger (namely, 87).11'

         At this point, our estimates were contrasted with those corresponding

to two popular hypotheses of the objectives of unions. First, under the

wage bill maximization hypothesis, e =      .5 and y   =   =0   and the estimates

of the labor demand function fitted under these constraints are given

in line (b) of Table 1. A conventional likelihood ratio test finds that

the unconstrained estimates in line (a) represent a significant improvement

(at the 5% level) over those fitted under the wage bill maximization

hypothesis in line (b). Second, a test of the rent maximization hypothesis

requires an interpretation of y    as the wage rate that typographers

would earn if they were not organized in a trade union. This alternative,

non-union, wage rate is not observed, of course, but a plausible specification

is that this alternative wage is a linear function of what some existing
                                  -19-



non-union workers receive. In particular, suppose that in the absence

of the IT1J,   these workers would earn a linear function of the real average
hourly earnings of nonsupervisory workers in the retail trade:

      m + y1(v/p)."                                       the rent maximization
  =                      With this specification for -,

hypothesis implies the restrictions e     = .5 and 6 = 0.     The estimates

corresponding to this formulation are presented in line (c) of Table 1

with the unconstrained estimates in line Cd). A comparison of the values

of the likelihood function in lines Cc) and (d) results in a rejection

(at the 5% level) of the null hypothesis that the unconstrained estimates

are no different from those implied by the rent maximization hypothesis.

Therefore, the objectives of the ITU at the Cincinnati Post are not

adequately described by the maximization of the wage bill nor by the

maximization of rents.

         The estimates in line (d) of Table 1 correspond to a specification

in which y is a linear function of an alternative real wage rate while

      is a constant. A natural generalization is to permit 6 to vary and,

upon investigation, it was found that o      appeared to take on a higher
value after the 1958 merger which resulted in the ITU members of the

Times-Star chapel being absorbed into the Post's composing room. The

final two rows of Table 1 augment the specification of y =
                                                                m + -y1(v/p)
with the specification of 6 =        +      in   line (e). This more general

formulation yields the highest point estimate of e (namely, .490) that

we encountered for Cincinnati. However, it is not clear what importance

should be attached to this because the implied estimates of y and 6
                                  -20-




are greater than the corresponding mean values of real wages and employ-

ment respectively so the objective function is not defined at these values.

This particular outcome probably results from too restrictive a specification

of the movements in    -y   and , but unfortunately   we are handicapped in

our investigation of this matter by insufficient degrees of freedom provided

by this data set.     In general, we found the point estimates of the employ-

ment parameter       to be the most sensitive of the coefficients estimated

to slight alterations in the specification of the model.

       Estimates that are more consonant with the Stone-Geary specification

are given in line (f) of Table 1, but they are obtained only after arbitrarily

restricting the parameter         to a value of zero. According to the results

in line (f), the elasticity of substitution between real wages and employ-

ment in the union's objective function is .305 at sample mean values of

the variables. The elasticity of the maximum value of the union's objective

function with respect to wages (.97) is virtually identical to the elasticity

with respect to employment (.98). The estimate of            is consistent with
                                                       -y1

the hypothesis that the ITU's reference wage, y, rises dollar-for-dollar

with increases in the wages of non-union workers in retail trade. The

merger raises       by almost exactly the amount by which the merger shifts

the labor demand function (as given by ci4). At sample mean values, the

elasticity of employment with respect to wages is -1.00, that with respect

to output is .53, that with respect to the price of newsprint is .55,

and that with respect to the price of machinery is .44.

       Finally, to illustrate the use of the union's indirect objective

function equation (11), we formed the index V/V0 where V0 and Vt
indicate the values of the indirect objective function in the year 1946

and in each subsequent year t respectively. This ratio, V./V0, may

be interpreted as an index number of the union's objective function given

the observed values of p. r1, r2, and X in year t relative to its

value in the base year 1946. Calculating this welfare index with the

parameter estimates from line (f) of Table 1 yields the following results:


                    1946    1950     1954    1958    1962    1965
          year

                    1.00    1.46     1.50    1.57    1.55    1.76
           vt/v0


which registers a 76% increase in the union's welfare over this period.

By contrast, the real wages of these typographers rose by 41% between

1946 and 1965 while employment grew 118%.



       C. Other Union Locals

       To examine the generality of this framework of union behavior, data

for the 1946—65 period were collected for seven other local chapters of

the ITU. Unlike the data for the Cincinnati Post, observations on firm

employment are not readily available so that for these seven locals we

used data on local union membership instead.' The resulting seven

union locals range in size from Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, with a mean journey-

man membership of 41 over the 1946-65 period to the Columbus union with

average membership of over 600.    In each city but one, the wage and

advertising linage variables relate to the single newspaper firm in the

city.— The stochastic forms of equations (8) and (9) were fiLted to
                                   -22—




the time series data for each of the seven unions with estimates given

in Table 2.

          As far as the union's objective function parameters are concerned,

first observe that the estimates of       -y are greater than the mean values

of real wages for Elmira and Fond du Lac and the estimates of 6 exceed

the mean values of employment for Augusta, Elmira, and Fond du Lac. As

was the case for the estimates for Cincinnati in line (e) of Table 1,

this is a consequence (we surmise) of not accounting adequately for movements

in the reference levels, y and               For the other four unions, the

estimates of y are significantly greater than zero in all cases while

for only Columbus would the estimate of 6 be evaluated as greater than

zero at conventional levels of significance. The point estimates of 0

range from .15 in Dubuque to .79 in Columbia. Except for Dubuque, the

estimates of o     are   significantly greater than zero and smaller than

unity.?! Comparing the results for Columbia, Columbus, Dubuque, and

Memphis, the tendency is for the estimates of the "reference' parameters,

-   and   6, to be greater for the larger unions. These larger unions are

located in bigger cities where opportunities for alternative employment

(especially in commercial printing) are greater and where, wage levels are

higher. In particular, the significance of       -y   suggests that the union's

wage policy is determined with reference to some alternative or comparison

wage rate and models that ignore this aspect of union behavior are neglecting

what appears to be a consistent finding in this study. In this regard,

using a likelihood ratio test, we are able to reject (at even the 1% level)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -    0)    0               CD
                                                                                                         0)       -                                 I-                 CD      —.    La.                               C_                rn                            La.                c—f.   CD                          0-                                  CD                        —          0                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (I)      c' 0-       L..       CD                                  <                                C                        c-P       0=                                 0-                   =- CD              I—   0.'   0 0 -.5
                                                                                                                  CD32 0/C                     C-        -n C                 C)     c-f. _L.                                      fl    -       Clv)3cp                                  =C            0/U)                         -             3c_t   CD                     -=             _2.   CD                     c=           t—f.   0)         -       —                           C)                        01       —-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0             (1)     CD <0)           CD                  crl-   =     La.   0=          U-)
                                                                                                                                                                       CD C,,        rt            La.    300            c_f-      CD    o              0) Lfl'<>3                        -      c-f-   0                     -'.    C_)           U' t-f-0)          =    0-CD  0)        -          0.                CD   -     -10'   0           U)            La.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -         0/lCD -so.-)    CD      =          c-f- =-f)C) CD         CD 1/)          S—
                                                                              CD                                               CD
                  0             0
                                                                              r..                                      CID "
                                CD —0
                  C.0's*
                                                                              0*                                  CD   =        50Di
                                                                                                                           CC- CD '00          LI
                                                                                                                                                                                                         .21                                                NJ C'SCO                                                    NJ    UI           Ui                                                         0* IN)                                          U)    00                                                  La              N)—                                                  CON)                                                                                                                                      10 N)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (21
                                                                                    0'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .21
                                CD      C,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CCC   ON
                                                                        NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                         LJ1                                      -         CS         N)CU                                    —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N)..0         0550(.2                                    L.0 OS                      U'                                       (.1                                                       .-'       0.21 La      '0                                            ':2C),                                                                                                                                     Lfl SC                            La..0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a               0                                                    isLa
                     5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         La                                           (.2   '.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         —a                                                 Cl)               —                                         NJ N)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.
       2-)   0—            (7   —.               0*                     N)    *0 *0                                        -. 0 Ui
                                                                                                                                                                                                         -                                        —         -.2        NJSO   .21                                       (.2            0.21ClUb                                  CON.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5CC')                NJ                                       (C    N) NJ                                                         0*0%NJ       0*                                   e);Ci C-) CL)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C)       CC'   La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1) CD                          -.21)  '.0                        :0''
       r*    0   —         (7 C—                 0* LI—        0               Ui '.0                                      C,      0N)
                                                                                                                                                                                     -                   i'J
                                                                                                                                                                                                          U'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c,         tOU



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              N)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               'UI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CON)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COOS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U's
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C'S CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .21.    -C'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                La

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '00*   '.3                                  i-* .0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     —.                                                 —0, O1CO

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '.0    '.0CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (.21.21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                —'    ID)                      -.05                              '-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                                                                                   0*    50NJ
                     2C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .21 U (.rC                                                  N).21                *0                                                                                                                                                                           La in 05                                                   Ca   0*                                                   'O                                                                              N) (.rC
       D0C,                     CD                        CD            N)     -     U)                                            050*
                                                                                                                                                                                           NJ..


                                                                                                                                                                                                          —
                                                                                                                                                                                                          '0                                      —         C* U)             0                                   . N) C'              aCID  0*                                  N2NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1U'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .0                                       .0    '.0'0                                                         .21   0 N)                                                 U)   c.                                            .0'O

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -21     C'sU)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               )•i NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U1
       r,,    ,;                 -               -C •                   C.)    -. (.21                                      -'     N)    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          *0                                      a           NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50NJ L.n

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C' .21
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ..-



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        La a,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Q-0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N2C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      '0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D'S



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fl.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C'S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NJ    4.) N)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NJ COC5                                            c-'.-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0La
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO'.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N)      0'.0                                             Cf.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ca CO                    ',rO   OU)'%J—'C,          t)CO
-23-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -           a CO0'                                                                         U)                                                                                                             '0 La                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     50La
                                        r                                                                                                                                                                 05                                                                                                            NJ                                                                                                                                                                                     NJ               *0 CO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (ft
       -I                                   CD        -                 NJ     '0 Ci                                               .CD   -                                                                .2                                      (21         ,         Cl)   0                                               -ao      :.U, -.'                                      C)-.).aUI               NJ.)                                     CS       U' 05                                                      U'    NJ —'                                                '0   0*0*

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0*      (21    0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      La La                    LaL)Nfl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          'L
                      —    0.DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U)                                                             '0'                                                             (a                                       (a       N)    —.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '.0                                                                                                                                                                                                "0
                                                                                                                                                                                                          C),                                     N)                                                                    NJ                                                                                                                                                                                                NJ                                                         (.2 Co                                                                                                                                                                         0*
                     00          U          -4 CD0        0             (a     -CD   0'                                     U)NJ(a
                                                                                                                                                                                           0'.)                                                                        .CDtfl '0                               -NJU'          LaOS     CLa   a                                   Cl                          CI                                                .21 L'S                                                   CO        C'S                                       ----    '.0 o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N) O0*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N)0*                     N)C'S0                     J      a-
                                                      0 r1         CD                                C          Cl-                                 0                                               -C               CD                      1                           c-f-                                                                 —                          LI)                                             CD                                 -       c_f.                                                   CD                       -      0)    -                                                       CD   -                 0               C     -                              0- C       -                     (.0         (-p   CD
                                                                                                     -.         J          -.Lfl
                                                                                                                                             (DJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CD                      r+0                               —art                0                       c-f-              2                                        CD                                                                               OCI) 00                                               c_f-CD                               <                 Cr)   0, c-s-                      o       c_f-       La.   c-t-"
                                                                                                     -"         C -PC •                                                                              —"        La.                                                       C,,              (•)                                                 -(1                ECOCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -c                                         CD        c+0                           -                                                 ClC0         C)—c*Z                   c-f-   0                                            -"5                   CD U)CDU)         —0)                   —         CD0.CD               Cl                                                      CD
                                                                                              >(C-*---
                                                                                                                CD                                  C,,              —                                                                                                   —.        0rP0      —    CD—.Chr+                                    —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1     CD—                     CD2CD       C)                                       C                -c)—0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      —CD--1/)                      La.    <                             '<CDC)2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 =0)0L                              0.tfl—C)    r+C   :r              La.   2-              -"<-•                           CD           rt-              ('1      c_f-
                                                                               0—CDr)

                                                                                     $2)(n0
                                                                                                     CD2-.223   -c         0       '<CD
                                                                                                                                             2—CDO)—1     r+c+CD(D       Zr)---'•C    c-f-c-$DCC
                                                                                                                                                                                                    <                0CD   CD—f-0-r--   V)   D(DCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CD2—0-CD   r)Cl0)CD     c_f-             0                  c*r*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rrt'<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CD              -c rf C) CD   -CD0--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cl'<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2     0)c-fC,    c--.0             CD0r+O-       '<c-f-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0)CCD-•   r-f.V)7c-t-   0.           CD      -         CCO —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -     3CDCD$CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -pc(0:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U,       (        —    <CD                     Cl   <          CD<CD5-               •              rn    0/CD   ()0.v)
                                                                               r4:- CD V' CD                          CD   - DJ (.0 c- — C)                          La. c-f- —         CD           C)              —     L/)               CD     < 0) C0)             —                 c_f- CD           0-               0) c_f-                c-f-    ;- CD             LI)    o2 Cl                         —    CD         2      CD0)                     < 0) — C CDY) o                                                                        c_p   -   CD             < 0)                    — 0) Cl-          -    CD (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +o        -          CD 0)1C)N                        C         La.    o                •
                                    -24-



for all of the unions the hypothesis that the unconstrained estimates

are no different from those implied by the wage bill maximization hypothesis

(under which a   = .5   and   y =     = 0).
       The estimates of the parameters of the labor demand function are

probably best understood in terms of their implications for the elasticity

of demand for labor which are given in the final three columns of Table 2.

The wage elasticities evaluated at the sample mean values of the variables

for each union (so the point of evaluation differs across unions) range

from -5.59 for Elmira to -.25 for Dubuque although the standard errors

attached to these estimates caution against confident inferences: clearly

a wide range of elasticities is compatible with the data.



V.     Conclusions

       The purpose of this paper is to report the consequences of an

empirical analysis of a well-known model of union behavior. In general,

our results indicate that the ITU's objectives cannot be identified with

wage rates or with employment alone, but that both are arguments of a

more general objective function. Our estimates accord with those models

in which the union is characterized as setting its decision variables with

reference to some norm since it appears to be the excess of wages and

employment over some reference levels that is relevant to union behavior.

However, the relative weight attached to supernumerary wages versus

supernumerary employment varies considerably across unions. The wage bill

maximization hypothesis that ignores these reference levels has been
                               —25—




found in every case to provide an inferior explanation of movements in

wages and employment compared with our more general formulation.

Nevertheless, in some cases, our more general specification is insufficiently

general, but the opportunity to relax the restrictions on the reference

level parameters, y   and   , is   severely limited by the available number

of observations on each union. It should also be emphasized that an

evaluation of the empirical performance of this model tacitly involves
                                                             function and of
joint tests on the specification of the union's objective

the labor demand function since expressions are required for both functions

in order that a model of this kind be implemented.

       There are two particularly important areas of union behavior where

the model described in this paper is inadequate. The first concerns the

various job security provisions in many union contracts which, if effective

and binding, should be modelled explicitly. Of course, although they

exist in many collective bargaining contracts, the extent to which the

 employer can evade their constraints has not been determined in other than

 a few instances.-" The second area that requires more research concerns

 the intertemporal aspect of the model: clearly the objectives of unions

 are defined over the future values of variables as well as their current

 values while the employer's immediate response to a negotiated settlement

 may well differ from his longer term response.    Any serious attempt to

 model trade union behavior must eventually come to grips with these issues.

 What has been described in this paper is only an initial step towards that

 more satisfactory model.
                                 -26-



                           Footnotes


 1/   This opinion differs from the one widely held that, as expressed
      by Reder (1952), ". . .the behavior of firms and consumers can be
      easily interpreted as 'maximizing' while that of a union cannot"
      (p. 34).

 2/   See Lipset, Trow and Coleman (1967).

 3/   Lipset, Trow, and Coleman (1956) write, "...all of the members of
      the ITU share a roughly common income and status.. .The ITU is thus,
      insofar as this is possible, a community of equals, and there is
      consequently no 'underpriveleged' group in the unions.. .all subskills
      contribute roughly equal proportions of active leaders and one finds
      no tendency for a high-status group to monopolize and dominate inter-
      nal politics." (pp. 142-143).

 4/   Most recently, the ITU has resisted the adoption of new technology
      which permits electronic and computerized composition of newspaper
      product except in cases where jurisdiction over new skills and
      maintenance of employment is permitted. See Kelber and Schlesinger
      (1967).

 5/   This philosophy of "work sharing" probably reached a zenith during
      the Great Depression when a national convention adopted a referendum
      vote approving a law directing all situation holders to put a sub-
      stitute on work at least one day per week.
 6/   In theirsurvey of the New York local, Lipset, Trow, and Coleman
      (1956) report, "A significant minority of the union's members, 17%,
      are the sons of printers, while 30% have relatives other than a
      father in the occupation. Many of the leaders of the ITU are re-
      cruited from the ranks of printer families" (p. 206).

 7/   This information is taken from Editor and Publisher (the industry's
      weekly magazine), 23rd February 1946, p. 76.

 8/   See Reder (1952), p. 39.

 9/   Therefore, it involves not too drastic an assumption if the costs
      of negotiation and the role of strikes which sometimes figure in
      models of union behavior (see Atherton (1973) and Mitchell (1972))
      are neglected in this study.

10/   The problems involved in aggregating over preferences are discussed
      in Becker (1974) and Samuelson (1956). A rationalization of
      equation (1) in terms of a "... union as a political institution
      run by a bureaucracy whose goals are not necessarily identical with
      those of the membership" appears in Kotowitz and Portes (1974).
                                   -27—




11/   Our assumption with the newspaper firms below is that their output
      is determined primarily by the demographic characteristics of the
      local media market which are exogenous to a single firm. In fact,
      we investigate below the possibility that output should be treated
      as endogenous. Also see Rosse (1970) andDertouzos (1979).

12/   As is well known, this tangency solution between the union's
      indifference curve and the slope of the firm's labor demand function
      does not lie on the contract curve. (See, for example, Leontief
      (1946) or Feliner (1947).) This feature may be unrealistic in some
      employer—union settings, but it is not clear that it is so for
      typographers. The second-order condition concerns the relative rates
      at which the union's isoquant and the employer's labor demand
      function are changing:



                 -2
                      g +
                              -l      f       a2f +     3f2
                            2p     g12- + g2—-        g22()    0




13/   The sort of restrictions on equations (1) and (2) that generate
      refutable sign implications may be illustrated as follows. If
      equation (1) is strongly separable in wages and employment (or, less
      restrictively, if g12    0), if labor is not an inferior factor,
      and if an increase in output does not reduce the slope of the labor
      demand function (i.e., if 2f/wBX >    0), then an increase in output
      or an increase in the price of a substitute input results in a
      higher optimal money wage rate.

14/   Also (V/Br1 )/ (aV/aX) = (af/r )/ (af/X).
15/   Clearly, with y       and    5 equal to zero, a value of e of 1 yields
      an objective function that consists simply of the wage rate (a model
      of union goals sometimes attributed to Henry Simons (1944)) while a
      value of a of 0       implies that only employment matters.

16/   Cf. ".. .[T]he bargaining      process is almost always directed toward
      an upward or downward change in a preexisting wage rate and the
      greatest interest often centers on the magnitude of the change,"
      Ross (1948, p. 46). Formally, this particular extension of the
      Stone-Geary was proposed and analyzed by Stone (1966) and Pollak
      (1 970)


17/   The importance of such comparisons in affecting the goals of trade
      unions has been stressed by Ross (1948). Again, formally it involves
      a similar sort of extension of the Stone-Geary function as that
      analyzed by Pollak (1976).
                              -28-




18/   Almost 8% of all cities with daily newspapers had more than one
      newspaper in 1948. By 1968 this had fallen to less than 3%. See
      Dertouzos (1979). The effect of a newspaper merger on union
      preferences was also investigated and the results are reported
      be 1 ow.


19/   More information on the newspaper production technology is contained
      in Rosse (1970, 1977). Also estimated with the Cincinnati data
      were labor demand functions whose slopes as well as whose intercept
      changed with a merger, but the results did not differ materially
      from those reported below.

20/   For evidence on the association between wages and firm size in the
      newspaper industry, see Dertouzos (1979).

21/   In particular, we employed the Berndt, Hall, Hall and Hausman (1974)
      computational procedure.

22/   One of us in the course of performing consulting activities for
      the Cincinnati Post obtained employment data normally not available
      through public sources.

23/   In some estimates, the machinery price index was replaced by a
      measure of the user cost of capital, but the results were essentially
      unchanged.

24/   It is not straightforward to compare these estimates of labor
      demand elasticities with others in the literature since these relate
      to a small group of workers in a single firm while previous estimates
      have been at a much higher level of aggregation.

25/   The assumption that output is exogenous in these equations was
      considered. For instance, errors in measuring output may arise
      because our index of newspaper output. namely, advertising linage
      ignores dimensions of output such as quality and the space devoted
      to news. For this reason, some instrumental variable estimates
      were derived where the instruments for newspaper output consisted
      of the city-zone household population per year, aggregate U.S.
      advertising expenditures per household in real dollars, and the
      share of aggregate advertising expenditures earned by television.
      Clearly, these variables are exogenous to the individual newspaper
      firm. The resulting estimates of the parameters of the labor demand
      function were very similar to those in line (a) of Table 1.

26/   This finding that newsprint and typographers are substitute inputs
      is consistent with the stylized facts in the newspaper industry.
      For as the relative price of newsprint rose, firms found it optimal
      to conserve on newsprint by producing zoned editions of newspapers
      and typographers were required to compose advertising copy for each
      edition's separate sections.
                                 -29-



27/   Augmenting the labor demand function with a linear time trend
      variable produces similar results to those reported in line (a)
      while the estimated coefficient on the trend variable is about one-
      quarter its estimated standard error. To be specific, the maximum
      likelihood estimates of this system are as follows (with estimated
      standard errors in parentheses): e = .201 (.053); y = 2.126 (.880);
      6 = -130.02 (283.58); ci,. = 196.4 (91.8);    -80.99 (27.59);
           1.087 (1.451); c3 =   3.315 (2.653); a = 85.14 (15.89); and
      with the estimated coefficient on the time trend variable .290 (1.302).

28/   To forestall any confusion, the assumption here is not that, if
      they were not unionized, these typographers would be workers in
      retail trade. The assumption is if the typographers were not
      unionized and remained typographers, their wage over time would be
      some proportion of what non-union workers in retail trade receive.
      The v series used relates to the United States as a whole. An
      hourly earnings series for nonsupervisory workers in the retail
      trade in Ohio is available only after 1952 and in Cincinnati after
      1957. However, for the years from 1953 to 1966, the Ohio series
      and the U.S. series move very closely together.

29/   Data on local union membership may be obtained from the union's
      publication Typographical Journal. These union membership data
      include those employed in commercial printing establishments as
      well as those in newspaper firms. We were obliged to use the union
      membership data although to minimize measurement problems large
      cities with substantial printing industries (such as New York
      and Chicago) were excluded from our analysis. For most union locals,
      commercial printing employment constitutes a very small fraction
      of the membership.

30/   Columbus is the single exception: in this city the data are
      aggregated over several newspaper firms. We follow Rosse (1978)
      in treating agency shop newspapers (i.e., "enterprises with
      separately owned and produced editorial products but with joint
      mechanical production and joint sale of advertising and subscriptions..."
      in the same city (p. 3)) as a single firm.

31/   On occasions, permitting the reference levels y and 6 to vary
      resulted in a likelihood function with no pronounced maximum.

32/   Evaluated at each union's sample mean values, the elasticity of
      substitution between wages and employment in the union's objective
      function is estimated at .70 for Columbia, .04 for Columbus; .49
      for Dubuque, and .20 for Memphis.
                              -30-



33/   One instance is Hartman's (1969) excellent study of the effects
      of the mechanization and modernization agreement in the Pacific
      Coast long-shoring industry. His analysis suggests that those
      work rules which took the form of specifying fixed quantities of
      labor input were essentially evaded by the employers by an
      appropriate arrangement of the flow of work. On the other hand,
      those work rules that governed the mix of machinery to labor did
      appear to affect employment and productivity.
                                 -31—



                            References


Atherton, W.N., Theory of Union Bargaining Goals, Princeton University
       Press, 1973.

Becker, G.S., 'ATheoryof Social Interactions," Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 82, No. 6, Nov./Dec. 1974, PP. 1063-1093.

Berndt, E.K., B.H. Hall, R.E. Hall, and J.A. Hausman, 'Estimation and
       Inference in Nonlinear Structural Models," Annals of Economic and
       Social Measurement, Vol. 3, No. 4, Fall 1974 pp. 653-65.

Cartter, A.M., Theory of Wages and Employment, Homewood, I'll:    Irwin, 1959.

de Menu, G., Bargaining: Monopoly Power Versus Union Power, MIT Press,
       Cambridge, 1971.

Dertouzos, J.N., "Union Objectives, Wage Determination, and the International
       Typographical Union," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford
       University, December 1979.

Dunlop, J.T., tIaqe Determination Under Trade Unions, New York:   Macmillan,
       1944.

Farber, H.S., "Individual Preferences and Union Wage Determination: The
       Case of the United Mine Workers," Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
       86, No. 5, October 1978, PP. 923-42.

Feilner, W. ,"Prices and Wages Under Bilateral Monopoly," Quarterly Journal
       of Economics, Vol. 61, No.  , August 1947, pp. 503-32.



Hartman, P.T., Collective Bargaining and Productivity: the Lonyshore
       Mechanization Agreement, University of California Press, 1969.

International Typographical Union, A Study of the History of the International
       Typographical Union: 1852-1963, Vol. 1, Colorado Springs, 1964.

Kelber, H. and C. Schlesinger, Union Printers and Controlled Automation,
       Free Press, New York, 1967.

Kotowitz, Y, and R. Portes, "The 'Tax on Wage Increases' : A Theoretical
       Analysis," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 3, No. 2, May 1974,
       pp. 113-132.

Leontief, W.W., "The Pure Theory of the Guaranteed Annual Wage Contract,"
       Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 54, No. 1, February 1946, pp. 76-9.

Lipset, S.M., M.A. Trow, and J.S. Coleman, Union Democracy: The Internal
       Politics of the International Typographical Union, Free Press,
       Glencoe, Illinois, 1956.
                                   -32-



Mitchell, D.J.B., "The Ross-Dunlop Debate Reopened," Industrial Relations,
       Vol. 11, No. 1, February 1972, pp. 46-61.

Pollak, R.A., "Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions," Journal of
       Political Economy, Vol. 78, No. 4, Part 1, July/August 1970,
       pp. 745-63.

Pollak, R.A. ,                Preferences," American Economic Review, Vol . 66,
                 "Interdependent
       No. 3, June 1976, pp. 309-320.

Reder, M.W., "The Theory of Union Wage Policy," Review of Economics and
       Statistics, Vol. 34, No. 1, February 1952, pp. 34-45.

Rosen, S., "Unionism and the Occupational Wage Structure in the United
       States," International Economic Review, Vol. 11, No. 2, June 1970,
       pp. 269-86.

Ross, A.M., Trade Union Wage Policy, Berkeley: University of California
       Press, 1948.

Rosse, J.N., "Estimating Cost Function Parameters Without Using Cost Data:
       Illustrated Methodology," Econometrica, Vol. 38, No. 2, March 1970,
       pp. 256-75.

Rosse, J.N., "The Daily Newspaper Firm: A 24 Equation Reduced Form Model ,"
       Studies in Industry Economics, No. 76, Department of Economics,
       Stanford University, January 1977.

Rosse, J.N., "The Evolution of One Newspaper Cities," Studies in Industry
       Economics, No. 95, Department of Economics, Stanford University,
       December 1978.

Samuelson, P.A., "Some Implications of 'Linearity' ," Review of Economic
       Studies, Vol. XV(2), No. 38, 1948, pp. 88-90.

Samuelson, P.A., "Social Indifference Curves," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       Vol. 70, No. 1, February 1956, pp. 1-22.

Simons, H.A., "Some Reflections on Syndicalism," Journal of Political
       Economy, Vol. 52, No. 1, March 1944, pp. 1-25.

Stone, R., "The Changing Pattern of Consumption," Chapter 14 of Mathematics
       in the Social Sciences and Other Essays, MIT Press, 1966, pp. 190-
        203.
