                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ACCCUMULATION AND GROWTH IN A 'NO-COUNTRY
                  MODEL: A SIMULATION APPROACH


                          David Lipton

                          Jeffrey Sachs

                     Working Paper No. 512




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                          October 1980




This paper was presented at the NBER's 1980 Summer Institute
program in International Studies. It is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. We would like to thank
participants in the NBER Summer Institute in International
Economics for helpful comments. This paper is a draft and is not
for citation. Comments are nost welcome. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper No. #572
                                                                   October 1980




                            Accumulation and Growth

                             In a Two—Country Model:

                            A Simulation Approach



                                   ABSTRACT



      This paper analyzes saving and capital accumulation in a two—good

growth model of two market economies in which economic agents optimize

with perfect foresight. The goal is to present a model in which short—

run dynamics and the steady—state are soundly integrated. We stress

the importance of asset markets as the linkage that transmits disturbances

both internationally and intertemporally. While many components of the

model described below can be found in the literature on optimal consumption,

investment   and international growth models, we provide a consistent
synthesis. Our framework permits the analysis of structural adjustment in
the   global economy, and the dynamic effects of a wide range of   public
policies.

                                                      Mr. David Lipton
                                                      Mr. Jeffrey Sachs

                                                      National Bureau of
                                                        Economic Research
                                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                      Cambridge, Massachusetts
                                                                     02138
                                 -1-




1.   INTRODUCTION

     This paper analyzes saving and capital accumulation in a two-
good growth model of two market economies in which economic agents

optimize with perfect foresight. The goal is to present a model
in which short-run dynamics and the steady-state are soundly inte-

grated. We stress the importance of asset markets as the linkage
that transmits disturbances both internationally and intertempo-

rally. While many components of the model described below can be
found in the literature on optimal consumption, investment and

international growth models, we provide a consistent synthesis.
Our framework permits the analysis of structural adjustment in the

global economy, and the dynamic effects of a wide range of public

policies.
     The two-economy model outlined below includes the following
features:   (1) optimization by infinitely lived households who
consume leisure and goods and who save by purchasing internationally

traded claims to equity capital; (2) intertemporal optimization by
value-maximizing competitive firms that make production and

(irreversible) investment decisions, where capital formation is

modeled as an adjustment process requiring real resources;

(3) perfect foresight of households and entrepreneurs; (4) produc-
tion of a single good in each country, which is traded internationally

and which is an imperfect consumption substitute for the other

country's good; and (5) perfect substitutability of the equity
claims to the capital stock of each economy.

     In the literature, we find many of these features in isolation

but never together. Hamada 1 9] provides an optimal growth model
                                 -2-




but for a single, small economy. Two-country models typically
include ad hoc savings behavior, with savings proportional to
disposable income or disposable income and wealth (cf.      [   9],   [   7],
[   8],   and [15]). One notable exception here is Buiter [     5],   who

presents a two-country growth model with full dynamic optimization
of households in an overlapping generations framework. Buiter
asks how international differences in pure time preference affect
accumulation, the balance of payments and welfare. The overlapping
generations framework unfortunately cannot handle the short-run

aspects of the adjustment problems that we treat. Obstfeld [14]

presents a model of infinitely lived, optimizing households, such
as ours, but he does not treat at all the issues of investment and

growth.
          Adjustment costs in investment were first introduced in the

two-country growth model literature by Fisher and Frenkel [7] , who

posit a production possibilities frontier for each economy that
contracts when capital formation is rapid. This feature, however,

has not been widely adopted. Ruffin [15], for instance, assumes

that capital may be transplanted instantaneously from one economy
to the other in order to instantly equalize marginal products of
capital across economies. In our model, the presence of adjustment

costs in investment imply that unequal marginal products result
in finite but differing rates of investment across economies. There
is a determinate, and in fact optimal level of investment for each

economy, which is shown to depend on Tobin's q.

          In our model, firms make investment decisions and households

make consumption and saving decisions based largely on asset prices.

Asset markets link households and firms and they guide an
                                 -3-


 efficient intertemporal allocation of resources. With
                                                         full optimi-
 zation by all agents, the model permits straightforward
                                                          welfare
 evaluations of alternative policies.

      Perfect foresight on the part of economic agents ensures that
 asset prices and the current assessment of human wealth summarize
 information about expected events and that current allocation
                                                               and
 accumulation decisions reflect these
                                      expectations. With the perfect
 foresight assumption, it is possible to analyze anticipated
                                                             future
 disturbances and the differing effects of permanent
                                                     versus temporary
 shocks. Of course, most models
                                 of two-country growth rely on static
 expectations, (cf. [8], [15], and again the exceptions of [14],
 [5]).

     To maintain the purity of this model, we have sacrificed
                                                              realism
at many points. We expect that in further work i'ealistic
                                                          features
may be added to analyze particular
                                   subsectors or institutions in the
world economy. We feel however that there is a need for
                                                         a canonical
model in this field to serve as a benchmark for further
                                                          study.
     We confine our attention in
                                   this paper to three applications
of the model: a study of the
                                "transfer problem," an analysis of
the international effects of
                               balanced-budget fiscal policy, and
an analysis of how improved
                            productive technology in one country
affects capital accumulation and production in both. This
                                                           case
has obvious relevance to the issue of OECD adjustment
                                                      to growth
in the newly-industrjaj
                              countries (NIC's).
     Besides these three topics our model can handle a host of alter-

native applications. By incorporating provisions of corporate
                                                              and
                               -4-



personal tax laws, one can study the nature and extent of

international transmission of domestic tax changes. By adding
oil as an intermediate input in production and OPEC as an entity
that sells oil and purchases goods, one can examine the impact

of an oil price shock on the capital formation processes in the

two developed economies (cf. [16J). Finally, the inclusion of
money as an additional asset allows one to look at the interaction

of monetary policies and the accumulation process in a global
setting, and to model exchange rate dynamics.

     Because of the assumption of perfect foresight, the model

exhibits saddlepoint stability and poses a two-point boundary value

problem. Since such problems do not typically yield analytical
solutions, we solve the model through simulation, using the
                                           1/
numerical method of "multiple shooting."        Simulation parameters
are selected from other work in the literature, and the importance

to the model of our choice of parameters is scrutinized through

sensitivity analysis. Though we rely heavily on simulation, our
qualitative dynamic results can be established with theoretical

arguments.


2.   THE MODEL
      The model we consider is that of a growing two-country world

where each economy produces a single good, which is consumed
domestically, sold to foreigners, and used for home capital forma-

tion. Firms produce goods and install capital so as to maximize

firm valuation. Labor is immobile internationally. Capital forma-
tion is irreversible: once in place, capital may be reduced only

through depreciation.
                                                 -5-



      Growing, infinitely lived households Consume home and foreign

 goods and leisure to maximize an additively separable intertemporal

 utility function. Household income is consumed or saved in the
 form of equity in domestic and foreign firms. Equity is the sole store
of value. There is free international trade in equities, as well

as goods, and we assume that home and foreign equities are perfect

substitutes. Thus, instantaneous real holding yields on equity
defined in terms of the home good are equalized internationally.

Let r and r* be the yield at home and abroad in own good units. Then

     (1)     r =   r*   -
                                IT/il

where IT is the relative price of goods, p/p, and "k" denotes the

foreign country.
     Through equity purchases by households, the world pool of savings
is channeled to profitable investment projects without regard to

the national origin of the savings. International trade in goods and
equity in this model allows households to satisfy desires for goods
unavailable at home and to shift consumption streams over time

through international borrowing and lending. If on net, one coun-
try spends more than its income, running a current account deficit,

the dissaving is matched by a capital account surplus, equaling
the sale of equity claims to the foreign economy.

    Goods market equilibrium in each country requires that output

supply equals goods demand:


     (2a)   Q=     CD+      I




     (Zb)   Q* =         + 1*           + G* +
                                                 CM
                                   -6-


where Q   is   output; CD is demand for the domestically produced good;
I is investment expenditures; G is government spending; and CM is

demand for the non-domestically produced good. Here, and henceforward,
quantity variables are written in intensive form, per member of the

home country household, Lf. Households in each country grow at the
same rate n, so the ratio of home to foreign population is constant.

Labor market equilibrium in each country occurs when firm labor demand

equals household labor supply. Households choose leisure and labor
supply to maximize utility. The labor market clears continuously;
variations in employment in this model are equilibrium shifts only.

     We now turn to a detailed description of firm and household

behavior within this framework and explain the dynamics of the model.

The model is written down in Table 1. We will refer to the pieces
of this model as we continue in the rest of Section 2.


A. The Firm
     The theory of investment behavior used in the model combines the

neo-classical approach associated with Jorgenson [11] and the "q"

approach associated with Tobin [17]. This cost-of-adjustment theory
of investment was first developed by Lucas [13] and Treadway [18], and
has been elaborated in Abel [1], Blanchard [4] and Hayashi [10]. In

the theory presented, investment depends upon Tobin's 'q', the ratio
of the market value of equity capital in the firm to its replacement

cost. Investment is described as an increasing function of q and
1>0 whenever q is greater than one. We will see that q summarizes all
relevant market information for the firm's investment strategy. In

our model each country uses its own good as the investment good. Thus

the replacement cost of capital is just the output price. qK is the
market value of the firm in units of the home good.
                                                -7-


                                              TABLE 1

                               THE COMPLETE MODEL


A. The Household

    (1.1)               =    (6-n)A

    (1.2)    PC* =

    (1.3)    A = AF + H


    (1.4)    A* =           AF+      H*


    (1.5)    AF = qK +               q*z/n

    (1.6)    AF= q*(K*z)

    (1.7)      =
                        (r-n)H        -
                                          w(l-T)

    (1.8)           =       (r_n)H*       -
                                               w*(l_r*)

    (1.9)    Urn
             t-)-o:
                    e'tH =                      0


   (1.10)    urn e             *)t              = 0
             t-co


   (1.11)    CD =           CD(IT,    W(l-T))•PcC

   (1.12)    CM = CM(ll, W(l-T))•PcC


   (1.13)    C=             C(ll, w*(1T*))pC*

   (1.14)    C=             C(JT,     w*(1T*)).pC*
   (1.15)    (l-L)(1-T) =                           -        -
                                                        CD       CM/Il
                                                    -8-



  (1. 16)     (lL*)(1T) = pC *                      - C*
                                                          D
                                                              -   llCM

  (1.17)      PC =         p(w,          Ti)




  (1. 18)     p =          p(w,           H)



B. The Firm

  (1. 17)     Q = OK1 aLa


  (1.18)      Q*   = O*K*laL*a

  (1. 19)     L =          (w/aO)lR.K
   (1.20)     L


   (1.21)     I =          J(1   +



   (1.22)     1*       =    J*(1     +



   (1.23)     J    =
                           J(q)K

   (1.24)


   (1.25)     k    = J(q)K           -
                                             (d+n)•K

   (1.26)
                       =    J*(q*)K* - (d+n).K*

C. Asset Market Equilibrium

   (1.27)     r =          Div/qK        +




   (1.28)     r*       =    Div*/q*K*           +
                                                            -9-




     (1.29)    r =     r*       -




     (1.30)    Div          Q       - wL       +       q(nK+K)      -
                                                                        I

     (1.31)    Div* =        Q* - w*L*                      +   q*(nK*+K*)       -   1*

     (1.32)    urn eltq =                  0
               t-co

     (1.33)    urn e
                            r*t q*      =          0
               t--co




D.   Output Market Equilibrium


     (1.34)   Q = CD         +      I   + C +


     (1.35)            C + 1*                  +             + CM


B.   Balance of Payments


     (1.36)   CA =     Q + (r**/q*)q*Z/rI                               -
                                                                            CD
                                                                                 -   I    -
                                                                                              C   -
                                                                                                      CM/TI


     (1.37)   Z =      (n/q*)cA                -       nZ



F. Government Sector


     (1.38)   G = TWL


     (1.39)   G* = T*W*L*
                                               -10-



     Let MH be the total manhours of labor supply, and L(= MH/Lf) be

the labor supply per person. Then output (per Lf) is given by the
neoclassical CRS production function Q =                             F[K,L].   In the simulation,

we will assume a Cobb-Douglas form for Q.
     11e assume that the firm acts to maximize market value. Our

discussion of the firm thus begins with the equations of firm

valuation. For an equity owner, the instantaneous yield on capital

is the sum of the dividend yield and capital gains:


     (3)     r =    Div/qK        +   q/q

where Div is total dividends paid by the firm. Because the value of

the firm V is qK we can re-write (3) as:


     (4)     V/v - K/K +              Div/V    =    r

We assume that the firm issues new equity to finance capital
formation.' At any instant, the new issues raise funds in the

amount q(nK + K).       It is easy to show that dividends are:



     (5)     Div =      Q
                            -    wL    +
                                           q(nK     +   k)   -   I

where w is the gross product wage paid. Substitution of equation (5)

into (4) gives:


     (6)     V/V+1=r-n
and integration yields the firm valuation integral


      (7)    V = qK =
                                f     (Q   -   wL   -
                                                        I)eO           (s)n)dt


V is maximized subject to constraint on capital accumulation:


      (8)     K =   J   -
                                (d+n)K
                                         -11-




where J is the gross capital formation and d is the rate of

depreciation. We assume that investment expenditures I differ from

capital formation J because of adjustment costs in capital installa-

tion. Let    represent per unit adjustment costs to capital formation.

Total investment expenditure is given by:


     (9)     I = (1    +    )J
Following Hayashi [10] and Treadway [18] , we assume that        is a

rising function of the rate of capital formation relative to the

existing capital stock:



     (10)    q() =         (J/K)                >   0



     Firms in each economy are identical price-taking competitors,

that maximize firm values. Maximizing (7) subject to (8) gives the
following first order conditions:


     (11)    w=QL
      (12)   A =   1   +    (J/K)    +   (J/K)q'    (J/K)


      (13)   A =   (r+d)X                +   (J/K)2'    (J/K)]


      (14)   K =   J   -
                            (d+n)K

A is the shadow value of capital from constraint (8). Using the
production function and (11) we may write labor demand as a function

of the wage and capital stock. In the Cobb-Douglas case, labor
demand is given by (1.19) and (1.20) in Table 1.
                                     -12-


       From (12) we see that the firm will choose the level of gross

capital formation to equate the marginal benefit of capital in

place, A, with the marginal investment expenditure, 1 +
The shadow price exceeds one whenever gross capital formation is

positive so that adjustment costs push investment expenditure above
the acquisition value of the capital itself.

       With the linear homogeneous production and adjustment techno-
logy that we have assumed it is easy to show that the shadow price

equals the market price of equity, that is A = q.        Using equations
(11) -   (14) we may check that all aspects of the firm's optimal
program are linear in K. That is, if a firm with capital stock
K hires L and invests J, a firm with cK will hire cL and invest U.

Thus, the value of the firm rises in proportion to K, since V in
(7) is linear in L, K, and J. Since A =        V/K   and V is linear
in K, V = AK.     But by definition, V = qK.    Thus q = A.   A more

formal proof of this relation may be found in Hayashi [10]. In
sum, the equity price that the firm observes in the market place
also equals the shadow price of capital that guides the firm's
investment    decisions.

       One key consequence of this equivalence is that an investment
function for the firm can be written in terms of q, an observable

price. Inverting equation (12) and presuming linear adjustment
costs q() =     (b/2)J/K,   we can write:


       (15)     J/K =   (q-l)/h
The managers of a firm can simply observe the market equity price,

q, and select a capital formation rate, J/K. This is the essence
                                             -13-


of Tobin's approach embedded in an adjustment cost model of firm
investment.

      Equation (13) describes the transition path for the shadow price
of capital. It can be shown that (13) is an equivalent expression

for the holding yield on equity in (                3 ).

      Equation    (   8   )   describes   the path of capital accumulation and
is repeated in Table 1 for each country as equations (1.25) and (1.26).


B. The Household

      Households maximize the discounted value of instantaneous

utility U(S) weighting by the size of the household at any moment,

Lf:


      (16)
              JU(CD, CI,            (1L))Lfetdt
Instantaneous utility is a function of domestic good consumption,

foreign good consumption, and leisure.                     (16) is an intertemporal
homothetic utility function under the assumption that

U(CD, CM, (l-L)) can be rewritten as:


      (17)                                                       a   1
                 [C(CD, Cr1, (1L)J°/(ia)

              log [C(CD, C1,(l-Lfl

with C linear homogeneous in its arguments. We adopt this assump-
tion. In this case, the household's decision problem is separable:

at any moment, the household decides on the level of C and the

level of savings. Subsequently, for given C, the household decides

upon the components CD, CM, and (l-L), based on the momentary

relative prices of these goods. This separability, and other tech-

nical aspects of the consumer problem, are discussed in Appendix
                                            -14-


        Given the linear homogeneity of C,               there     is a true price
index          that is itself linear homogeneous in the prices of

CD, CM, and (l—L). The price index may be defined by the property
that


        (18)      p C =      mm                    CD + CM/N   +
                                                                   (l-T)w(l-L)
                             CD, CM, (l-L)

                             such that      C(CD, CM, l-L) =

For any C, pC is the value of total instantaneous consumption,
equal to CD + CM/fl +             (l-T)w(l-L).     The first stage of the consumer

optimization problem is to maximize JjetU(C)dt such that the
discounted value of pC equals current wealth A. That is, the

budget constraint is given by:


        (19)      A =
                           J0cC)d5dt
Time differentiation of this constraint yields the dynamic equation:


                           (r-n)A       pC , with t-*
                                                  Urn     eTtA = 0
                  A   =             -
        (20)


       A is the sum o,f financial wealth AF and human wealth H. Since

we are imputing consumption expenditures to the household's leisure,
in the amount of (l-T)w(l-L), we must treat the human wealth component

of A in a consistent manner. Human wealth must be defined as the

discounted value of post-tax potential labor income, for a household

that takes no leisure, i.e., L                   1. This is equivalent in a static
model to measuring "full income" at the point of zero leisure.

Thus, we have

                                             (s)
        (21)         H =
                           j w(l-T)e                  dsdt

Time differentiation of (21) yields H =                 (r-n)H     -
                                                                       w(l-T),   with
        -rt H =
Urn e           0.
t±cx,
                                         -15-



Financial wealth is simply the sum of the values of home and

home-held foreign equity (Z):

        (22)    AF = qK +    q*zln

     We now maximize (16) subject to (19), for which it is easy
to show:


        (23)           r -    -


Importantly,   C is rising when the real interest rate r -                  is
greater than the rate of time discount. When r -
above
                                                            c'c     rises
           in some time interval the marginal rate of substitution
of consumption will equal the interest rate only if consumption is
rising over the interval. With additively separable and homethetic

utility, consumption at the later point must exceed consumption
at the earlier point to drive down marginal utility at the later
point relative to the initial point.

     For simplicity we restrict consideration here to the logarith-
mic case of o = 1 and U(C)   Ln(C), and discuss the more general
case in Appendix 1 .     The logarithmic utility function proves simple

to use for it implies that pC is a fixed proportion of wealth at
any instant, where the factor of proportionality for the growing
household is the discount rate less the household growth rate:

                   =
        (24)           (ó-n)A

To see this, consider the solution to the differential equation (23).
Since (pC)/(pC) =                 +
                                      C/C, we have from (23) that
                        PC/PC

     (25)      (pC) =    (r-)(pC)
                                      -16-


 Solving this equation, we find


      (26)       pc =   pc(O)C(0)e
When (26) is substituted into the intertemporal budget constraint
 (19), we have


      (27)    A(O) =
                        J0Pc(0)C(0)etdt
which reduces immediately to (24).

     Total consumption for the individual at any time is thus

entirely dependent on current wealth. In the more general case of
Appendix 1, when ci     1, PcC also depends on the future paths of
   and r. The asset markets which value equity and the householdts

foresight over labor income provide an assessment of wealth which
guides the household in its choice of total consumption.

     The components of total consumption in any period may be
derived from standard static optimization, and depend on the

relative goods price, 11, the net-of-tax wage, w(l-T) and total

expenditure pcc.

     (28)    CD = CD(H, w(1-T)) (pC)


     (29)    CM = CM(n, w(l-T)) (pC)


     (30)    (l-L)(1-T) =         -        -
                            PcC       CD       C14/H

In Table 1, domestic and import demands, CD and CM enter the goods

market conditions (1.34) and (1.35).            Labor market equilibrium

requires that household labor supply equals firms' labor demand.
                                         -17-



C.   Balance of Payments

     For each country the current account CA must equal the opposite

of the capital account. The current account is income less absorp-
tion, where income is the sum of output and dividend payments on

claims to foreign equity. Note that this national accounting defi-
nition of income excludes accrued but unconstructed capital gains

on the foreign equity. Since the dividend yield is r* -                          q*/q*,
we write


      (31)    CA =   Q   + (r* -    q*/q*)q*z/n   -
                                                      CD
                                                           -   I   -
                                                                       G   -
                                                                               CM/fl

where Z denotes the per capita number of foreign securities held
domestically. The change in Z is governed by the current account

surplus (or capital account deficit), with


      (32)    Z =    (n/q*)CA   -   nZ


We may note from (32) that the CA will not in general be zero in

the steady state. If the home economy is a net creditor of the
rest of the world (i.e., Z>O), the current account must be in
surplus to allow for widening of the foreign claims for the growing

household. Thus, CA         nZq*/fl > 0. For the case Z<0, the current

account will be in deficit in the steady state.



D. Government
      Government revenues in the current context are simply the

proceeds from proportional labor taxation at rate T.                           Presuming

balanced budget government spending at all points on home goods,

per capita government expenditure is


      (33)    G = TWL
                                   -18-

 Note that we assume that C does not enter into household utility,

 (or less restrictively, that utility from C is additively sepa-

rable from U(S)). In the simulation we take -r as the policy

instrument, with C adjusting to preserve budget balance.


3.   PROPERTIES OF THE MODEL

      The pieces of the model are now in place, and we may turn to

some of the model's important characteristics. Most importantly,

the global economy is Pareto efficient across economies and over

time. For given eótU(.)dt , the              foreign household utility

level U =    f0eótU*(.)dt   is maximized. This fact may be demonstrated
by arguments similar to those in [ 2   ] .   Several relations are key
to this efficiency result. Because of perfect foresight and effi-
cient asset markets, resources are set aside for capital formation
whenever the shadow utility of an extra unit of investment exceeds

the current household marginal utility of consumption of those
resources. Marginal rates of substitution over time equal marginal
rates of transformation within each economy. Moreover, inter-

temporal marginal rates of substitution are equalized across house-
holds in the two countries through household savings behavior.

This equality forces equalization of the marginal rates of trans-
formation at home and abroad.

      The next issue is the subtle problem of solving for the dynamic

paths of adjustment in this model. Judging from the differential
equations in Table 1, it appears the system is an eight-dimensional

non-iinear differential equation system, in K, K*, Z, q, q*, H, H*
and IT.   In fact these eight variables do not provide the minimal

state-space representation of the model, since the dynamic and
                              -19-


static equations may be used to solve for II and q* in terms of

the levels and time derivatives of K, K*, Z, q, H, and H*. In fact,

we have a six-dimensional system.
     If we know at any time the values of these six variables and

the path of anticipated future exogenous variables, the model may
be integrated forward to solve for the future paths of all endogenous
variables. The problem, however, arises that the value of q, H,

and H* are unknown at any time t. As is customary in these models,
the values of these three asset variables are defined not by the

history of the system but by the future paths of certain endogenous
variables. Thus, H equals the discounted value of future wages,
and q equals the discounted value of the firm's future cash flow.
An apparent computational dilemma arises: we must know future

wages to determine H, but we must know H in order to integrate the
system forward to find the future wages.
     Fortunately, the problem may be restated in more conventional

form, as a two-point boundary value problem. The unique H which
equals the discounted value of future wages is also the unique H
from which forward integration of the economy settles down to

a steady state. In other words, the dynamic system is saddlepoint
stable; starting from any but a unique set of q, H and H* the

forward integration diverges from a steady state. Starting from

the point that does converge, the arbitrage conditions on the

 asset prices guarantee that they represent the appropriate dis-
 counted values of other variables.     Unfortunately, there are

 no general analytic methods for finding the initial values of
 H, H* and q that lead to the balanced growth equilibrium.   In the

 simulations described below we have used a numerical method called
                               -20-


"multiple shooting" for solution to the problem. The method is

well known in the physical sciences, but only recently has been

introduced as a technique for solving rational expectations models

(see [12]). Described simply, an initial guess for the three
variables is made, and the model is integrated forward from this

point. The path will be explosive as long as the initial guesses
are not the true values. At a distant terminal date, one assesses
the extent to which the steady-state values have been missed by
forward integration. Newton's method is then used to adjust the

initial guesses so that forward integration will more accurately

approach the steady state. Iteration will provide convergence to

the unique initial values, as long as the starting guess is suffi-
ciently close. The method is "simple" shooting if the forward
integration is made over the whole interval from the initial to

terminal data. Because of the saddlepoint nature of our model

the simple procedure will often fail, as the economy's path diverges
too quickly to permit numerical integration to the terminal date.

Multiple shooting harnesses the explosiveness by dividing the time
horizon into shorter intervals, for which interim guesses of the
predetermined and non-predetermined variables are made. Newton's
method is performed on an extended vector of guesses. Since the
model is no longer integrated forward over the entire time horizon

of the simulation, the explosiveness is kept under control. For

details, see [12].
     One reason to construct a dynamic optimizing growth model is

to examine the entire path of economic variables, and to look beyond
steady-state comparative statics. Indeed in this model no parti-

cular welfare implications emerge from an examination of steady-states
                                                  -21-


because household utility is governed by the entire path of
consumption. Nonetheless a look at the model's steady-state cha-

racteristics provides a helpful reference point against which we
can measure movements caused by particular shocks, and can indicate

where the system will be heading after a disturbance.
     The condition for consumer equilibrium in (23) holds that

full consumption is constant only when the endogenous interest

rate is equal to the fixed rate of pure time preference 6. Thus,

in models of infinitely lived households with additively separable
utility and constant 6, r returns to 6 regardless of the shocks

that hit the economy. Put otherwise, saving is perfectly elastic
at the interest rate 6 in the long run. The equality of r and 6 is the

steady-state modified golden rule of the economy.

     With the long-run interest rate fixed, the steady-state
capital-labor ratio is strictly determined by the production tech-

nology and adjustment costs of firms. Since steady-state growth
requires the rate of capital formation J/ to equal n + d, long-run

q and q* must be high enough to elicit such investment. In the long-
run, q and q* exceed 1.0, and we see from (15) that J/K = n + d

implies
             =   1   +       b(n+d).
     From the asset market equilibrium conditions and i =                                      6, we
may note that            =    0   and 4       0   imply (]V/) =               6 and
 (V*/K*) =       6*.          Let us turn, to the expression for Div/K, with

the goal of showing that steady-state K is uniquely determined by

6 and .   Since Div =              Q
                                       -
                                           wL + q(nK+K)       -
                                                                  I,       and I =   J(l   +


steady-state     Div can be written as                        =   0    -       + (n)       -



Thus, Div/K equals (Q-wL)/K +                     n   -
                                                          (n+d)(1      +    4(n+d)). From the
Euler condition Q = F1L + FKI(, and the labor demand relation
                                               -22-


FL = w, we may further re-write Div/K                 as   FK -   n-   (n+d)(l   +   q(n÷d)).
Long-run equilibrium requires that this equal óq, or that

FK =   (n+ó)   +     (n+d)(l     +   (n+dfl.     Since FK is a function of the

capital-labor ratio, we may find
(7T) =    FK'[(n+ó)          +   (n+d)(l   +   (n+d))].      Obviously, a parallel
expression for (K*/L*) exists.
       Now the product wage is also set by FK condition, since
       =
w =
    FL   g(F) for a function g(g' < 0) defining the factor price
frontier. Per capita human wealth is the capitalization of the

net-of-tax wage flow:


       (34)        Fl =   w(l-T)/(r-n)
       Although the capital-labor ratio and wage are set, the separate
components of K/L, K and L, are yet to be determined. In addition

we must find the steady-state terms of trade, H, and the world dis-

tribution of equity ownership.
       Total world equity wealth is given by qK +                 q*K*/H, with home
wealth qK +q*Z/fl and foreign wealth q*(K*Z*). The level of home

ownership of K*, denoted by Z, is dynamically determined in the
model. It depends on the entire transition path of the two econo-

mies after a disturbance. For example, a transfer payment from
one economy to the other starting from steady-state will not result

in a return to the initial wealth distribution over time, as in

other models with ad hoc savings (see, for example [15]). We
cannot readily solve for steady-state Z analytically, but we can

solve for the remaining steady-state variables for a given 7. We
do this first, and then examine the effects of a shift in Z on the

equilibrium.
                                -23-




L

                                                D




L0




                                                S(fl, Z)

                                                            K
                           K0

         FIGURE 1.    Partial Equilibrium Diagram of
                        the Labor Market


    II




                                              , / QS
                                            /
                                       //
                                                       S(z)

                                  //
    ri0



              //                                       QD
                                                       Q'(Z)


                                                                Q




          FIGURE 2.   Partial Equilibrium Diagram of
                        the Domestic Output Market
                                       -24-



        In the cases where labor is inelastically supplied, i.e., L

we have /t E            so the capital stock per person is fixed by the

arbitrage condition shown earlier. When Z is set, wealth and full
consumption are determined in each country and the equilibrium

relative price, Ti, emerges from the goods market equilibrium condi-

tions, equations (2a) and (2b).

        When leisure enters the utility function, one must look to
the labor market to find, K, K*, L, L*, and II.        Here a set of
diagrams shows the simultaneous determination of K and L.          Consider
the supply and demand for labor at different levels of K, holding
Ti and Z constant, and using the steady-state relationships for q

and 11 that we have so far adduced. Since K/L is fixed by ,         labor
demand (DD) as a function of          is a ray from the origin in Figure 1.
Also, with leisure a normal good, and wealth increasing in K for

given Z and H, labor supply (SS) is a negatively sloped function of
K. An increase in Z shifts the SS schedule down, due to the income

effect on leisure of greater wealth. An increase in II shifts the
SS schedule up, through an income effect and substitution effect
that work in the same direction. Higher H raises the home real wage

by reducing real import prices at any product wage w, thus causing
a substitution effect towards work. Also, higher H reduces the value
of wealth in foreign claims q*Z/H, and thus reduces the demand for

leisure. In sum, the equilibrium level T shifts up with IT and
down with Z.

        Now, output is Q      F[K, L] and by linear homogeneity,
Q =   F[r/L}   .
                   L.   Since Y/L is fixed by ó, steady-state   is linear
in L.     Output market equilibrium for the home good is shown in
                                -25-




Figure 2, again drawn for given .      Output supply rises in H for
reasons just described, while steady-state output demand can be
shown to fall with high 11, given substitution in consumption towards

the foreign good. A transfer towards the home country in the form

of higher Z shifts the QD schedule up, because the home household

has a higher propensity than the foreign household to consume
the home good. We have already seen that a rise in       shifts the

QS schedule up as leisure-taking increases.
     The effect of a transfer payment is illustrated by the dotted

lines. Since QD and QS both shift up, H must rise, while the effect

on total output is ambiguous.

     A similar ambiguity arises in consideration of a balanced-

budget tax increase. We assume throughout that fiscal spending
falls entirely on the home good, so a shift in taxes that raises

C and reduces C tends to increase demand for the home good at given

H. Thus, a tax increase shifts the QD schedule up. The effect of
the higher tax on QS is of course ambiguous, as the income effect

on labor supply (or leisure taking) raises QS while the substitution
effect tends to reduce QS• We assume a fairly high elasticity of
substitution between leisure and goods (see Appendix 2) so that

the substitution effect dominates, and QS shifts up. Again i1

unambiguously rises while t may rise or fall. Note importantly
that this steady-state treatment is incomplete, as changes in C

may induce shifts in Z over an adjustment path, causing further shifts

in the QD and QS schedule. We cannot avoid the dynamic analysis,
then, in determining the full steady-state results.
                              -26-


     It should be clear for the tax and transfer problems as well

as the technology shock that the results depend crucially on
differential consumption behavior at home and abroad and on the

nature of labor supply. To see how these factors affect the paths
of adjustment we will simulate the model under a variety of

assumptions, contrasting the cases of (1) elastic versus perfectly

inelastic labor supply; and (2) imperfect versus perfect sub-

stitutability (i.e., fixed H) in consumption. The case of perfect
substitutability is a special case of identical household pre-

ferences at home and abroad. Notice that for the tax, transfer

and technology experiments we may readily isolate the pure effects
of labor supply or varied tastes across countries.



4. SIMULATION RESULTS
     This section of the paper examines the dynamic paths of

the variables of the model via a simulation study. The simulations
show the dynamic effects of (1) a transfer of financial

capital from the foreign to the home country; (2) an unanticipated
fifty percent balanced-budget reduction in the foreign labor tax

rate; and (3) a neutral five-percent improvement in foreign
technology. In each case we show the sensitivity of the dynamic
path to the inclusion of leisure in the utility function and to
the presence of two goods in the model. These are features which

have often been excluded from other studies. See Appendix 2
for a list of parameter values and initial steady-state values

of variables used in the simulations.
                                        -27-




CASE 1: Transfer of Equity Claims to Home Economy

       The first set of simulations treats the case of a transfer of

financial claims of foreign capital from foreign equity holders
to home equity holders. We model, for illustration, a sizable
transfer of claims, equalling 40 percent of the foreign holdings

of foreign capital. Note that because of the predominance of

human wealth, this transfer (at initial prices) represents only a
5.6 percent reduction in the wealth of the foreign country.

       To begin with the simplest application of the model, consider
the case where the home and foreign good are identical, and where

leisure does not enter the utility function, so that labor is in-

elastically supplied. After the transfer, the international economy
moves immediately to a new steady state: the 5.6 percent wealth
decrease abroad leads to a proportionate decline in foreign con-
suniption while the wealth increase at home leads to a proportionate

rise in home consumption. The fact that the economies adjust

immediately to the new steady-state growth path follows from the
assumption of constant and equal rates of time discount across
economies. At the initial interest rate, home consumption rises by
dC =   (6n)q*dZ,      while foreign consumption falls by an equal amount.
Since world output supply remains fixed, total demand continues to
equal total supply at the initial interest rate. Clearly,
Div/qK =   r   =   Div*Iq*K   continues to hold, so equity prices and the
capital stock remain in equilibrium.

       The only additional effect of the change in Z is a slight ad-

justment in the composition of the balance of payments. With the
                                   -28-


                             TABLE 2
CASE 1:   FINANCIAL TRANSFER FROM FOREIGN COUNTRY TO HOME COUNTRY:
                      ELASTIC LABOR SUPPLY




                          One Good Case

                            Period
                     0        10      Steady-State
           q       -1.0       0.0          0.0
           q*       1.0       0.0          0.0
           K        0.0      -2.5         -2.8
           K*       0.0       2.5          2.7
                    4.3       4.2          4.2

          pC*      -4.9      -4.8         -43
          L        -2.2      -2.8         -2.8
          L*        2.1       2.6          2.6




                          Two Good Case

                            Period
                     0        10      Steady-State
          q        -0.2       0.0          0.0
          q*        0.3       0.0          0.0
          K         0.0      -0.8         -0.9
                    0.0       1.0          1.1
          PC       -5.0       4.7          4.7
          pC*      -6.2      -5.8         -5.7
          L        -1.0      -0.9         -0.9
          L*        1.2       1.1          1.1
          IT        4.5       5.2          5.4




This table shows the effect of a financial transfer from the
foreign-country to the home country equal to 40 percent of the
initial foreign capital stock. Variables are measured as per-
centage deviations from the initial steady-state growth path.
                                 -29-



home capital stock unchanged, home GNP rises by the change in the

service account rq*dZ. Consumption rises in proportion to the

wealth transfer, with dC = (cSn)q*dZ.     Since 5 =   r   in equilibrium,
dC =   (rn)q*dZ.   The trade balance thus worsens in the amount

(rn)q*dZ as consumption rises, while the service account improves

by r*q*dZ. On net, the capital account of the wealth-receiving
economy improves by the sum of the service account surplus and trade

account deficit: nq*dz. In other words, per capita consumption
does not rise as much as GNP, and the current account moves into

surplus. The per capita saving nq*dZ reflects the necessary widen-
ing of home holdings of foreign equity required to keep Z constant
for future household generations. Note that the current account

surplus is matched by an equal deficit abroad.
       In summary, the transfer in this case simply affects who con-

sumes, with no effect on how much output is produced or where it

is produced. The result will change with alternative specifications
of household utility. For example, if as in Obstfeld [14]., the rate
of time discount is a declining function of instantaneous utility, the

transferring economy will reduce consumption by more than the trans-

fer, in order to build up wealth to the pre-transfer level.

       When there are two goods, but still no leisure, the only result
which differs is that the composition of world spending shifts when

wealth is reallocated. So long as the marginal propensity to
consume home goods is higher at home than abroad, the home terms

of trade improves after the transfer. At the initial terms of trade,
the transfer raises demand for home goods and lowers demand for
                                   -30-




foreign goods, while supply of each good is fixed. Thus, a terms
of trade change is needed to equilibrate these markets. In our

simulation, the required change in II is 2.5 percent. The change

occurs immediately, and again there are no subsequent dynamic adjust-
ments. The rise in spending at home is just enough to induce a

current account surplus of n(q*/rT)dZ, which equals steady-state
widening for dZ. Hence    =   0   after the transfer.   Clearly, there
is no one-to-one relationship between the terms of trade and the
current account balance, as is often supposed.
     When leisure enters the utility function, the transfer induces
income effects on leisure in both countries, and changes in labor

supply. This alters the profitability of investment and eventually

changes per capita capital stocks. We first consider the one-good
case. The simulation results are recorded in Table 2.

     As transfer recipient, the home country consumes more leisure
and on impact the labor supply falls by 2.2 percent; the donor

abroad increases labor supply by 2.1 percent. With current and
expected future labor supply diminished at home, current and

future short-run capital-labor ratios rise above the steady-state
value. This higher capital intensity translates into a decline in

earnings per share. As a result, the shadow price of capital, q,
falls by one percent and investment slumps. Abroad, higher labor

supply reduces the capital-labor ratio, raises q* by one percent
and boosts investment.

     Unlike the earlier cases, the one-good model with leisure

exhibits dynamic adjustment after the transfer. Most importantly,
the shifts in labor supply cause a reallocation of world capital.
                               -31-




At home, the capital stock is too high at the outset, given the

rise in leisure; and abroad it is too low. A foreign investment boom

results, which is financed in part by domestic purchases of foreign

equity (in practice, the purchases could show up in portfolio
investment or direct foreign investment). Thus, Z>O after the
transfer. Over ten periods, the investment slump at home draws down

the capital stock by 2.5 percent, and the expansion abroad raises
the capital stock by 2.5 percent. The model approaches a new steady

state as the capital stock movements brings the capital-labor
ratios (but not capital-potential labor ratios) back toward their
technically determined steady state values and the equity prices
recover. With Z equal to .16 before the transfer and .48 upon the

transfer, steady-state Z rises to .51.

     With two goods produced and leisure consumed, we find a mode-

ration of the swings in labor supply, investment and capital forma-
tion. The results of the simulation are recorded in Table 2.

Upon impact the income effects on leisure remain but the change in
the locus of spending in favor of the recipient country leads to

more spending on the home good and a 4.5 percent terms of trade
 improvement. This increase in TI raises the consumption wage.    Given

 our assumptions on the instantaneous utility function, the substi-
 tution effect of the real wage increase dominates the income effect,

 and the fall in the labor supply due to the transfer is moderated.

 Abroad the lower consumption wage leads to a substitution toward

 leisure and the rise in labor supply abroad is diminished. As a

 consequence, the movements in equity prices, investment and capital
                                  -32-




accumulation are smaller than in the one good case. The consump-

tion switch toward the home country is now more powerful because
the wealth transfer is not muted by asset price swings.

     To summarize, a wealth transfer leads to a one-shot increase in

home consumption and one-shot decline in foreign consumption in the
no leisure case. If home and foreign goods are imperfect substi-

tutes, the transfer will raise the home terms of trade assuming a

higher home marginal propensity to consume domestic goods. If
leisure is a normal good, the transfer will result in a fall in man-
hours worked at home, and a rise abroad. Since the capital-labor
ratio must remain constant in equilibrium, the capital stock even-

tually falls at home and rises abroad. q provides the signal for
a shift in investment. In the one-good case q falls 1.0 percent on

impact and in the two-good case, 0.2 percent. In general, the pre-
sence of two goods moderates the investment effect, since the home

country's terms of trade improvement reduces the leisure-taking

effect.

     When a transfer is announced in period zero to occur at
some future date there are no essential differences from the case

of an unanticipated transfer. An expected transfer changes wealth
at the time of the announcement by the present value of the trans-

fer and is equivalent to a current transfer with this value.

The paths of consumption, accumulation, labor supply and prices in
the case of an anticipated transfer are thus the same as for the

corresponding current transfer.
                                -33-


CASE 2: Unanticipated Balanced-Budget Tax Decrease
     Next  we consider a reduction in the proportional labor tax
rate in the foreign country from 36 percent to 18 percent. Govern-
ment spending   adjusts endogenously in order to maintain budget
balance.

     As in the case of the transfer, a tax cut induces dynamic ad-

justment only if the labor supply if variable.J Thus in the no-leisure,

one-good case the decrease in foreign government spending is exactly
offset by a 21.1 percent rise in private consumption triggered by
the jump in after-tax human wealth. With consumption higher at

all points in time, the marginal rate of substitution in consumption
between any two points is unchanged.    In the home country no changes

occur. In the no-leisure two-good case, the only modification is that
the transfer of spending from the government to the private sector
worsens the terms of trade for the foreign country (TI rises by

20 percent) because by assumption government spending falls only
on home goods while private spending falls on both goods. Full

consumption at home and intertemporal marginal rates of substitu-
tion are unchanged, but the composition of home spending shifts

toward foreign goods. Through a higher consumption wage, home
wage earners share with the foreign wage earners the resources no

longer taxed by the foreign government.

     When leisure enters the utility function, a reduction in the
foreign labor tax leads to a higher net wage, with a subsitution

effect towards leisure and an offsetting income effect. In our

study the substitution effect dominates because of the presence
of non-labor income and an elasticity of substitution greater than
                                   -34-


                                 TABLE 3

    CASE 2:     BALANCED-BUDGET TAX DECREASE IN FOREIGN COUNTRY




                              One Good Case

                                Period
                         0        10      Steady-State
          q            -0.6       0.1         0.0
          q*            3.0       0.4         0.0
          K             0.0      -0.8        -0.4
                        0.0       8.3         9.6
          p C          -1.4       0.1         0.6
          p*C          20.9      22.3        22.8




                              Two Good Case

                                Period
                         0        10      Steady-State
          q             0.5       0.1         0.0
          q*            1.1       0.2         0.0
          K             0.0       1.7         2.1
          K*            0.0       3.4         4.1
                       -1.1      -0.3        -0.2
                       20.8      22.1        22.4
          pC*
          L             2.0       2.1         2.1
          L*            4.0       4.0         4.0
          II           21.6      22.2        22.3




This table shows the effects of a balanced budget tax decrease
of fifty percent in the foreign country. Variables are measured
as percentage deviations from the initial steady-state growth
pat h.
                               -35-


                                              6/
one between leisure and goods consumption.         Labor supply initially
rises abroad by 8.7 percent, driving the capital-labor ratio

below its steady-state level. With a high current and future expected

marginal product of capital, the equity price jumps by 3 percent
and investment rises.

     The transmission of economic effects to the home country is

quite limited in this simulation as is clear in Table 3, but the
channels of transmission are important so we trace them in some
detail. While in the no-leisure case the consumption increase

matched the government spending decrease abroad, now a world excess
demand develops at the initial interest rate. Although output rises

with the higher labor supply, the rise in investment and the rise
in consumption ensure an excess demand for goods. In this case,
the interest rate rises by 30 basis points. With interest rates

high, future profits are discounted more heavily and home equity
prices fall by a slight .6 of one percent, so that investment dips
at home. Households see the temporary rise in interest rates and

postpone leisure and consumption. Upon impact, the labor supply
is one half of one percent higher. With income up and investment

down at home, the capital account turns to deficit as home country

residents lend to foreigners by purchasing equity. This helps
finance the capital stock expansion abroad.

     Over time, the capital stock rises abroad and falls slightly

at home, until the steady-state capital-labor ratio is restored.

     Once again, when two goods are produced and leisure is con-
sumed there is a moderation in the swings in labor supply, invest-

ment and capital accumulation. The foreign substitution of goods
                               -36-


for leisure remains, but the transfer of purchasing power from the

government to the private sector leads to a 22.6 percent worsening

of the foreign terms of trade because the foreign private sector
consumes some home goods. The foreign consumption wage does not
rise as sharply as in the one good case because of the terms of

trade effect, so the increases in labor supply, equity prices, and
investment are moderated.

     At home, the terms of trade effect adds a channel of transmis-

sion. With a higher consumption wage, leisure falls and the labor
supply rises by 2 percent. Instead of a decline in home equity
prices and depressed investment which we saw in the one-good case,

the opposite now occurs. Labor in both economies shares the bene-
fit of the tax cut, and capital stocks rise both at home and abroad.

The increased world savings required to finance the rise in
accumulation results from an initial rise in real interest rates.



CASE 3: Technological Improvement in the Foreign Country
     When an economy or group of economies such as the NIC's

adopt more productive technologies and more rigid capital accumula-
tion, what effects will be transmitted to other countries? Will

the improving countries capture all the proceeds of their techno-

logical advance or will other economies also benefit? In particular,
what will happen to the world-wide distribution of productive
capacity and to factor returns in the other economies? We can
use our model to answer to these questions in the context of a

perfectly efficient two-country environment. Obviously, a
                                -37-


realistic study of OECD adjustment to NIC growth will require

careful treatment of special factors in semi-industrialized nations.
     We begin with an initial steady-state in which foreign

technology is 5 percent less efficient (in the Hicks-neutral sense)
than in the home country. We then shock the global economy with

a five percent Hicks-neutral improvement in foreign technical

efficiency, that restores technological parity between the two
countries. The results of the simulation are recorded in Table 4.

     Upon impact foreign output and the foreign factor returns
rise by five percent. At the initial world interest rate, a rise

in the foreign equity price and a rise in investment would be

needed to eliminate arbitrage possibilities in world equity markets.
In the foreign country, with both equity prices and wages up,
higher wealth exerts an immediate upward pressure on consumption.
The rise in foreign investment and consumption at the initial

rate exceeds the production gain. There results on impact an
excess of world investment over world saving at the initial interest
rate, requiring a rise in the world interest rate.

     In the one good case, the rise in the world interest rate

is the sole channel for transmission of the shock to the home

country. With no leisure-taking in the model, the technology
shock will have the following effects.   Foreign equity prices are
bid up while high interest rates cause a reduction in the home

equity price. In the home country, the depressed equity price

discourages investment and the capital-labor ratio begins to

decline. Foreign investment jumps as entrepreneurs are encouraged
to take advantage of the enhanced technological ability, the
                               -38-



capital-labor ratio begins to rise. At home, the high interest
rates encourage households to postpone consumption to take advan-

tage of strong financial returns. Strictly speaking, the high
interest rates depress human wealth and home equity prices; the
resulting fall in financial wealth leads to lower home consumption.

With home saving up and home investment down, the savings are
channeled to the foreign country as home savers buy foreign equity.

The home country runs a capital account surplus and provides

capital that assists in the foreign building effort.

     As time passes, the foreign capital-labor ratio approaches

a new, higher steady-state value. The growing foreign capital-
labor ratio depresses the marginal product of capital, reduces
investment demand, and puts downward pressure on the world interest
rate. Eventually the fall in interest rates and the low home

capital-labor ratio, and the home capital-labor ratio recovers to

its initial level.
     With leisure in the one-good model, the results are modified
only slightly. Table 4 reports the results of this simulation.

The technology shock in the foreign country has three effects on

labor supply: first, the wealth increase encourages leisure-taking;
second, the interest rate increase leads to a postponement of

leisure-taking; and third the higher wage discourages leisure-taking.
 In our simulation the last two effects predominate and the foreign

 labor supply rises on impact by 1.8 percent. At home, depressed
wealth discourages leisure-taking, the interest-rate effect leads

 to leisure postponement and the wage effect is, of course, absent.

 Labor supply rises by a modest one-half of one percent. In both
                                 -39-



places, the higher labor supply boosts the marginal product of
capital. At home this limits the fall in q and investment, while
abroad it adds to the rise in q and investment. At home, q falls

on impact by .6 of one percent, investment falls by 4.1 percent
and over the first ten years, the capital stock falls by about

1 percent. Abroad, q rises by 3 percent, investment jumps up
16.6 percent and in ten years time, the capital stock is 8.3 percent

higher. Households at home own 20 percent of the initial foreign
capital stock. A decade of home capital account surpluses raises

their foreign equity holdings to 25 percent of the initial foreign
equity holdings to 25 percent of the initial foreign capital stock.

     In the new steady-state, after capital stocks are fully
adjusted and equity prices return to their initial levels, the

foreign capital stock rises 9.6 percent and foreign consumption

6.6 percent. Abroad, the product wage is permanently boosted by
the technological shock itself so labor supply remains 2.8 percent

above its initial level. At home the capital stock never quite
returns to its initial level because accumulation of home-held

foreign equity leaves wealth and leisure-taking somewhat higher.
The capital-labor ratio in production, however, must return to
                            7/
the initial steady-state.
     With two goods produced and leisure consumed, the terms of

trade provide an added channel of transmission and strikingly

 different results. What we find is that home equity prices and

 investment need not be depressed by the foreign technology shock.

      When foreign technology improves, output and factor incomes
 rise. An excess supply of the foreign good develops at the initial
                                      -40-



terms of trade, so p/p's rises by 3.9 percent upon impact. The
change in the terms of trade ensures that home labor shares

directly in the technological gain as cheaper imports push up
the consumption wage (w/p) by 1.5 percent. The rise in the real
wage at home causes a substitution away from leisure at home and

the fall in leisure-taking abroad is sharply moderated. Unlike
the one-good case where home labor supply and the capital stock

fall in the steady-state, the rise in the consumption wage ensures

that both the labor supply and capital stock will rise in the
steady-state. We see in Table 4 that there is a .7 percent rise
in each rather than a .5 percent fall as before. Abroad, the extra

leisure-taking limits the steady-state rise in the labor supply

and capital stock to .9 percent and 7.7 percent respectively.

Since   the home country      capital stock must ultimately grow,
the presence of adjustment costs in accumulation ensures that the

process of capital accumulation begins immediately.

        Over   time,   both capital stocks grow, though foreign accumula-

tion is at a far more rapid clip. Home households, as before,

purchase       foreign   equity and the home country runs a capital account

surplus    but   the presence of home investment requirements sharply

limits capital flows. As the foreign accumulation pushes up
foreign output, the terms of trade shift widens to an ultimate

foreign deterioration of 7 percent.

        To summarize, improved technology in one country leads to

rapid capital accumulation in that country and may change the
climate for investment in other economies. Effects on investment

 in the non-improving country and the size of capital account
                               -41-


                              TABLE 4

CASE 3: TECHNOLOGICAL IMPROVEMENT IN FOREIGN COUNTRY




                           One Good Case

                             Period
                      0        10     Steady-State
         q          -0.5       0.0         0.0
         q*          3.0       0.4        0.0
         K           0.0      -0.8       -0.5
         K*          0.0       8.0        9.6
         PC         -1.3       0.2         0.5

         pC*         4.7       6.2         6.6
         L           0.5      -0.4       -0.5
         L*          1.8       2.7        2.8
         z           0.0      25.4       28.2




                           Two Good Case

                             Period
                      0        10     Steady-State
         q           0.1       0.0         0.0
         q*          2.0       0.0         0.0
         K           0.0       0.5         0.7
         K*          0.0       6.3         7.7
                    -0.2       0.0         0.1

         pC*         3.7       6.5         7.0
         L           0.5       0.7         0.7
         L*          1.1       1.1         0.9
         11          3.9       6.3         7.0
         Z           0.0       4.9         6.3



This table shows the effects of a 5 percent Hicks-neutral techno-
logical improvement in the foreign country restoring technological
parity between the two countries. Variables are measured as
percentage deviations from the initial steady-state growth path.
                               -42-


imbalances are shown to depend on the extent of goods substitutabi-

lity and labor supply elasticity. These results emphasize that
discussions of NIC-OECD interactions should focus as much on the
process of world capital accumulation as on traditional issues of
trade barriers and import penetration.



5.   CONCLUSION

     In this paper we analyze a two-country growth model featuring

optimizing agents with perfect foresight. The paper emphasizes
the role of asset prices as aggregating information over future

events, providing signals for current decision-making, and
serving as a channel of transmission of shocks from one economy
to the other. The model illustrates many facets of the process

of international adjustment. We present simulations of a finan-
cial transfer from equity holders in one country to the other,

a labor tax decrease in one country and a neutral technological

improvement in one country. In each case we consider the importance

of imperfect substitutability of home and foreign goods, and of
the household's labor-leisure. Two key relative prices are
emphasized, the interest rate, as regulator of the savings-invest-
ment balance, and the terms of trade, as a crucial determinant
of the local supply of labor and the global composition of spending.

     In the case of a transfer, anticipated or not, or an unantici-

pated labor tax change, capital accumulation is altered only when
income effects on leisure push labor supplies and capital produc-

tivity. Otherwise, these events merely shift purchasing power
from one economy to the other, change international spending
                               -43-


patterns, and move the terms of trade. In the case of a technolo-
gical improvement, interest rate movements and relative price
changes lead to a new pattern of capital accumulation in both

countries. The international relocation of capital depends impor-
tantly on the strength of terms of trade effects that arise when

the pattern of spending shifts, and on labor supply movements that

accompany spending shifts.

     Many extensions and applications of this model are already

completed, and others are planned. Sachs [l6 includes oil as an
intermediate input in production, adds an oil-exporting region

(OPEC) and examines the effects of an oil price increase on growth

in the two importing economies. Money is treated as an additional
financial asset, to study the interaction of monetary policies,

exchange rates, and the accumulation process in a global setting.
                                              -44-

                                       Problem
Appendix 1: The Household Maximization


        Consumers maximize


A.l)        JU[C(CD CM l-LflLfetdt

subject to the constraint

            A =   (r-n)A   -        -            -   wL
A.2)                           CD        CM/fl

                                                       and l-L.
We assume that C is homogeneous of degree one in C, CM
                                              is homogeneous of degree one in H
Therefore the price index c
and w. First order conditions for the consumer are:

            U'(C)C1 =      A
 A.3)


 A.4)       U' (C)C2 =     (l/fl)A

 A.5)        U' (C)C3 = wA


 A.6)        -i/A   = (r-6)
                                    derivative of c(.) with respect to the
 where C is the partial
 th argument. Multiplying the first three of these equations by
                                                                  the three we find:
           and (l-L) respectively and summing
 CD, CM

                                          +                  =
                                                                 ACD
                                                                       +
                                                                           (1/ll) +   w(l-L)]
  A.7)       U' (C)[CC + C2Cj                  C3(l-L)I
                                                             consumption C, in terms of
  The price index expressing aggregate

  the domestic good is PC
                                     =               1/fl,   w). The partial derivatives

                    =                      =              and c3 =     (l-L)/C     by standard
  of       are          CD/C,       c2         CM/C
                                                                               +                +
  duality theory. By Euler's equation, PC = (CD/C)l                                (CM/C)1/ll
                                                     left-hand bracket equals C by
   ((1-L)/C)W.      In equation (A.7),
                                                     -45-


Euler's equation applied to aggregate consumption, and the right-
hand bracket is pC as just derived. Equation (A.7) can thus
be rewritten to relate aggregate consumption to its price index.


A.8)         U'(C)C =
                             ApC
        or

             U'(C) =


Time differentiating (A.8) and substituting equation (A.6) we get


A.9)                    C =      (r-)          -




When U(C) =       C10,       we get

                                       p
A.lO)             = (r-6)        -     —
             cr

          p
or adding —s- to both sides


             pC     =
                        r -      tS       - (l-a)p c /p c
A.lO')


Let the rate of change of the price index Ic/Pc given to the
household at time t, be 'Y.                        Integration yields the condition for
consumption expressed in domestic goods at time t:



A.ll)        pc(t) C(t) =              pc(e"                -   n   -   6   -
                                                                                (l-o)(s))dsdt
Also we have the requirement that wealth equals the present value

of lifetime consumption

                                      t
A.12)        A(O)       f    e            r)dsP() C(t) dt
                        Jo
                                                  -46-



Using (A.ll) in (A.12) we get


A.13)             C(O) =          (O)   A(O)

with
                                  rtr(01) (r(s)             -         +     - fl1
           l/(O) =        e
                              -
                                  o                                                 dt
                     Jo

Hence the time path of               is described by differentiation


A.14)        =     - 1(o-l)(r-)
                             0
                                                      +
                                                           - , limet
                                                                t*
                                                                                =




The path of consumption over time is governed by equation
(A.14) and the condition that p(t) C(t) =                                 A(t). The consumer

problem is reduced to a two-point boundary value problem with A
predetermined at time t and                 ?i   non-predetermined.
        When U(C) = Ln C, a =           1         and the non-predetermined variable

  is a constant equal to c5 -                    n.       In this case consumption is

proportional to wealth, p(t) C(t) =                             (-n)A(t).
                                  -47-



   APPENDIX 2: SIMULATION PARAMETERS AND STEADY-STATE VALUES


                              Par am e t e r S


            d, d* = 0.08                         depreciation rate
            6, 6* = 0.09                         rate of time preference
            n, n = 0.02                          labor force growth rate
            b, b* = 2. 00                        adjustment cost parameter
                                                  in investment
            a, a* = 0.75                         labor share
            Ti,   fl = 0.60                      expenditure share on domestic
                                                  good
            8, 0* =    1.00                      neutral technology parameter
            T,    T* = 0.36                      initial labor tax rate
            0,    G = 2.00                       elasticity of substitution
                                                  between leisure and produced
                                                  goods

                       Initial Steady-State Values*

            One Good Case                            Two Good Case
                   =
                   1.20                                      1.20
              q                                       q
                   =
                   1.20                                      1.20
              q*                                      q*
              K    =
                   0.87                               K    = 1.07
              K*   =
                   0.89                               K*   =   L08
              L = 0.62                                L    =   0.77
              L* = 0.64                               L*   =   0.77
              Z  = 0.16                               Z    =   0.20
              R = 0.09                                R    =   0.09
                   = 0.61                                  =   0.63
            PcC                                      PcC
                   =   0.58                                    0.59
           pC*                                      pC*
              w    = 0.82                             w    = 0.82
              w  =
                       0.82                           w*
                                                         =
                                                               0.82
                                                               0.16
              I        0.13                           I
              1* =     0.14                           1* =     0.17
              H =      7.46                           H =      7.46
              H* =     7.46                           H* =     7.46
                                                      P1 =     1.03
                                                         =     0.21
                                                      CM
                                                           = 0.31
                                                      CD
                                                           = 0.19
                                                      C    = 0.29
                                                      C
*These values describe the initial steady-state states for the
 transfer and labor tax simulations. For the technology shock,
 with 0* set at .95 initially, the initial steady-state is
 slightly different.
                                  -48-



                               FOOTNOTES

1/ This procedure is an elaborated form of Newton's method, fully
    described in [12]. A summary description of the method is
    provided in Section 3 of the text.

2/ In the absence of taxation on corporate or non-labor income,
    the Modigliani-Miller Theorem assures us that our financing
    assumption is harmless, and that any mix of financing through
    debt, new equity, and retained earnings will give the same
   results.

3/ We assume in the simulations that the function C(C, CM l-L)
    in the utility function is a nested function which is CES between
    leisure and an aggregate of produced goods (with elasticity of
    substitution 2) and that the aggregate for produced goods is

   Cobb-Douglas,            (with n =    .6).
4/ Without convergence, the improper integral does not exist. For
    example, on non-convergent paths, the discounted value of future
    dividends approaches infinity.
5/ In the no leisure case, the steady-state change occurs on impact.
    The steady-state change in government spending is dG* = w*L*dT*
    and with interest rates set by the rate of time preference the
    steady-state change in human wealth is dH* = (w* ldT*

   In the one good case, the fall in foreign government spending is exactly
   matched by a rise in foreign private consumption (caused by raised
   human wealth)                                (*n)(*)dT = -dG.
                  dC* =     (*n)dA*
                                  =       (*n)dH*
   No changes occur at home. This effect occurs at the time of the
   shock, none of the prices in the model change and the steady-state
   is reached instantly.
   In the two good case, the change in foreign aggregate consumption
   is the same as above but the transfer of spending from the govern-
   ment to the private sector worsens the foreign terms of trade
   (because government spending falls only on home goods while private
   consumption is split between the two goods).

6/ On the importance of the substitution elasticity for labor supply
—
    decisions,   see [3].

7/ This case makes clear the importance of perfect foresight in
—
    response to macroeconomic shocks. When q* rises and q falls, all
                                               of capital abroad
    agents anticipate the eventual accumulation
    and the temporary decumulation at home (they foresee a falling
    marginal product of capital abroad and expect capital losses,
    they foresee a rising marginal product of capital at home and
    expect capital gains). As a result, equity prices and investment
                               -49-


do not move as sharply as they would if agents mistook the
                                                           changes
as permanent. A comparable model with static expectations rather
than perfect foresight is likely to imply a greater vulnerability
of the home country to the foreign technology shock. With adjust-
ment costs related to investment
                                 ratios, perfect foresight presents
unnecessary adjustment costs in both countries.
                                   -50-



                                REFERENCES


 1. Abel, Andrew, 1978, "Investment and The Value of Capital,"
          Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

 2. Abel, Andrew and Olivier Blanchard, 1980, "An Intertemporal
          Equilibrium Model of Saving and Investment," Harvard Univer-
          sity Discussion Paper No. 739.

 3. Atkinson, Anthony and Joseph Stiglitz, 1980, Lectures in Public
          Economics, McGraw Hill.

 4. Blanchard, Olivier, 1979, "Dynamic Effects of a Balanced Budget
          Change in Spending, The Case of Flexible Prices," manuscript,
          Harvard University.
 5.   Buiter, Willem, 1979, "Time Preference and International Lending
           and Borrowing in an Overlapping Generations Model," Working
           Paper No. 352, National Bureau of Economic Research.
 6.   Fisher, Stanley and Jacob Frenkel, 1972, "Investment, The Two-Sector
           Model and Trade in Debt and Capital Goods," Journal of
           International Economics.

 7. __________, 1974, "Interest Rate Equalization and Patterns of
          Production, Trade and Consumption in a Two Country Growth
         Model," Economic Record.

 8. __________, 1974, "Economic Growth and Stages of the Balance of
         Payments," in Free Trade, Stability and Macroeconomics, edited
         by Horwich and Samuelson, New York.

 9. Hamada, Koichi, 1966, "Economics Growth and Long-Run Capital
         Movements," Yale Economic Essays, Spring.

10. Hayashi, Fumio, 1979, "The q Theory of Investment: A Neoclassical
          Interpretation," manuscript, Harvard University.
11. Jorgenson, Dale, 1963, "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior,"
          American Economic Review.

      Lipton, David, James Poterba, Jeffrey Sachs, and Lawrence Summers,
           1980, "Multiple Shooting in Rational Expectations Models,"
           Technical Working Paper No. 3, National Bureau of Economic
           Research.
13.   Lucas, Robert, 1967, "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply,"
           Journal of Political Economy.

14. Obstfeld, Maurice, 1980, "Macroeconomic Policy and World Welfare
          under Flexible Exchange Rates," Discussion Paper No. 63,
          Columbia University.
                                       -51-




    15.   Ruffin, Roy, 1979, "Growth and the Long-Run Theory of International
               Capital Movements," American Economic Review.

    16. Sachs, Jeffrey, 1980, "Energy and Growth Under Flexible Exchange
              Rates: A Simulation Study," in The International Transmission
              of Economic Disturbances under Flexible Rates, edited by
F             J. Bhandari and B. Putnam, forthcoming.
    17. Tobin, James, 1969, "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary
              Theory," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.

    18. Treadway, Arthur, 1969, "On Rational Entrepreneurial Behavior and
              the Demand for Investment," Review of Economic Studies.
