                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SYMMETRIC SUBSTITUTION MATRICES
                     IN ASSET DEMAND SYSTEMS


                         David S. Jones


                      Working Paper No. 5Th




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Canridge    MA 02138

                          October   1980




This paper is part of the NBER's   research program in Financial
Markets and Monetary Economics.    Any opinions, findings or conclu—
sions expressed herein are those   of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of   the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #574
                                                               October, 1980




          Symmetric   Substitution Matrices in Asset Demand Systems

                                  ABSTRACT



    In this paper, necessary and sufficient conditions for an asset
substitution matrix to be symmetric for all distributions of rates of
return   are derived. It is found that symmetry in this context is
essentially equivalent to the proposition that the von Neumann—Morgenstern
utility function displays either constant absolute or constant relative
risk aversion, depending upon whether the substitution matrix is defined
in terms of arithmetic or geometric rates of return.




                                                   David S. Jones
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Northwestern University
                                                   Evanston, Illinois 60201

                                                   (312) 492—5690
ytinetric Substitution Matrices in Asset Demand Systems*


I. Introduction
          Consider the generic single-pericxl portfolio choice problem
in which an investor seeks to allocate wealth "W0,' among "k" alternative
assets so as to maximize the expected utility of end-of--period wealth.
Denoting the amount of money invested in the th asset by A1 in the absence
of transactions costs this problem may be formally written as:

                                    k
(1)        maximize E {u[E1A R.]}



                              ii
                              k
           subject to: E A. = W0


where     E C.         = the expectation operator,
           U [•]       = a von Neumann - Morgenstern   utility function
                         displayiug non—satiation and risk aversion
                         (i.e., U > 0 and U"< 0), and
                       = the randan gross after ta rate of return per
                        dollar invested in the i asset.
      It will prove convenient below to parameter ize the randan rates of
return     in the form:
(2)       (.El-I-.
           1     1
             E1 +           + 5c.

where              the net rate of return per dollar invested in the th aset,
            1           1
                             and
                   a   zero mean randan variable definitiorially set equal to
                   the prediction error in i.
      Subetituting expression (2) into (1), we can in principle solve
the portfolio choice problem for the optimai asset demands A1. These
                                    —2—


asset dands are generally of the form:
(3) A = al[,...,rk ; 1) ; W0]
where       =a   vector of parameters which ccziletely characterize the
              joint probability distribution of (5,... ,x).
      The asset substitution matrix US" is, by definition, the Jacobian
of the systen of asset dand equations (3) with respect to the vector
of net rates of return. Thus, the typical elanent of S is:
(4)        S EES. .1=   1


Without prior information about either the form of the utility function
U [.] and/or the joint probability distribution of rates of return preciously
little can be said about the structure of S other than that each of its
columns sum to zero and that its diagonals are likely to be positive.1
This lack of knowledge about the structure of S is sanetirnes not well
appreciated. For example, it is traditional in the monetary econa'nics
literature to say that asset "i" is a substitute (ccinp]2xnent) to asset "j
if the sign of     is negative (positive)? In general, however, these
concepts are not well defined because the sign of   need not be the
same as the sign of     for i j . Thus, we might have the confusing
result that asset "i" is a substitute for asset "j" but that "j" is a
canp1nent to "i".
        One situation in which the above ambiguity does not arise is when
the substitution matrix is snietric. Under s'ninetr'            =   S.   implying
that the cross yield effects between two assets are equal and therefore
of the same sign.
        Syrrinetry of the substitution matrix not only permits one to define
asset substitutability and canplanentarity unambiguously, it has useful
 npirical implications as well. Gramlich and Kalchbrenfler (1970) were
 the earliest to observe the fact that syrrrnetry of the substitution matrix
                                   —3—

may   facilitate the estimation of systarts of asset dnaiid equations which
are linear in expected rates of return. To appreciate this fact, consider
the following sinplified vector systan of asset duand equations

          *
        A =   (Br+d)    •W0




where B is a k x k matrix of coefficients       and d is   a k x 1 vector   of   co-

efficients. In general, there are    k2 -   1   independent paramaters to be
estimated after allowances are made for the balance sheet constraint.            If
the   substitution matrix B.W0 is syrrmetric, however, the number of independent
parameters is reduced to (k2-i- k -2)/2. For k =      5,   this results in a decline
in the number of coefficients to be estimated fran 24 to 14
      Symrtetry restrictions on the substithticn Iwftri x have heen usfully
anploy&1 in npirica1 estimations of systans of asset driands by Gramlich
arid Kalchbrenner (1970), and Hendershott (1977).          Smith (1978)
has criticized this practice for apparently lacking theoretical justification4.
The purpose of the present paper is to provide a theoretical justification
for iirosing syirmetry restrictions on the substitution matrix within the
context of the portfolio choice nvdel discussed above. Specifically, in
Section II of this paper we shall derive necessary and sufficient conditions
for the substitution matrix to be synmetric for all joint probability
distributions of rates of return. Concluding rnarks are presented in
Section III.
                                      —4—


II    Syninetry of the Substitution Matrix
ii. A Case 1: Discrete Ccmpounding
       Roley (1977) was the first to derive necessary and sufficient condi-
tions for the substitution matrix to be syninetric in a portfolio choice
setting with uncertainty. His analysis, though, is confined to mean-variance
rcde1s of investor behavior. Nonetheless, his results are useful as a
starting point in• our investigation of the synrnetry property for general von
Neumann - Morgenstern expected utility maximizers.
       Suppose that an investor has a mean-variance utility function of the
              2:                  2
form u [p, a I where p and a are the mean and variance of end—of-period
wealth respectively. A measure of the investor's risk avprsion is
-u1/u2 , defined
                 to be the investor's mean-variance absolute risk aversion.
Roley proves that a necessary and sufficient condition for a mean-variance
investor 's substitution matrix to be exactly syrrunetric is   that   the investor
display constant mean—variance absolute risk aversion.
      The   first new   result of this paper is to generalize Roley' s theorn to
von   Neumann-Morgenstern expected     utility maximizers:


              Theoran 1:    Consider the portfolio choice problea (l)whose

              solution  is given in (3). Then a necessary and sufficient
              condition for the substitution matrix S to be synmetric for
              all joint probability distributions of rates of return
              is that utility display constant absolute risk aversion.5

Clearly Theorn 1 includes Roley' s result as a special case when mean-
variance rreferences are derived fran an underlying von Neumann -
Morgenstern utility      function.
                                  —5—



       Sane care must be exercised when interpretting Theoranl. When utility
displays constant absolute risk aversion this theorEn says that the sub-
stitution matrix will be syninetric regardless of the joint probability
distribution of rates of return. It also says that only this type of utility
function generates a synmetric substitution matrix for all joint distributions
of rates of return. Theorea 1 does not claim, IxMerer, that the substitution
matrix will never be synmetric if utiltiy does not display constant absolute
risk aversion:   given an arbitrary utility function it may be possible to
find sane distribution of rates of return that will generate a syninetric
substitution matrix.



II. B Case 2: Continuous Canpounding
       Constant absolute risk aversion is a very stringent assumption about
investor behavior which does not have much eapirical support. Therefore,
tpirical applicability of Theoren 1 is likely to be quite limited.
     Constant relative risk aversion, on the other hand, appears to
characterize the preferences of many groups of investors reasonably well.6
In the present section we shall redefine the substitution matrix in terms
of geanetric rather than arithmetic rates of return. Having done this it
is straightforward to derive a result analogous to Theoren 1 in which
constant relative risk aversion is both necessary and sufficient for the
(redefined) substitution matrix to be syninetric.
       Rather than parameterize gross rates of return R by the arithmetic
net rates of return as in (2), it is gcjne.tjines nore convenient to pararneterize
then by their geanetric analogues g defined by
(2')              exp[J
                                      —b—




           expL+ y.]
where      = the net geanetric rate of return per dollar
                invested in the th asset,
        g=E{} ,and
                        a.
Essentially,          differs fran    in that the former is the net rate of return
per unit time if rates of return are canpounded continuously during the
investment period whereas the former is the appropriate concept if returns
are canpourided only at the end of the investment period.
       l½nalogous to (3), the solution to the portfolio choice problen generated
by   substituting (2') into (1) can be written in the general form:
           *
(3')       A = a1(g1,...      '      ; W0]

where           = a vector of parameters which canpletely
                     characterize the joint probability
                     distribution of     .

We   are interested in the conditions under which the (gecmetric) substitution
matrix defined by
(4')                 [c1]

is snetric. Our results are surmiarized in the following theoren         which

is proved in lppendix 2:
               Theoren 2: A necessary arid sufficient condition
               for   to be snnnetric for all joint probability
               distributions of rates of return is that utility
               display constant relative risk aversion.


This theorn should be interpreted in the same manner as was described for
Theoren
                               —7—


III Concluding Rnarks
    Above we have derived necessary and sufficient conditions for the
substitution matrix to be synmietric, depending on whether this matrix is
defined in terms of ariti-irnetic or geanetric net rates of return. In the
former case constant absolute risk aversion is required for syrrrnetry
wliereas in the latter case it is constant relative risk aversion.'
     Several thnitatioris of our analysis are apparent. First, the portfolio
choice frameworK of this study, given in (1), abstracts fran transactions
costs. As such, the substitution matrices ciiscussed above are best interpreted
as long-run or &uilibrium suostitut on matrices.
     A question naturally arises about the syxtinetry of the short-run sur,sti-
tution matrix wnen transactions costs are incorporated, into the analysis. It
is proven in Appendix 3 that when transactions costs are incorporated into the
above portfolio choice framework then the (arithmetic) short-run substitution
matrix is syxm'etric if utility displays constant absolute risk aversion re-
gard less of the form of the transactions cost function, provided that it is
twice differentiable.
     The above portfolio choice paradigm is aiso inherently static. Tfle
introduction of dynamic considerations into this framework, hcMever, renders
the probian exceedingly difficult and well beyond the intendi scope of tnis
paper.
                                    Foothotes
*Tbis   paper   is a portion of my thesis which was written under the supervision
of Professors Benjamin Frie±nan and John Linther. Their caments have been
greatly appreciated.


1. See Jones (1979) for a discussion of when the diagonals are positive.
    In general,   > 0 if         0 and     > 0.


2. See for instance, Silber (197(J).
3. This case may result if one of                    .       and               is   quite small
                                                0                  0
     and the    other is   quite   large and   positive.      See Jones (1979) for a
     discussion.
4. Roley (1977) has provided a rigorous justification for                the   syametry
     restrictions for mean—variance investors. See section II below.
5.   See Pppendix 1 for a proof of Theorn 1. See Jones (1979) for a proof
     which hasizes the similarities between portfolio theory and neo—
     classical    consuiption theory.
6. See Jones (1979) and the           references cited       therein.
7. When a risKless asset exists then                the   following interesting     result

     obtains: that portion of the arithmetic (gearietric) substitution
     matrices corresponding to just the risky assets is syninetric for all
     distributions of rates of return if and only if utility displays
     hyperbolic absolute risk aversion in the sense of Merton (1972). See
     Jones (1979) for a proof of this result.
                              APENDDC 1


Proof of Theorem 1:

       Necessity:

         Step   1: After using the wealth constraint to rewrite
problem    (1) in terms of the unconstrained choice over Al,...,Ak_l

the first order conditions are


(Al)     E{U'.(R — Rk)} = 0       for i =    l,...,k—l.
          Step 2: Since   each column of S    sums   to   zero, by virtue

of the wealth constraint, symmetry implies that if all               are

increased by "(5"    then all asset demands remain unchanged. By
totally differentiating (Al) and     assuming that the Hessian
associated      with (Al) is positive definite so that the second
order conditions hold this is seen to imply that


(A2)      E{U".(R — Rk)} =    0    for i =   l,...,k—l.
           Moreover, because symmetry must hold for all joint distri-

butions of the          (A2) implies that U" and U' are proportional.

This is the same as saying that U[] displays constant absolute

risk aversion.


Sufficiency:
           Step 1: Define the matrix H to be the Hessian associated

with    (Al). Thus,
                                    -A2-


        H                               —
(A3)         [H.] =       [EU".(R               Rk) (R — Rk)}1.

         Also   define


                                    •       •    •
                                                      'k- 1



(A4)             SE

                          k—l       •       • • k—l


The matrix S is therefore the upper (k-l)x(ik-l1 submatrix of
S   (which we will recall is k x k)..

        Step 2: Totally differentiating (Al) arid making use of
the assumption of constant absolute risk aversion we obtain

(A5)    S=   —E{U'   }   S H1.

Hence, S is symmetric. Moreover, since the choice of which
asset to eliminate via the wealth constraint was arbitrary,

it must be true      that S too is symmetric.
                                        APPENDIX 2

•   Proof of Theorem 2:

             Necessity:
                  Step 1: Since each column                      of   the substitution matrix

    2 sums   to   zero, symmetry implies th.at                   each    row must also sum   to
    zero. That is, an equivalent increase in all                               leaves all

    asset demands unchanged. Equivalently, all asset demands are
    unchanged if all gross yields R are increased by the same

    proportional amount          "3."
              This        can be shown       to   imply that
                                                             -
    (A6)     E{U" .       1 k     -.


                                ACR
                                         —
                                             —

                                                      ÷ WoRk) (R —
                                                                         —


                                                                         Rk)]}= 0 for i = 1,...,k—l.
    Since this must hold for all joint distributions of the R it must
                              k
    be true that U' and          U" ( A(R
                                       -
                                         Rk)
                                             + W0R,) are proportional.
    This,however, is equivalent to the requirement that UI ]                            displays
    constant relative risk aversion.


    Sufficiency:
              Step 1: Define



                                                  a
                                                        —1

                  A
    (A7)              =




                                                  k—l
             Totally differentiating CAl). and invoking constant
relative risk aversion yields
                                                                   T
                                                      A
(A8)    c2   = -E{U'   1k —       S
                                             +    S




                                                      :




which   is     clearly synimetric. Since the choice of which asset to

drop via the wealth constraint was arbitrary, this implies

that         is also symmetric.
                                 APPENDIX 3


          Within the framework described above transactions

costsmay be incorporated by positing that costs c[Al,...,Ak]
are incurred if the beginning—of—period portfolio is (Al,...,Ak).

Conceptually, the scalar cost function c[] is also parameterized
by the asset holdings inherited or carried forward from the
previous period. Since these are given at the time the current
portfolio decision is made, these additional parameters will be
excluded from our notation for simplicity.

          Thus, the portfolio choice problem with transactions
costs may be written
                           k
(A9)   Maximize E{U[             A.R.]}
       A11...,A            i=l


subject   to
          k
               A + c[Al,...,Ak] = w0.
       i=1


          Under general conditions the portfolio holding of the
kth asset can be solved as a function of
                                        A1,...,A_1 and W0
from the wealth constraint in (A9). Denote this function


(AlO) Ak =      f[A1,.. ?Akl;
                       .
                                  W0].

Then the portfolio choice problem may be rewritten as an

unconstrained optimization over A11.. .,Ak_l:
                                -A6-

                          k
(All) Maximize E{U1 A(R —                    ÷ f
                          i=l
                                       Rk)         IA1,... ,Ak_l;WO]Rk]}.

The first order conditions are:


(A12) EU''E(R — Rk)       + -— R]}     = 0         for i =   l,...,k—l.
Define the short—run substitution matrix to be


(A13)


where    A E f[A,...,A1;W01. Also, let be the upper left-
hand    (k-i) x (k-i) submatrix of . Then totally differentiating
(A12) yields:

(A14)      = — M1 E{U'}I + E U" •                  —         +

                                         k-i           Rk




                                  A1

                                             (Al,...,Ak_l)T
                                 af




where M is the Hessian associated with (All). From the first
order conditions (A12) and constant absolute risk aversion,

however, this expression is just:


(A15)      =   —E{U'}M1
                            -A7-

which is clearly symmetric. Since the choice of which asset
to drop via the wealth constraint is arbitrary, this implies
                               -
that   is symmetric also.
                        BIBLIOGRAPHY


Gramlich, E. and J. Kalchbrenner, 1970. "A Constrained
        Estimation Approach to the Demand for Liquid
        Assets." Federal Reserve Board Special Studies
        Paper No. 3.

Hendershott, P., 1977. Understanding Capital Markets, Vol. 1:
        A Flow-of-Funds Financial Model. Lexington, Ma.:
        D. C. Heath & Co.

Jones, D., 1979. A Structural Econometric Model of the United
        States Equity Market. Harvard University Ph.D. Thesis.

Merton, R., 1973. "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing
        Model." Econometrica 41 (September): 867-87.
Roley, V., 1977. A Structural Model of the U.S. Government
        Securities Market. Harvard University Ph.D. Thesis.
Silber, W., 1970. Portfolio Behavior and Financial Institutions.
        New York: Hoit, Ithinehart and Winston, Inc.

Smith, G., 1978. "Review of P. Hendershott, Understanding
        Capital Markets, Vol. 1: A Flow-of-Funds Financial
        Model." Journal of Monetary Economics 4 (August) : 560-66.
