NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES
IN AN OPEN ECONOMY
Jacob A. Frenkel
Michael L. Mussa
Working Faper No. 575

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge r~ 02138
October 1980

This paper was presented at the American Economic Association
meetings, September 1980, Denver, Colorado, and is forthcoming in
the American Economic Review, May 1981. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #575
October, 1980
Monetary and Fiscal Policies in an Open Economy
ABSTRACT
The central theme of this paper is that international linkages between
national economies influence, in fundamentally important ways,
ness and proper conduct of national macroeconomic policies.

~e

.effective-

Specifically,

this paper summarizes the implications for the conduct of macroeconomic
policies in open economies of both the traditional approach to open economy
macroeconomics and of more recent developments.

As recent experience demon-

strates, no country is immune from disturbances originating in the rest of
the world and no government can sensibly conduct its macroeconomic policy on
the assumption that it operates in a closed economy.

National economies are

linked not only through the mechanism of tile Keynesian foreign-trade multiplier
but also through the complex of linkages implied by commodity trade, capital
mobility and the exchange of national monies.

These linkages are not proper-

ties of a particular model but implications of parity conditions and equilibrium
requirements in goods and asset markets, income and balance sheets constraints,
the absence of long-run money illusion, and consistency of expectations which
impose important constraints on the conduct of macroeconomic policy in an
open economy.

Professor Jacob A. Frenkel
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL
60637

ProfesSbr Michael L. Mussa
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5836 Greenwood Avenue
Chicago, IL
60637

312/ 753-4516

312/753-3695

•
The central theme of this paper is that international linkages between
national economies influence, in fundamentally important ways, the effectiveness and proper conduct of national macroeconomic policies.

Specifically, our

purpose is to summarize the implications for the conduct of macroeconumic
policies in open economies of both the traditional approach to open economy
macroeconomics (as developed largely by James E. Meade, Robert A. Mundell and
J. Marcus Fleming) and of more recent developments.

·Our discussion is organized

around three key linkages between national economies:

through commodity trade,

through capital mobility, and through exchange of national monies.

These link-

ages have important implications concerning the effects of macroeconomic policies
in open economies that differ from the effects of such pOlicies in closed economies.
Recent developments in the theory of macroeconomic policy have established conditions for the effectiveness of policies in influencing output
and employment which emphasize the

distinctionbetw~en anticipated

and unan-

ticipated policy actions, the importance of incomplete information, and the
consequences of contracts that fix nominal wages and prices over finite intervals.

In this paper, we shall not analyze how these conditions are modified

in an open economy.

However, since our concern is with macroeconomic policy,

a principal objective of which is to influence output and employment, we shall
assume that requisite conditions for such influence are satisfied.
I.

Commodity Market Linkages
International trade links the prices of goods produced and consumed in

different national economies.

This linkage has at least three implications for

the conduct of macroeconomic policy in open economies.
First, according to the principle of purchasing power parity, the price
level in one country (in terms of domestic money) should equal the price level
in a foreign country (in terms of foreign money) multiplied by the exchange

1

2

•

rate between domestic money and foreign money.

Because of transport costs,

trade barriers, -different weighting schemes for price indices and changes in
relative prices of non-traded goods, this link is not rigid; but the evidence
indicates that this principle holds fairly well over long time periods (though
it has weakened during the 1970s).

The key implication of purchasing power

parity is that a country cannot choose its long-run inflation rate independently
of its long-run monetary policy and the long-run behavior of its exchange rate.
A country, particularly a small country, that fixes the exchange rate between
its domestic money and the money of some fore1gn country will experience a
domestic inflation rate and a domestic rate of monetary expansion that are
strongly influenced by the monetary policy of that foreign country.

This is so

even if changes in real economic conditions (which are largely independent of
domestic monetary policy) induce divergences from strict purchasing power parity.
Second, the world monetary system and the conduct of national monetary
policies must allow for changes in equilibrium ,relationships between national
price levels induced by changes in relative prices of internationally traded
goods and of non-tradable goods.

To maintain a system of fixed exchange rates,

changes in equilibrium relationships among national price levels must be accommodated by differentials among national inflation rates, supported by appropriate
national economic policies.

Under a system of controlled or managed floating,

it is essential that countries either allow their inflation rates or the rates
of change of exchange rates to accommodate equilibrium changes in relative
national price levels.

A rule that links changes in the exchange rates rigidly

to changes in domestic and foreign prices, in accord with relative purchasing
power parity, is not consistent with this requirement.
Third, macroeconomic policy can do little to offset changes in equilibrium
levels of real income resulting from changes in relative prices of internationally
traded goods.

A case in point is the: recent increase in the relative price of

3

oil.

Monetary policy can influence the extent to which the increase in the

relative price of oil affects general price levels and perhaps short-run
levels of employment in oil exporting and oil importing countries.

Tax and

expenditure policy can affect the extent to which gains and losses of real
income are translated into changes in real expenditure, or are financed by
changes in foreign lending and borrowing.

By influencing the level and dis~

tribution of real expenditure, fiscal policy can also affect the relative
prices of non-tradable commodities and the distribution of the change in real
national income among individuals within the economy.

However, neither monetary

nor fiscal policy can alter to any appreciable extent the average change in the
long-run level of real expenditure resulting from a change in the relative
prices of internationally traded commodities that are beyond the control of
national economic policies.
lIe

Capital Market Linkages
International capital mobility links interest rates on financial assets

denominated in different national monies through the interest parity relationship.

This relationship requires that interest differentials betwedn securities

denominated in different currencies equal the forward discount or premium on
foreign exchange.

The empirical evidence indicates that this relationship

holds almost exactly for easily tradable securities identical

i~

all respects

except currency of denomination" but somewhat less well for assets exchanged
primarily in national credit markets (see Robert Z. Aliber, Michael Dooley and
Peter Isard, and Jacob A. Frenkel and Richard M Levich).
v

International capital

mobility also allows countries to finance imbalances in their current accounts
and thus provides an important channel for the international transmission of
macroeconomic disturbances.

The linkage of interest rates through interest

parity and the transmission of macroeconomic disturbances through international

4
capital flows have significant implications for thp. conduct of macroeconomic
policy in open economies.
International capital mobility imposes a severe constraint on the use of
monetary policy for domestic stabilization purposes.
rate, an increase in the

domes~ic

credit

com~onent

Under a fixed exchange

of the money supply in a

small open economy may temporarily reduce interest rates on domestic

securitie~,

but it will induce a capital outflow and a corresponding loss of foreign exchange reserves that will rapidly reduce the money supply back to its previous
equilibrium level.

Monetary expansion by a large country, which affects con-

ditions in world financial markets, can be somewhat more effective in influencing domestic prices,

out~ut

and employment.

However, even a large country

will suffer a loss of foreign exchange reserves that is inversely related to its
size in the world economy.

Sterilization operations of a central bank may

temporarily insulate the domestic money supply from changes in foreign exchange
reserves; but, in the long run, sterilization cannot sustain ,a money supply
that differs from the equilibrium level of money demand.

Under a

f~exible

ex-

change rate, a government regains long-run control over the nominal money supply.
However, international capital mobility still limits the effectiveness of monetary policy:

Any increase in aggregate demand induced by lower domestic interest

rates is partially dissipated in

~ncreased

expenditures on imported goods,

financed by international capital fluws; and exchange rate adjustments that
occur rapidly in response to perceived changes in monetary policy are likely to
leaq to rapid adjustments of domestic prices and wage. rates, thereby limiting
the effect of monetary policy on output and employment.
A high degree of capital mobility also implies a low degree of effectiveness of fiscal policy.

Under a flexible exchange rate, a fixed domestic money

supply and a domestic interest rate fixed by

condi~ions

in world markets (and

by exchange rate expectations which affect the forward discount or premium on

,.

5

foreign exchange) impose a strict constraint on the level of domestic income
that is consistent with monetary equilibrium.

Fiscal policy actions do not

affect this constraint (except possibly by altering exchange rate expectations)
and, hence, cannot affect the equilibrium level of domestic income.

Under a

fixed exchange rate, the money supply is not fixed because the capital inflow
induced by an expansionary fiscal poLicy will increase the foreign exchange reserves of the monetary authority.

The initial expansionary effect of any fiscal

stimulus, however, is limited by the extent to which it falls on domestically
produced goods that are not close

substi~utes

for imports; and the

subsequ~nt

multiplier effects of any fiscal stimulus are limited by the high marginal
propensity to spend on internationally traded goods.
To achieve the maximum effect from fiscal and monetary policy in open
economies, it follows that such policies should be directed toward goods and
assets that are isolated from world trade, that is, toward goods and assets for
which the home country is "large" relative to the size of the market.

Changes

in government expenditures on non-tradable goods are likely to be mure effective
in influencing domestic output and employment than changes in government expenditure on internationally traded goods.

Similarly, open market operations in-

volving financial assets that are not close substitutes for international
financial assets are more likely to influence

intere~t

rates and thus other

macroeconomic variables [see Rudiger Dornbusch, William Branson and
Russell Boyer].

This does not imply, however, that it is desirable to artifi-

cially restrict trade and capital movements in order to enhance the effectiveness
of macroeconomic policy.

Such restrictions have an important cost in terms of

reducing the benefits that a country derives from integration of markets.
over,

substi~ution

More-

possibilities among goods and among financial assets limit

the effectiveness of restrictions,on trade and capital movements.
makers have discovered, using macroeconomic policy for

dom~stic

As many policy-

stabilization

/

6

Objectives in an open economy is like trying to heat a house when the doors and
windows are open and

th~

cold wind is blowing.

Finally, international capital mobility implies that current account
imbalances can be financed by capital movements, independent of the government's
willingness to allow cha~ges in its foreign exchange reserves.

Hence, with

capital mobility, the current account which measures both the net contribution
of the foreign sector to aggregate demand for domestically produced goods and
the change in a country's net debtor position, is always a concern of macroeconomic policy, regardless of the exchange rate regime.

As emphasized by the

absorption approach to the balance of payments [see Sidney Alexander and Harry
G. Johnson (1958)], the current account is equal to the excess of national income over national expenditure.

It follows that the policies required to bring

about an improvement in the current account are not primarily commercial policies
that affect the domestic relative prices of imported goods, but monetary and
especially fiscal policies that stimulate private saving and that reduce the
government's own excess of spending over income.
III.

Monetary Linkages
The concept of monetary equilibrium as requiring equality between the

demand and supply of money, is a basic ingredient in both closed and open
economy macroeconomic theory.

It implies that any change in the supply of

money or any exogenous disturbance to money demand must lead to changes in
the equilibrium values of one or more of the variables that inf.luence
demand.

money

It also implies that any disturbance or policy action that does not

directly affect the demand or supply of money must, in equilibrium, lead to
offsetting changes in the variables

that'inf1uenc~

money demand that are con-

sistent with a constant level of that demand.
The implications of monetary equilibLium for the macroeconomic policy

7

of an open economy operating under a fixed exchange rate are reflected in the
principles of the monetary approach to the balance of payments [see Michael
Mussa (1974) and the articles in Frenkel and Johnson (1976)].

Specifically,

the use of monetary policy for domestic stabilization purposes is constrained
th~

by the equilibrium level of the demand for money which io largely beyond
control of the monetary authority.

An

expansion of the domestic credit component

of the money supply may temporarily raise prices (especially of non-traded goods),
raise output (especially in industries with sticky wages and prices), and reduce
interest rates (especially for domestic securities sheltered from world financia1 markets).

In the longer run, however, the direct effect of monetary ex-

pans ion on desired spending and on desired portfolio reallocations, and the indirect effects of changes in prices and interest rates will induce deficits in
the current and capital accounts of the balance of payments.

H;.nce the foreign

exchange reserve component of the money supply will decline until the money
supply is reduced to the long-run equilibrium level of money demand.

For a

large country, the long-run equilibrium level of money demand may be influenced
by the effect of domestic monetary expansion on the world price level.

However,

except for a reserve currency country, whose national money is accepted as a
foreign exchange reserve by other countries; the principal long-run effect of
monetary policy will be on the composition of assets on the central bank's
balance sheet rather than on the magnitude of its monetary liabilities.

Further,

other economic policies affect a country's foreign exchange reserves (and hence
its cumulative official settlements balance) only
the demand to hold domestic money.

~o

the extent that they

aff~ct

For example, an import tariff can induce a

once-and-for-a11 increase in the level of reserves to the extent that it increases the domestic price level and thus the demand to hold domestic money.
But, it cannot induce a continuing inflow of foreign exchange reserves by
reducing imports relative to exports [see Mussa (1974)].
/

8

The requirements of monetary equilibrium also constrain economic policy
under a flexible exchange rate.

A flexible exchange rate is not an additional

policy tool that can be manipulated by the government, but rather an endogenous
variable that is determined by market forces which are influenced by the actual
and expected conduct of fiscal and, especially, monetary policy.

In particular,

from the homogeneity postulate, it follows that, other things constant, in the
long run, changes in the nominal money supply will lead to proportionate changes
in all nominal prices, including the price of foreign exchange.

This is one of

the fundamental tenets of the monetary approach to exchang~ rates [see Frenkel
and Johnson (1978)].
Other important implications of this approach follow from the essential
dynamic linkage between current exchange rates and expectations of future exchange rates implied by international mobility of financial assets denominated
. d1f
. f erent nat10na
.
1 mon1es.
.
1
1n

First, since future government policies will

influence future exchange rates, it follows that expectations concerning future
policies should influence current exchange rates.

Hence, the effect of any

particular policy action on exchange rates (and through exchange rates on other
macroeconomic variables) will depend on its effect on expectations concerning
future policy actions.

Second, the sensitivity of exchange rates to expectations

of future policy implies that the traditional approach to macroeconomic policy
analysis, which views policy as
circumstances, is inappropriate.

iso~ated

actions in response to particular

Instead, it is necessary to analyze the general

framework ofgovernrnent policy, within which the effect of any particular action
depends on the public's perception of the implications of that action for the
future conduct of policy.

Third, since exchange rates respond quickly to new

information about events likely to affect foreign exchange markets, exchange
rate adjustments are an important channel for rapid transmission of macroeconomic
disturbances and of government policies.

In particular, new information that leads

9

to the expectation of a higher rate of inflation is likely to induce an immediate depreciation of the foreign exChange value of domestic money which will be
rapidly translated into increased domestic prices of internationally traded
commodities.

In addition, exchange rate depreciation may serve as a

~ignal

for upward adjustments in the prices of domestic goods and in wage rates.
Fourth, if there is short-run stickiness

~f

prices of domestic goods in terms

of national monies, then rapid exChange rate adjustments will induce changes
in the relative prices of different national outputs.

Such relative price

changes are a desirable response to changing real economic conditions requiring
adjustments of relative prices; and a flexible exchange rate regime may have
an important advantage in facilitating such adjustments.

However, unnecessary

changes in relative prices in respol1se to purely monetary disturbances may have
significant social costs that can be avoided or reduced by pursuing monetary
policies that are not themselves an independent source of monetary disturbances
and that offset, as much as possible, exogenous fluctuations in money demands.
Fifth, official intervention in foreign exchange markets, which alters only
the supplies of non-monetary assets available to the public, may have a limited
influence on exChange rates through portfolio balance effects.

In aadition,

such intervention may have a more powerful effect on exchange rates by signalling to the public the intentions of governments concerning future policies.
Finally, exchange rates may be useful as an indicator for monetary policy directed at offsetting fluctuations in money demand, especially when rapidly
Changing inflationary expectations maAe nominal interest rates an unreliable
indicator of fluctuations in money demand.

For example, the combination of

rising nominal interest rates anu appreciation of the foreign exchange value
of domestic money would probably indicate an increase in the demand for domestic
money that should be accommodated by an increase in supply; whereas the

co~

bination of rising interest rates and depreciation would probably indicate an

10

acceleration of inflationary expectations that should not be fueled by an
accommodative monetary policy.
IV.

Concluding Remarks
In this paper we have discussed the implications of "openness" of an

economy for the effectiveness and appropriate conduct of macroeconomic policies.

As recent experience demonstrates, no country is immune from distur-

bances originating in the rest of the world and no government can sensibly
conduct its macroeconomic policy on the assumption that it operates in a
closed economy.

National economies are linked not only through the mechanism

of the Keynesian foreign-trade multiplier but also through the complex of
linkages implied by commodity trade, capital mobility and the exchange of
national monies.

These linkages are not properties of a

par~icular

model but

implications of parity conditions and equilibrium requirements in goods and
asset markets, income and balance sheets constraints, the absence of longrun money illusion, and consistency of expectations which impose important
constraints on the conduct of macroeconomic policy in an open economy.

,.

.

'

11

•
REFERENCES
S. S. Alexander, "Effects of a Devaluation on a Trade Balance," IMP Staff
Papers, Apr. 1952,

~, 263-78~

R. Z. A1i.ber, "The Interest Rate Parity Theorem:

A Reinterpretation," J.

Po1it. Econ., Nov./Dec. 1973, 81, 1451-59.
R. S. Boyer, "Commodity Markets and Bond Markets in a Small, Fixed-ExchangeRate Economy," Can. J. Econ., Feb. 1975,

.!!.,

1-23.

W. H. Branson, "Portfolio Equilibrium and Monetary Policy with Foreign and
Non-Traded Assets," in Emil Claassen and Pascal Salin,

eds~,

Recent

Issues in International Monetary Economics, Amsterdam 1976.
M. P. Dooley and P. Isard, "Capital Controls, Political Risk, and Deviatiuns
from Interest-Rate Parity," J. Polite Econ., Apr. 1980, 88, 370-84.
Rudiger Dornbusch, "Capital Mobility and Portfolio Balance," in Robert Z.
Aliber, ed., The Political Economy of Monetary Reform, Montclair 1977.

------',

"Monetary Policy Under Exchange Rate Flexibility," Managed Ex-

change Rate Flexibility:

The Recent Experience, Fed. Reserve Bank

Boston Conference Series, No. 20, 1978.
J. M. Fleming, "Domestic Financial Policies Under Fixed and Under Floating
Exchange Rates," IMP Staff Papers, NoveII'ber 1962,

~,

369-79.

Jacob A. Frenkel, "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Role of 'News':
Lessons from the 1970's," U. of Chicago Center for Mathematical Studies
in Business and Economics, No. 8020, 1980.
______ and Harry G. Johnson, eds., The Monetary Approach to the Balance of
Payments, London and Toronto 1976.
______, eds., The Economics of Exchange Rates:

Selected Studies, Reading 1978.

J. A. Frenkel and R. M. Levich, "Transactions Costs and Interest Arbitrage:
Tranquil versus Turbulent Periods," J. Polito Econ., Dec. 1977,

------ and

~,

1299-26.

M. L. Mussa, "The Efficiency of Foreign Exchange Markets and
/

..
12 .

/

A

13
FOOTNOTES

*University

or Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.,

and the University of Chicago, respectively.

J. A. Frenkel acknowledges re-

search support by the National Science Foundation, grant SOC 78-14480.
research is part of the NBER's Program in International Studies.

This

The views

expressed are those of the authors and "not necessarily those of the NBER.
IThe emphasis on new information which alters expectations concerning
future exchange rates and thereby induces an immediate adjustment of current
exchange rates is fundamental in explaining the recent volatility of exchange
rates; see Mussa (1976, 1979), Dornbusch (1978), Frenkel (1980) and Frenkel
and Mussa.

