                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    TAXATION AND CORPORATION FINANCE


                             Roger H. Gordon

                            Burton G. Malkiel


                         Working Paper No. 576




                  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge MA 02138

                             November 1980


The research reported here is part of the NBER's research project in the
Changing Role of Debt and Equity Finance in U.S. Capital Formation, which is
being financed by a grant from the American Council of Life Insurance. This
paper was originally prepared for a Brookings Institution conference on the
economic effects of tax policy held on October 18—19, 1979. We would very
much like to thank Daniel Frisch, Daniel Feenberg, Elvira Krespach, James
Rauch, and Stephen Williams for assistance in the computational work. We
would also like to thank Alan Blinder, David Bradford,
                                                       Jerry Butters, Mervyn
King, and Richard Quandt for many helpful suggestions on earlier drafts of
this paper. In addition, the officers of the two financial corporations and
the Securities and Exchange Commission were kind enough to make available to
us their records dealing with the costs involved and settlement terms for
several bankruptcies and reorganizations. Finally, we would like to
acknowledge financial support from the N.B.E.R. Project on the Changing Roles
of Debt and Equity, and the John Weinberg Foundation. This paper is part of
the NBER's research programs in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics, and
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
I,
                                                    NBER Working Paper #576
                                                              October, 1980




                 Taxation and Corporation Finance


                              ABSTRACT



     This paper analyzes the effects of the federal tax structure on

corporate financial and investment behavior. We first develop a model of

corporate behavior given taxes, taking into account both uncertainty and

costs of bankruptcy. Simpler. models abstracting from bankruptcy costs

had clear counter—factual implications. The forecasts from our model

proved to be consistent with both the observed cross—sectional variation

in debt—equity ratios and the time series pattern of debt—equity ratios

(data that were constructed in the paper).

    We then attempted to measure the efficiency costs created by corporate

tax distortions as implied by the model. The forecasted efficiency cost

of the distortion favoring debt finance seemed to be quite large, while

the tax distortion affecting investment seemed to be less important than

others have claimed. The paper concludes with a study of the efficiency

implications of various proposed corporate tax changes.




Roger H. Gordon                                     Burton G. Malkiel
Bell Laboratories                                   Department of Economics
Murray Hill, New Jersey 07474                       Princeton University
                                                    Princeton, New Jersey 08540
(201) 582—6472
                                                    (609) 452—4000
                TAXATION AND CORPORATION FINANCE

                              by
            Roger H. Gordon and Burton G. Malkiel




      The analysis of the effect of the federal tax structure on
corporate financial policy is one of the most complex tasks in
the area of tax incidence and financial theory. The corporation
tax, several aspects of the personal income tax, the specific
provisions of the bankruptcy law and the costs involved in

financial reorganization must all be considered simultaneously.
Yet much of the early literature on the determination of

corporation financial structure, the early Modigliani-Miller
(1958, 1961) contribution being the key example, was developed
without consideration of taxes. Even the literature that does
allow for the effects of taxation has several drawbacks. For

one, many of   the   implications   of   the models, such as the suggestion
in some models that debt    equity       ratios will be increased without
limit, or the result that new equity will never be issued, are

clearly counterfactual. In addition, there has been little
effort either theoretically or empirically to measure the
efficiency costs of the effects of taxation on capital structure.
                                                              2.



Stated starkly, in a world without taxation, corporate financial
policy is considered to be irrelevant, i.e. all policies are

equally efficient. Why then should the fact that taxation
makes a particular financial policy preferable be of any concern

to society?

      in Section I of this paper, we first explore various models

of corporate financial policy with taxation. We find that,
unless we allow for both uncertainty and costs of bankruptcy,
the models have important counterfactual implications, which
undermines our confidence in other forecasts of these models.

We therefore use only the model allowing for uncertainty and

costs of bankruptcy in drawing inferences.

      In Section II, we develop a time series for the aggregate

debt-equity ratio, then explore the consistency of the time

series and cross-sectional variation in debt-equity ratios with

the implications of the models. In Section III, we attempt to
estimate the magnitude of some of the efficiency costs and the
nature of the equity implications resulting from the existing
tax structure.

      Finally, in Section IV, we analyze a variety of possible
changes in the tax s€ructure. In addition to describing how
these tax changes are likely to alter behavior, we also examine

the efficiency and equity implications of such changes.
                                                            3.



 I.


       Though the purpose of this section is to analyze corporate
 financial policy with taxation, it will be useful first to review
 the early development of the theory without taxation. This will
 provide a basis for comparison when taxes are introduced.

       A. Capital structure in a no-tax world
              The classical articles on financial policy in this

 context are by Modigliani and Miller (1958, 1961). while their
arguments have been clarified in later articles,1 their basic
approach continues to be used.
      Their main result is that, with no taxation and no
bankruptcy, corporate financial policy is irrelevant--that is,
investors will be indifferent if the firm proposes to alter its
debt-equity ratio or its dividend payout rate, investment policy

held constant. Therefore, given any investment policy, neither
dividend policy nor decisions regarding capital structure affect
the value of the firm. in addition, given that stocks are risky

while bonds are riskiess, risk will
                                       be spread efficiently and,
under certain assumptions, investment will be efficient.
      The basic argument underlying these conclusions is as
follows. Assume that the firm will receive        dollars in return
on its investments after expenses each period, where x is a

random variable. The firm has debt D       on which it owes rD

      1See, for example, Fama and Miller (1972), Hirshleifer
(1970), and Stiglitz (1969, 1972, l971i.).
                                                                                      1.



in interest payments each period. Stockholders therefore receive
x -   rD (assuming all is paid out as dividends). However, suppose
stockholders have borrowed an amount B in order to purchase
their shares, in which case they owe rB in personal interest
payments. (The firm and the individual are assumed to face the

same interest rate, r .        ) Stockholders              as a group therefore

receive a net amount           -    rD   -   rB       each period.
        Suppose the firm decided to decrease its debt—equity ratio

by selling stock, using the proceeds to retire D of debt. The
firm's stockholders have available the option of borrowing an

amount B = LD in order to buy the new issues of stocks. If
the stockholders employ this personal leverage, they will receive
each   period    -   r(D   -
                               D)    -
                                         r(B      +   D)   =   x   -   rD   -   rB.   (Note

that tD could equally well have been negative implying an
increase in the firm's debt-equity ratio. The stockholders

could offset this change by purchasing the bonds. )                               The amount

the stockholders receive is identical to what they would have

received prior to the change. Stockholders can completely undo
the effects of any action by the firm to change its debt-equity
ratio and so would find the change irrelevant. Since personal
borrowing is a perfect substitute for corporate borrowing, the
firm cannot profit from additional leverage and since individuals

can undo any degree of corporate leverage by buying bonds and
shares of the levered company, the firm would not be hurt by a
                                                             7.



capital structure that is more levered than investors desire.

 In fact, not only is any one firmts financial policy irrelevant,

but so is the aggregate financial policy of the corporate sector.
      While we have so far assumed that the entire net return to
the firm is paid out as dividends, the same type of argument
as used above will show that the dividend payout rate is also

irrelevant. For suppose that the firm chooses to retain some

additional portion of its earnings. Given the firm Ts investment

policy, this change implies that the additional retentions will
be used to retire securities (or to sell fewer additional

securities on the open market to finance its investment program).

Suppose the retentions are used to repurchase debt D     .   The
stockholders can then increase their borrowing by D, thereby
obtaining funds which will exactly offset the loss in dividends,

while leaving themselves with the same cash flow in future

periods as they would have had prior to the change. These kinds
of individual transactions can be employed to offset payout

changes rendering dividend policy irrelevant as well.2

      What are the implications for the efficiency of risk bearing
and of real investment? Diamond (1967) shows that when individuals
can bear part of the risk in the return from a firm only by bearing


      2Alternatively, when the firm cuts its dividends, it could
issue fewer new shares E. Shareholders can then offset the
lost dividends by selling E of their own shares and yet retain
the same percent ownership in the firm as they would have had
without the change in policy by the firm. The argument here does
not depend on no bankruptcy, since the debt-equity ratio remains
unchanged.
                                                           6.



some proportionate share of the firm's profits, a competitive

stock market will spread these risks efficiently across investors

(assuming no binding constraints on short sales). Thinking
of risk as a commodity (a lottery), efficient risk spreading
would exist if at the margin each investor demanded the same
risk premium to absorb an additional unit of risk. A fully

competitive market would achieve this result since all individuals

buy lottery tickets until the market price just compensates them
for absorbing an additional unit of risk, thereby equating risk

premiums across investors. Diamond (1967) also shows that under

certain reasonable assumptions regarding competitive securities
markets (which rule out any degree of market power for a firm
in the securities market), real investment will also be efficient.
      The above arguments on the irrelevance of corporate

financial policy, include a number of implicit assumptions. The
key one is that there is neither bankruptcy of the firm nor of
the individual. Under this assumption, it follows naturally
that everyone faces the same interest rate, independent of

amount borrowed. What happens, however, if bankruptcy is
introduced but is assumed neither to entail any cost when ownership

is transferred to bondholders nor to create any moral hazard

problems?
     As long as the firm's debt and equity have perfect
substitutes among combinations of the other available securities,
                                                               7.



 for any choice of financial policy by the firm, the firm's

 financial policy would still be irrelevant. Since any
 Subdivision by the firm of its total random return into two
 securities (debt and equity) is already available to investors

 through combinations of alternative securities, and since the
 sum of the prices on these two securities must by competition

equal the price of that proportional share in the firm, the
firm could not gain by changing its financial policy.3

      Under what assumptions would the firmTs debt and equity

have perfect substitutes among combinations of the other
available securities? Those assumptions yielding the simple form
of the capital asset pricing model would be sufficient.      Here
a traded security is characterized completely by its covariance
                                     Note that no
with the return on the market as a whole. /   change in a firm's
financial policy, given its investment policy, will affect the
marJcet return, as long as bankruptcy is costless. Therefore the
          f i rm
value of a /   will   depend only on its expected return and the
covariance of this return with the market, and not on how this

return is divided between debt and equity. Other conditions
sufficient to imply irrelevance of the firm's financial policy
are (1) the existence of complete contingent commodity markets


      3Iuerbach and King (1979), however, deal with a simple
case involving one firm, two investors, and two states of the
world, where even costless bankruptcy could lead to an optimal
capital structure. Their case involves changes in the pattern
of returns across states of nature that, in effect, change the
set of available securities in a nontrivial way and so directly
affect the utility of investors.
                                                            8.


(see Stiglitz (1969)), and (2) the existence of financial
intermediaries willing to repackage without cost the financial

structure of the firm whenever it might be profitable.

         To the degree that any of these sets of assumptions are

felt to be realistic, corporate financial policy is irrelevant
as long as bankruptcy is costless and there are no taxes. But
there    are many reasons why bankruptcy is costly. First, the

processof bankruptcy itself entails significant administrative
expenses for lawyers, accountants, appraisers, etc. We explore
the    magnitude of these costs   in Section III. The bankruptcy

process    also creates uncertainty for security holders,   in   addition
to    the basic uncertainty in the return on the real investments.

The courts have not consistently followed legal priorities in
determining settlements, and legal costs themselves are uncertain.

Given the uncertain interpretation of the law, any group of
security holders might bring suit claiming that they have received
an insufficient share. We shall also see below that informal

reorganizations, while less costly in total than bankruptcy,

may be difficult or impossible to arrange.

         Bondholders may also push for liquidation over reorganization,
even   when this is inefficient.    First, there is

less   room for the courts to deviate from the absolute priority
                                           under
of bond holders under liquidation. Also, /liquidation, bondholders
could receive up to the par value of their bonds even if the
market value of the bonds had fallen substantially due to a


        Since by assumption a financial intermediary can create
any securities that the firm can create, they can provide the
perfect substitutes. See also Stiglitz (1971i).
                                                         9.


 general   rise in interest rates.

       in addition, the very possibility of bankruptcy creates

 opportunities for the firm's managers, acting in the interests
of stockholders, to aid stockholders at the expense of existing

bondholders through inefficient financial policy and investments.
For exaliple, suppose the firm were to issue new debt with equal

priority in bankruptcy to old debt, using the proceeds to
undertake new investment or to repurchase stock. The previous

debt holders would suddenly own a riskier asset, yet the interest

rate charged could not adjust to reflect that increased risk.

By issuing debt in separate issues rather than all at once,
the  firm may receive more favorable overall terms. Similarly,
if the firm undertakes a new risky investment, implying a higher
probability of bankruptcy, existing bondholders are worse off,
yet again the interest rate on their securities cannot readjust.5
Conversely, new safe investments may lower the probability of

bankruptcy, aiding existing bondholders. The previous arguments
about the irrelevance of the debt-equity ratio and the efficiency

of investment assumed that bondholders charged the interest rate

appropriate for the risk they absorbed, while we have seen in

our example, that the firm might subsequently be able to change
the amount of risk they absorb. Investment incentives are
therefore distorted.


      5Bondholders will attempt to prevent such actions through
covenants in the initial contract. However, their ability to
prevent these actions is limited.

      6For further discussion of these moral hazard problems in
debt contracts, see Myers (1977) or Jensen and Meckling (1976).
                                                                 10.



         Bondholders are not quite so vulnerable, of course. They
may attempt to anticipate these actions by the firm and will

charge an appropriate interest rate. Investment would still
be inefficient, however, implying that the gains to stockholders
from the investment are more than offset by the higher interest
costs.                                                    the
           HowL ver, in order to obta in lower interest costs,

firm would have to guarantee to bondholders initially through
indenture provisions in the bond contract that it will not engage
in such activities that cause harm to existing bondholders.

There will likely be not insubstantial negotiation and monitoring
costs involved in such guarantees, and it is most unlikely that

the provisions will be foolproof. It is probably impossible to
avoid the moral hazard issue completely unless the firm does not
issue risky debt.

                                                    financial
         Ignoring bankruptcy costs and taxes, a firm'S

policy would be irrelevant. However, with bankruptcy costs
but no taxes, risky debt entails costs but no compensating benefit.
We conclude, therefore, that without taxes the firm would finance

itself almost entirely by equity7--whatever debt is issued will

        TSuch a strategy will also give the firm the most flexibility
in acquiring new funds as has been suggested by Myers (l97'().
Nevertheless, several other considerations have been suggested
in the literature which should lead firms to choose more debt:
(1) lower underwriting and selling, fees for debt than equity
issues (Baumol and Malkiel, 1967); (2) the use of the amount of
debt as a signal to investors of the management's expectations
about bankruptcy risk (Ross, 1977); (3) moral hazard or agency
costs involved with public equity issues on a par with those
discussed above with debt issues (Jensen and Meckling, 1976);
(Ii.) moral hazard costs in the individual debt substituted for firm
debt. (The individual can provide collateral other than the firm's
equity, however, so individual borrowing may dominate borrowing
by the firm.); and () the greater flexibility of debt to meet
seasonal and other short-term needs for funds.
                                                             11.



  be essentially riskless.   Therefore, bankruptcy costs will be
  effectively zero. The dividend payout rate would be viewed
 as irrelevant, or if individuals have preferences between

 dividends and capital gains, the firm would have the incentive
 to take them into account.8 Given the zero probability of

 bankruptcy and the use only of a stock market in
                                                    spreading risk,
 the risk from the investment will be spread efficiently
                                                         among
 investors and, subject to certain qualifications, investment
 incentives will be efficient.


 B. Introduction of taxes

       When considering the effects of taxes on the firm's
 financial structure, we must consider in detail at least the
 corporation tax and the personal income tax. The corporation
 tax by itself provides a strong incentive in favor of debt
finance as interest payments are deductible from operating

earnings before income taxes are imposed, while a tax rate T
must be paid on the residual owned by the shareholders. However,

under the personal income tax, interest income is taxed at a
marginal rate m .   While dividends are also taxed at this rate,9

      8When transactions costs are taken into account, for
example, the payout rate will be of concern to both investors
and issuers. Individuals who need to
                                       use the returns from their
investments for consumption will be able to avoid the substantial
brokerage charges involved in selling off small pieces of their
security holdings if they receive dividends. Alternatively,
they will prefer retention by the firm if they would choose to
reinvest their returns anyway. Similarly, by retention, the
firm would avoid the underwriting and selling fees involved in
new issues. One might therefore expect consumers to prefer firms
with little need for funds and reinvestors to prefer firms with
greater needs for funds.

      9Thjs is not necessarily the case. For example, a
 minimum amount of dividends                             certain
                             may be excluded entirely from taxable
income. Moreover, corporate shareholders are able €o exclude
85 percent of
              dividend receipts from taxable income.
                                                           12.



capital gains are taxed at a lower effective rate, c, which is

lower than m because a) 60 percent of long-term capital gains
are excluded from taxable income; b) the tax is due (without
interest penalty) only when the asset is sold or perhaps not

at all if it is part of a bequest; and c) the individual can
selectively realize capital losses sooner than capital gains.
Therefore, the personal tax alone favors equity finance.
Whether the total tax system favors the use of debt or equity

finance will depend on a balancing of the advantages under one
tax with the disadvantages under the other. At the end of the text
a glossary of symbols is included to aid the reader in following the
development of the model.

        1. No uncertainty, no bankruptcy

             Let us first examine this problem in the idealized

setting where there is neither uncertainty nor bankruptcy.

The model used basically is a formalization of Miller!s (1977)

arguments, though it borrows also from King (l97)#) and Stiglitz

(1973).  Most of the existing literature is developed in this
context. Can we rationalize the existence of both debt and
equity in this context?
      Let us first develop optimal investment rules for the
firm.     The first result is that the firm will continue to invest
until the pretax marginal return on its investments (after

covering depreciation and expenses) denoted by s, has been reduced
to the market interest rate, r. Repurchase of debt and new real
investment are alternative uses of funds, so ought to earn the
same net rate of return at the margin after tax. Both alternatives
                                                                  13.


 receive the same tax treatment
                                     (assuming economic depreciation
 in the tax law and no investment tax credit). The net returns

 from investment are taxed at regular corporate rates. The net

 reduction in cash outflow from purchasing debt is taxed at the

 same rate since deductions from taxable income are lowered.

 Thus, both alternatives must have the same rate of return before
 tax as well. Note that unincorporated businesses will also
 invest until the marginal return on their investment equals the

market interest rate, for similar reasons. This implies that
 in spite of the corporate income tax (ignoring explicit investment

incentives), investment earns the same pretax marginal rate of
return in both corporate and noncorporate uses, contrary to the

assumption in Harberger (197k). However, because of the personal
income tax, individuals invest until         r(l-m) is their marginal time
preference rate. We therefore conclude that even though the
investment that occurs is allocated efficiently, an inefficient

amount of investment occurs as a result of the distortions in
the personal income tax.1°
         Let us now examine   the firm's   optimal decision rule for
investments    financed   with equity. The firm should finance new
investment    through new issues of equity until the stock market
values   the returns to a dollar of marginal real investment at


      10Were we to take into account the investment tax
credit and accelerated depreciation, however, investment is
also allocated inefficiently (see Bradford (1978)).
                                                          l4.



just a dollar. This result is analogous to Tobin's q theory of

investment, as developed in Tobin (1969), Ciccolo (1975), and
                          11
von Furstenberg (1977).
      Could the stock market consistent value a dollar of
real investment at less than a dollar in this context of no

uncertainty and no bankruptcy? Certainly there would be no new
equity issues in such a case. However, in addition, the firm
would find it profitable to borrow further, using the funds to
repurchase equity. For if the firm were to borrow an additional
dollar, it would owe r more in interest payments each period.

Assume it repurchases q dollars of equity, where q is the
value in the stock market of the returns to a dollar of the

marginal real investment. The repurchase, by freeing the
returns to a dollar real investment, allows the firm to just

cover its additional interest payments, a result implied by optimal
debt finance of investment. But since q < 1, the firm is left
with 1-q > 0   in profits. Equity would therefore continue to
be repurchased until                       q =   1   or until there
is no more equity outstanding.
      If repurchase of equity is forbidden (or very costly),
however, then as long as q < 1, the firm will issue no new

equity, but existing equity will remain. The amount of equity
that will remain is a historical accident. In fact, repurchase

      11In these papers, q is the ratio of the total market value
of the firm (debt and equity) to the replacement cost of the firm's
capital stock (ignoring obsolescence). Here, q is the ratio of
the value in the stock market of a marginal investment divided
by its purchase cost. Though one advantage of the first definition
of q is that it is easier to measure, Gordon and Bradford (1979)
estimate a time series for q as defined in this paper.
                                                            17.



 of equity is illegal in Great Britain.   In the United States
 although repurchases are not illegal as such, complications can
 arise. For example, one clear problem is that if repurchases
 are done so as precisely to imitate dividend
                                                payments (periodic
percentage repurchases from each shareholder) then the payments
will be taxed as dividends.12 Bradford
                                        (1977), Auerbach (1979),
and Stiglitz (1973) explore models where q < 1 due to a constraint

preventing repurchase of equity. Any existing equity is left
over from the period prior to the imposition of the corporation

tax (when, as we argued above, equity finance would have been
favored) or from the initial equity established in order for the

firm to incorporate. These models all have the counterfactual

implication, however, that no new equity will be issued.
      Since   it is difficult to maintain that corporations, even
after forty years, would not have taken advantage of these
arbitrage profits, and since new issues of equity do occur, we
will henceforth assume that the debt-equity ratio does not deviate
systematically from its equilibrium value. Optimal firm behavior
then tells us that in equilibrium 1) s=r from optimal debt

finance and 2) q=1 from optimal equity finance. (Were q to
be > 1, the firm would continue to sell new equity to undertake
real investment until q=1.)

      Let us now look at optimal portfolio behavior of
                                                         investors,
assuming that firms satisfy these two equilibrium conditions.


      12Another problem, in principle, is prosecution for
trading on inside information.
                                                                   16.



In exploring this problem let us assume that the firm pays out

as dividends p percent of its after tax profits and reinvests
the rest. Also assume that the investor with a marginal tax
rate of m on interest payments has a marginal tax rate of n
on dividends1 and an effective tax rate of c on capital gains.
      When investing a dollar in bonds, the investor receives
r(l-m) =    s(1-m)    each period. When investing a dollar in equity,
the investor receives as dividends ps(1_T)(l_n) after tax.
The firm has also reinvested (1_p)s(1_T) per dollar of real

investment, implying a capital gain to the shareholder of

(1p)s(1T)(1_c) after personal income tax. Assuming that the

investor must buy only non-negative quantities of either asset,
he will invest in that asset giving the higher rate of return,

and only in that asset. He will be indifferent between the
two assets only if


(1.1) r(1-m) =       s(l-m)   =   ps(l_T)(1_n)   +   (1_p)s(1_T)(l_c)

      Let us explore this indifference condition further.
Miller (1977) effectively assumed here that p = 0 and c = 0;
although n = 0 and c = 0 would be equivalent. These imply that



      13Corporate holders of securities, for example, pay a full
corporate tax rate on interest receipts but,as noted, above are
able to exclude from taxable income 85 percent of dividend receipts.
      1If the individual can purchase negative quantities of
either asset, then he will find it profitable             to sell the less
desirable asset and to invest the proceeds in the other asset.
He will continue to do this indefinitely or until his tax rates
have evolved to the point where he is then indifferent between
the two assets.
                                                          17.


 the investor is indifferent
                               between bonds and equity if and
 only if rn = T  If m < T he will invest only in bonds, if
 m > T only in equity. The equilibrium debt-equity ratio there-
 fore depends on the progressivity of the personal income tax

 and the distribution of wealth across tax brackets. Since
 T = .-6
         now, whereas the maximum federal marginal tax rate is
 7O many individuals could well optimally be investing in equity
 in this context. Since, by assumption, returns to equity come
 aftercorporate taxes but then are free of tax, returns from
bonds are inferior for all holders with tax rates above the
corporate tax rate despite the fact that returns to bondholders

are not subject to corporate taxes.
      When all investors have purchased their preferred security,
the marginal investor (for whom m =T) will just be indifferent
between receiving the returns from a given real investment
through   debt or through equity. While returns to equity come
after the payment of corporate income taxes, those returns will
not be taxed again. On the other hand, bond returns, while not

subject to corporate income taxes, will be subject to personal
income taxes at the same rate. The firm will therefore be
indifferent to how it finances that given real investment.

In fact, assuxriing that the firm is small relative to the market
so that the firm cannot affect the characteristics of the

marginal security holder, it will find irrelevant any change in
                                                                 18.


its   financial policy, large or small. The Modigliani-Miller
conclusions are thus maintained at the firm level. However,

as noted above, the aggregate debt-equity ratio is determinant,
depending on the distribution of wealth across tax brackets.
       How realistic are Millerts assumptions? In particular,

is the marginal individual tax rate on the returns to equity

effectively zero? Since taxes on capital gains are paid only
at realization (with no interest penalty for the postponement),
or not at all if the share is still owned when the investor

dies, c will certainly be very small for many investors.

However, empirically the payout ratio p is approximately •55)5
Therefore,    the individual tax rate on equity is zero only as
long as n = 0    .   Due to the exclusion of 2OO in dividends from

taxable income for married couples, for small investors n = 0,

but almost surely in addition m < T         for those. investors, so

none will own equity. Similarly, tax free investors will have
n = 0 but also m = 0 < T, implying that bonds are preferable

to equity. Miller and Scholes (1978) point out that for very
large investors extra dividends may enable the investor to
increase his interest deduction so as just to offset any tax
due, implying also that n = 0     .   For   there to be a binding
restriction   on interest deductions, however, the investor must


       1This is the average figure in the National Income and
Product   Accounts for 1970-75.
                                                                     19.


    be deducting well over p25,000 in interest.16
                                                        According to
    the Treasury's file, a representative cross-section of
    individual tax forms, only .02% of tax payers who received

 dividends appeared to face a binding constraint on interest
 deductions.17 Therefore, for almost all individual
                                                     investors
 potentially interested in equity in this context, we expect
 n = m, the tax rate on dividend and interest
                                              income is the
 same.

         If n = m, at what value of m will
                                           an investor now be
 indifferent between debt and equity? We have indicated that
                  c    .2rn,
p      .55. Suppose/   as would be the case with a 60 percent
 exclusion and assuming postponement of the tax until realization
halves the effective rate.       Investors will then be indifferent
when m       .70. With reasonable values for the
                                                       parameters,
essentially no individual investors will own equity. To reinforce
this implication of the model, let us introduce tax free debt
earning an interest rate       rf .   We   present evidence in Appendix A
that rf has been approximately equal to .75r.18 Thus, the


           1975, the maximum deduction allowed was 25,0O0 plus
dividends plus interest income and other investment income
(realized capital gains plus items on Schedule E).
      1we would like to thank Dan Frisch for
calculations for us.                         doing these

      18The model would imply that if (1-rn) <
                                               .75, the individual
would borrow deducting the interest payments from taxable income
in order to invest in tax free bonds. However, the IRS would
disallow the interest deduction in this setting eliminating such
incentives. Our implicit estimate of m.25 is consistent with
McCulloch (1975) who estimated the marginal tax rate of holders
of long-term government bonds to be between .22 and .30.
                                                              20.


maximum tax rate that    individuals have to pay
                                              on interest
                        m   (r-rf)/rf = .25.
receipts is just 25 percent;/While under Miller's assumptions,
only individuals with m      T = .146   will prefer equity to bonds,
we find that no one will face this high a marginal tax rate.
We conclude that nobody will own equity.

       Thus,when the relative rates of return on debt and equity
are such that firms are indifferent between debt and equity
finance,    essentially all individual investors will prefer owning

debt to equity--the equilibrium financial structure in this

context will involve only debt. This conclusion is dramatically
counterfactual. Thus, in a world of certainty and taxes, it
does not seem possible to explain an equilibrium financial
structure with both debt and equity. An analysis ignoring
uncertainty is clearly unsatisfactory.
2. Uncertainty, no bankruptcy
      Given these counterfactual implications of the model
without    uncertainty, let us explore whether we will obtain
more realistic conclusions if we allow for uncertainty but not
bankruptcy, so that bonds are riskiess securities (ignoring
inflation risk). This is the setting used by Modigliani-Miller

(1958).    However, we continue to allow for both corporate and
personal taxes.
       As before, let us first look at the firm's incentives to

finance investment through debt issues. Now, at the margin the
expected return on a dollar investment must be sufficiently

above the market interest rate so as just to compensate shareholders
                                                              21.


 for the extra uncertainty which
                                   they bear as a result of the
 investment. We may then express the required expected rate of
 return, s, on the marginal dollar investment as s =
                                                        r+p
                                                          where
 p is the risk premium demanded by
                                     shareholders, before corporate
 tax, in compensation for bearing the extra risk. As before, the
 firm would be indifferent to
                              financing additional investment by
 issuing new equity when the stock market values the returns from
 a dollar of real investment at a dollar.   We can also show as
 before that if the stock market
                                 consistently values the returns
 from a dollar of real investment at less than a dollar, then the
 firm can borrow to repurchase equity and make arbitrage profits.

       With these two results, we can show that there still will
be an incentive to increase the
                                debt-equity ratio without limit.
                       of
The return on a dollar/real investment
                                       before corporate tax can
be represented by S = r+p +      Here     represents the random
element, with mean zero, in the return on the investment.
Optimal debt finance implies that equity holders will be

indifferent to the last dollar of debt-financed real investment,

so will be just willing to accept the residual s-r which has
expected return p in compensation for also accepting the stochastic
return       Optimal equity finance implies that equity holders
will be willing to pay a dollar for the returns on a dollar

real investment, so they will pay a dollar for an expected return
r-I-p along with a stochastic return €, all prior to the corporate

tax. Combining the two results, equity holders must be willing
                                                            22.



to pay one dollar to receive a nonstochastic return r .      However,
we found in the previous section that when the alternative
investments are riskiess taxable bonds also earning r and tax

free bonds earning rf       .75r that no individual would invest a

dollar in equity to earn a nonstochastic before corporate tax

rate of return r.19 As long as debt remains riskiess, the firm
will always have an incentive to increase the debt-equity ratio
without limit. The model, allowing for uncertainty but not

bankruptcy, still has dramatically counterfactual implications.


3. Uncertainty with bankruptcy
         Let us now allow for the possibility of bankruptcy in the

model. What if bankruptcy is costless? We showed in Section l.A
with costless bankruptcy and without taxes that the debt-equity

ratio   would be irrelevant. With taxes, however, all investors
would pay less taxes through owning debt, so firms would desire
to increase their debt-equity ratios without limit.20 Since
we know that firms (and their lenders) do tend to limit the
extent   of financial leverage, it   would appear that bankruptcy

        19With equity, the after tax return is at best r(l_T) =
while   tax free debt earns .75r.

        20The IRS   could threaten to reclassify debt as equity for
tax purposes were debt finance used almost exclusively. This
threat would create an incentive to maintain enough equity to
forestall the danger. It is doubtful, however, that one can
rely on this explanation for the existence of the amount of
equity actually in existence.
                                                             23.



is sufficiently costly to affect the value of the firm materially.

      One problem that must be faced if bankruptcy is costly,

however, is why the market does not find some device to avoid

such costs. Presumably, avoiding these bankruptcy costs is in
the best interests of the various claimants on the firm in

aggregate. However, there are several reasons why bankruptcies
may occur in spite of the cost. Negotiation with the full set
of investors is both difficult and very costly—-especially

when public bondholders exist. Bankruptcy costs arise in large
part precisely because of these difficulties.

      While the availability of alternatives to formal bankruptcy
puts some upper bound on the costs of bankruptcy (as argued by
Haugen and Senbet (1978)), these alternatives are themselves

costly. Costs are not avoided by informal reorganization for
the essential problem remains of negotiating acomplicated

settlement among parties with different interests and alternative
legal remedies. Indeed the problems are sometimes so complex
that informal reorganizations without bankruptcy is either

impossible to achieve or can be arranged only with costs as
large as those incurred with formally bankruptcy. We show in
Section II that this is especially true if there are many classes
of security holders all of whom must agree to a reorganization
plan and all of whom may take recourse in litigation if they

subsequently feel they were treated unfairly.
                                                            2.

      There is also a potential problem of externalities.

When any reduced coalition of investors considers preventing

the firm from going bankrupt, it must ignore the resulting benefits

or costs accr'uing to the remaining investors. But the smaller

the coalition, the larger this externality. The benefits of
avoiding bankruptcy for the reduced coalition may not be as
large as the costs of keeping the firm out of bankruptcy even
if the benefits to the investors as a whole are large enough.

Bulow and Shoven (1978) and White (1979) give examples of this,
where a coalition of bank lenders and equity holders would choose

to force bankruptcy in spite of the costs, at the expense of the

public bondholders.

      Another inducement to bankruptcy is that as the size of

debt increases relative to the value of the firm, the management

acting in the interest of stockholders will find more inefficient

investments becoming profitable as they ignore any costs born by,
bondholders or bank lenders resulting from an increase in the

probability of bankruptcy. Bondholders, unable to prevent such
actions may well stop the erosion in the value of their securities

by forcing the firm into bankruptcy at their first chance,
in spite of the transaction costs of bankruptcy.

      Finally, formal bankruptcy may be the only way a firm in
distress can obtain new financing. This is so because new loans

to the bankrupt estate receive an enforceable first lien on the
assets of the estate while new loans to a reorganized company
cannot receive the same degree of protection.
                                                           25.



         How, then, ought these bankruptcy costs to be modelled
 when studying the firm's debt-equity decision? The covenant's
with existing bondholders would normally require that any

 further debt issued be junior in priority in bankruptcy to the

 existing debt, unless certain earnings coverage and liquidity
ratios are met, in which case bankruptcy is highly unlikely,
at least over the near term. When considering additional debt,

the stockholders and the potentially most junior debt holder

form a coalition. Only possible bankruptcy costs born by this
coalition will be considered in the decision to increase the
debt of the firm. These costs will depend mainly on the existing

debt-equity ratio (positively) and the variability of both prior
and additional earnings or cash flow (giving together the change

in the probability of threatened default), though the form of

the dependence will vary by firm. Only part of the total costs
of bankruptcy will be born by this coalition, however, with the

fraction depending on the priority rules in bankruptcy and the

circumstances under which bankruptcy would occur.21 As we shall
see below, "me first" rules are often not honored in bankruptcy
reorganizations.

        In analyzing the effects of uncertainty and possible

costly bankruptcy on the firm's financial decision, we assume

      21To the degree that part of the costs created by a higher
debt-equity ratio are ignored in financing decisions, since they
are born by existing bondholders, these decisions will be inefficient.
Increasing the fraction of bankruptcy costs born by this coalition
would therefore improve the efficiency of investment and financial
decisions, and revisions in the legal structure of bankruptcy
ought   to aim towards this.
                                                                  26.



that the firm sells its securities on a market satisfying the

assumptions of the capital asset pricing model. Brennan (1970)
and Gordon-Bradford (1979) show that when the capital asset

pricing model is applied in a world with personal taxes, all

securities traded in the market will satisfy the equation.22

(3.1)       +   a(d.   -
                           r) iM
                               =       +
                                           a(ãM
                                                  -
                                                      r))
Here, g1 is the part of the expected return on the i'th
security which is given capital gains treatment, di is the
part of the expected return taxed at ordinary rates, and r
                                               the
is the return, also taxed at ordinary rates, on/riskless asset.
The subscript M refers to the market index, and             measures the

(systematic) riskiness of the i'th security. In the derivation,
it is shown that a is a weighted average across investors of
the relative value of a dollar of dividends to each investor
                                               2
                                                     also
compared with that of a dollar of capital gains.3 a is/the same
for all firms.             The equation says that the equilibrium risk
premium on any asset (the left hand side of 3.1) compensates
just for the component of that asset's risk (measured by )
that    moves with the market as a whole--any other component can

be diversified away and merits no risk-premium.



      22The derivation assumes that only g and              are
stochastic.

      23When only taxes affect the relative values of capital
gains and dividends, an investor's relative value of dividends
would equal     .  When m   n for all investors, however, the
weight ab on bond interest payments will differ from the
weight a on dividend receipts.
                                                          27.


        Pt the equilibrium debt-equity ratio for the firm, both
 the debt and the equity issued by the firm must satisfy the

 capital asset pricing equation, and the firm must find issuing
 debt or equity to be equally profitable at the margin.     In

 addition, when investment is optimal as well, investors must be
willing to pay a dollar to receive the returns from a one

dollar marginal investment, whether the financing was from debt

or from equity. What implications do these equilibrium conditions
have?

        Let us explore first the relative profitability of debt

and equity finance when the probability or costs of bankruptcy

are not affected by the choice.2 Even for this case there are
two new complications which must be addressed.   First, when
considering debt vs. equity finance, though total bankruptcy
costs are assumed to be unchanged, the fraction of the receipts

in bankruptcy going to the coalition of equity holders and the

possible new bondholder may be affected by the financing decision.

However, if the new debt is, in fact, junior in priority to all
existing debt, as new equity would be, this may not occur.
Second, even if the amount of uncertainty born by the coalition
is the same whether debt or equity finance is used, the risk

premium demanded for the given risk may be affected by the
financing decision. However, because of the implicit assumption
in the Gordon-Bradford model that all stochastic returns are


             setting is essentially the same as that used in the
previous section, and we will show that the conclusions remain
unchanged when we use the capital asset pricing model.
                                                          28.



taxed at the capital gains rate, the capital asset pricing
model implies that the total risk premium (the right side of

equation 3.1) required to compensate investors for bearing all
the risk depends only on the covariance of the uncertainty with
the market uncertainty, and not on how the uncertainty is split

between bondholders and equity holders.
      Since the total risk born by the coalition, and the price

demanded for bearing that risk, is unaffected by the financing
decision, we need only look at the risk premium received (the
left side of equation 3.1) in order to decide whether the firm

will find debt or equity finance more profitable.      1½s long as

the risk premiums received are equal under either debt or equity
finance of a given investment, the market will value the returns

independently of the form of finance, implying that the firm is

also indifferent to the form of finance.       It can be shown that

the risk premiums will be equal in this context when:25

(3.2) abr = (1_p)r(1_T)       +   apr(1_T)
This comparison is equivalent to that in equation (1.1) assuming

      25When a dollar of investment is financed by equity, the
expected receipts to the firm after corporate tax (including
expected bankruptcy costs) are s(l_T). With p still representing
the percent    paid out as dividends, the risk premium received,
as valued in the market (the left hand side of equation 3.1) is:
EV(s) =   (1_p)s(l_T)   +   ap(1_T)   -
                                          ar
where EV(s) represents the expected return to equity over the
risk free rate resulting from before tax return . When the same
investment is financed by debt, the expected after tax receipts
to the firm are r + (.r)(1_T). Were there zero expected capital
gains on bonds, then when bond finance is used, bondholders would
receive an expected risk premium abr_ar = BV(r), the expected
value to bondholders of the return r, over the risk free rate,
while equity holders would receive the rest, increasing the risk
                                                                29.


a = 1-n and ab =   1-rn
                          , implying   that investors prefer bonds

except when ab is extraordinarily smaii.26 But of course this
should be the case since we have so far ignored any effect of

the financing decision on the probability of bankruptcy so the
situation is basically that of the last section.

      However, a decision to finance an extra dollar with debt
instead, of equity will increase the probability of bankruptcy,
and increase the moral hazard associated with risky debt,

described in section 1. These increased costs will be split

between the existing bondholders and the equity holders (perhaps
along with a coalition of the new junior bondholders).27

The component of the costs that will be borne by the existing

bondholders will be ignored by the coalition deciding whether to


(footnote 27 continued)        —
premium they receive by EV(s-r) + ar .  When comparing the
expected value to investors of the rturn to_the firm using
equity vs. debt finance, we then compare EV(s) with BV(r) +
EV(s-r) + ar .  If                                           —
                   they are equivalent, then BV(r) + ar = EV(s)       -
EV(s-r) = EVr) + ar orabr= (1-p)r(lT) + ap r(1_T). Z
      26The derivation of 3.1 assumed n=rn and ignored the
existence of tax free bonds. When n,Lrn, the weight a on interest
receipts would differ (and presumably be smaller) th'n the a
weight on dividends.

      27To the extent that public equity also has moral hazard
or agency costs, as described in Jensen and Meckling (1976),
then the increased costs described are net of the decrease in
agency costs associated with the decrease in equity.
                                                            30.



increase debt. We assume that the other component of the

increased costs is itself an increasing function of the existing

debt-equity ratio. These increased costs include both the extra
risk premium demanded resulting from the correlation of these

bankruptcy costs with the market risk,28 and, also, the decline
in expected return due directly to the increase in expected
                     c ( D/ E)
bankruptcy costs. Call/the total increase in bankruptcy costs
from financing an extra dollar by debt instead of equity.

Now, the firm has chosen an equilibrium debt-equity ratio when:

       ar     =   (1_p)r(1_T)   +   apr(1_T)   +   c(D/E)
The existence of bankruptcy costs makes equity finance relatively
more attractive, and in equilibrium by enough so that the firm
is indifferent at the margin between debt and equity finance.

Since the function c(D/E) will vary by firm for many reasons,

particularly because of the variability of its stream of operating

eainings, the equilibrium debt-equity ratio will also vary by
firm, with firms having more variable earnings choosing a lower
debt-equity ratio. In Section II B, we measure empirically the
size of this variation in firm debt-equity ratios. The size
of c(D/E) in equilibrium will depend on the specific values of
a and ab .    We    will discuss below some empirical evidence on
the sizes of these parameters.


                  systematic component of bankruptcy costs is often
ignored. An       important cause for systematic or market risk is
thesensitivity of corporate returns to general market conditions.
But a cyclical downturn is likely to increase the probability of
bankruptcy and its associated costs. Thus, firms with high
debt-equity are likely to have higher anticipated systematic
risk as has been suggested by Rosenberg and Guy (1975).
                                                              31.


       Let us now   explore   individual debt-equity decisions by
 looking more closely at the capital asset pricing model. When
 looking at the individual's utility maximizing portfolio choice
 in this model, we find as seen in Gordon-Bradford (1979) that

 for each individual an equation analogous to 3.1 will be

 satisfied for all securities. In the equation, however, a will
equal the ratio        for    that investor, and the subscript M
will no longer refer to the market portfolio but to that

individual's utility maximizing portfolio. Each individual
will own every asset in a non-zero, though not necessarily

positive, amount.29 However, individual portfolios will vary
due both to differing marginal tax rates and also to differing
utility functions (if no risk free asset exists).       Those with
lower tax rates would normally put a smaller (if not negative)
share of their portfolio into equity, but everyone would be

active in the market for equities--unless an individual is

completely indifferent to acquiring a share of equity, at the
existing price, he can profitably either buy or sell shares.




      29Negative holdings of assets ought to occur only when
tax rate differences are very large. When all individuals have
the same tax rates, they all own a proportionate share of the
market portfolio. Except in degenerate cases (such as Miller
(1977) where there is no uncertainty) portfolios will change
continuously as the tax law moves away from equal rates. Large
changes in rates from equality would be necessary before any
holdings of equity became negative.
                                                            2.


 This conclusion contrasts with the complete portfolio specialization

 implied by Miller's model (1977). Since he ignored uncertainty,
 he ended up with corner solutions when solving for optimal

 portfolios.

         An additional implication of the model is that risk is

 distributed inefficiently by the securities market as a result
 of tax distortions. Intuitively, the argument can be described
 as follows. Recall that risk will be efficiently distributed

 only if,at the margin,each individual demands the same risk
premiums (charges the same price) for accepting a given lottery.
The basic point of the argument is that because taxes influence

portfolio choices this efficiency condition will not be met.
         In equilibrium those in all tax brackets are indifferent

between debt and equity at the margin. Any relative tax advantage
to equity vs. debt must therefore be counterbalanced by a larger

cos-t at the margin of bearing the risk in equity- -the risk

premium on equity ought to be larger for those with a relative
tax advantage in equity.3° Those with a relative tax advantage
in equity demand a larger risk premiumbecause they own relatively
more equity in their portfolio. As a result, there will be a
higher covariance of the return on new purchases of equity with


            capital asset pricing model implies that for any
given marketed security, an individual in equilibrium would
just be satisfied with the risk premium he does receive:
         -
   +
      ad       max(j-,
                    are), where a =      .  The behavior of
this expression as a function of a provides the   justification
for the statements in the text.
                                                          33.

 the return on their portfolio as a
                                    whole, leading to a larger
 risk premium at the margin. Individuals in higher tax brackets

 will find that equity tends to be relatively more attractive
 than bonds, because these investors obtain tax advantages from
 the relatively favorable treatment of capital gains. Those in
 low tax brackets have a relative tax disadvantage in equity
 since the higher capital gains component in equity carries little
 advantage for them. Those   in the highest tax brackets also have
a relative tax disadvantage in equity since   tax exempt bonds
have   such a high return after tax in comparison. Thus, the
condition for efficient risk spreading is not achieved. Indiviuals
demand different risk premiums for holding additional limits of

equity on the margin.

       In summary, when we allow for both uncertainty and costly

bankruptcy, the implications for the firm's equilibrium financial
policy are:

      1) Each firm will have its own optimal debt equity ratio,
with firms with riskier investments choosing a lower debt-equity

ratio. The debt-equity ratio is no longer indeterminate, nor
is there an incentive to increase it without limit.

       2) Individuals will hold diversified portfolios, with
those in the lowest tax brackets owning relatively little equity,
and those in the highest tax brackets specializing in tax exempt

bonds. Unlike in Miller (1977) there is no specialization of
portfolios.
                                                             3lt..


         3)   Excess burden costs now arise from a) bankruptcy
costs, and b) inefficient spreading of risk across investors.
The magnitude of these costs is further explored in Section III.

These implications are much more realistic than those from the

previous model without costly bankruptcy. The elimination of
many of the earlier counterfntual conclusions makes us more
confident in the other forecasts from this model we will make

below.


C. A Note on Dividends
         So far in our analysis including corporate and personal
taxes we have taken the payout rate as given even though the

firm has complete control over the dividends it pays. If we
allow the firm to choose an optimal dividend payout rate, what

do the models imply? When there are no taxes, we showed that
the dividend payout rate is irrelevant. Unfortunately, the above

models, seem to imply that, contrary to fact, no dividends ought
to be paid.1 While a few attempts have been made to rationalize
the payment of dividends, the size and stability of dividends
remains a puzzle.

      When the firm considers the payout of available funds as

dividends, it faces the alternatives of using the funds for

repurchase of equity, new investment, or retirement of debt.
Let us look first at the equity repurchase option. Assume that


         1A1ternatively, the implication is that dividends are more
valued   relative to capital gains than one would have expected
given their relative tax treatments.
                                                                     35.



one dollar will be paid out by the firm this period either for
dividends or for repurchases, and that N shares exist initially.
If the firm chooses to pay dividends, then each shareholder
receives         ,   after       personal taxes. If the firm decides publicly

to repurchase shares, then the remaining shareholders experience
a capital gain of            ,   while   the shareholders who sold out
experience a capital gain of the same relative size. This amounts
to         after capital gains tax, which we assume is imposed on
accrued gains.32 Shareholders for whom c < n would prefer
repurchase to dividends and conversely.33
          If instead of using the dollar to repurchase shares the
firm were to retain the dollar using it for new investment or

for repurchase of debt (equivalent at the margin) then the total
value of the equity would increase by an amount that we shall

denote by q .        Optimal equity finance of investment implies that
the stock market ought to be willing to pay a dollar at the margin

for the returns from an additional dollar of equity-financed
real investment. Profit maximization thus implies that q                   1.

Each share would experience a capital gain of                 after tax, so

in equilibrium retentions are equivalent to repurchases.

      32The algebra is somewhat messier with a tax only at
rea lization.

      33We abstract from transactions costs in this example.

      If the debt-equity ratio is not in equilibrium, at that
            1. After-tax capital gains on each share are then
      -
moment, q
       .  An investor now prefers retentions if and only if

q >        .   However, repurchases continue to dominate dividends
as long as c < n
                                                              6.

      How then does c compare with n ? The presumption of
course is that c < n .      It   is this presumption which leads to

the conclusion that firms ought not to pay dividends. However,
not all investors will favor repurchases. For example, for

married couples filing jointly with under p200 in dividends,
n = 0 so c > n .   I1so,   for corporations owning shares in other

corporations, 85% of dividends received are deductible, so
n = .072, assuming a marginal corporate tax rate of 146    percent.
The statutory tax rate on capital gains is .28, so that even
with the gain from postponement of the payments until realization,

one would expect c > n for corporations.       In addition, tax exempt
institutions are sometimes constrained against spending capital

gains and so may prefer dividends.
      What incentives does the firm face, given this disagreement
among shareholders? We assume that the firm's objective, and
implicitly that of a majority of its shareholders, is to maximize

the value of its shares, although such an assumptionmay be
questioned. What dividend policy then will maximize the value
of the shares? Under the assumptions of the capital asset pricing
model, the market weights dividends relative to capital gains

by a factor a which is just a weighted average of the ratios
     across investors.35 The relative weight on any investor's


      35See Gordon and Bradford (1979) for a derivation.
 ratio           in determining a is larger for investors who are
 less risk averse at the margin (infinite if risk neutral),

 probably giving corporations and institutions relatively more
weight in the determination of a
           If,in spite of the extra weight on the less risk averse,
a   < 1,   then the firm can increase the value of its equity by

repurchasing shares rather than paying dividends. The presumption
that firms ought not to pay dividends is equivalent to the
hypothesis that a <      1.   Fortunately, it is possible to estimate
the value of a statistically by comparing the average returns

on equity in firms with similar riskiness but different dividend

payout rates. Black and Scholes (l97.) find a to be

statistically indistinguishable from one, while Gordon and Bradford
(19T9) find that while a varies above and below one over time,
on average it is fairly close to one.

    -    Though these empirical results are consistent with firms
paying dividends since the stock market seems to value dividends

and capital gains equally, they raise the question of how the
market a can be around one when for so many investors, a is
well below one. We have shown that taxes do not affect all
investors the same way, however.       Moreover, taxes are not the
Only factor affecting the relative value to investors of

dividends vs. capital gains. Transactions costs for example will
favor dividends for many shareholders intending to consume the

income. Small investors, for example, those with ,5,OOO or less
                                                         38.



invested in a sample security, would face transactions costs

of well in excess of 10 percent were they to liquidate small
pieces of their investment in lieu of receiving dividends.
Alternatively, Black (1976) hypothesizes that investors have an
irrational preference for dividends.

      Even if a is accepted to be around one on average, because
the estimates of a wander over time, another prDblem is created.
Only if a = 1 will the firm find it profitable both to retain
or repurchase and to pay dividends. While a    1 it ought to

cease completely one activity or the other. Yet dividend payments
are extraordinarily stable over time. Some factor clearly is
being ignored by the models. To the extent that dividend
recipients, such as tax-exempt institutions, use dividends to

fund consumption, one can rationalize some desire for stability

in payments. However, many recipients do not consume out of
dividends, yet virtually all firms have very stable dividend

payments.
      An alternative explanation for the stability of dividend
payments, explored in Bhattacharya (1979), is that the level of
dividends is used a a signal to investors concerning the financial
strength of the firm. This use of dividends as a signal seems
intuitively very appealing. Firms have such latitude in areas

such as inventory valuation, depreciation, writing off or capitalizing
certain expenses, etc., that it is not always possible to obtain
                                                              59.


 a good estimate of corporate earnings with either reported data

 or earnings figures adjusted on the basis of publicly available
 accounting information. A dollar of earnings for one company
 may not be equivalent to a dollar of earnings for another. No
 such ambiguity exists with a dollar of dividends, however.

 Hence, dividends can be used in the financial community as a proxy
 for true earnings.

       While the signalling role provides an explanation of how
dividend payments may benefit the firm, through creating more favor-

 able expectations of future profits,a given dividend payout rate
also creates additional costs. In addition to higher personal
taxes, dividends increase the firm's need to seek outside funding,
or to cut back on investments, in order to offset the loss of

internal funds. The firm itself must pay substantial transactions
costs such as underwriters fees in order to float new issues
of -debt or equity. Moreover, substantial new issues can usually
be sold only at a discount from prevailing market prices. The

firm is assumed to trade off these benefits and costs created

by additional dividends when choosing its dividend payout rate.

More profitable firms, everything else equal, will find any
given level of dividends relatively less costly since they will

use outside funding less frequently or at lower costs. As a
result, they will choose a higher payout rate, enabling dividends
to be useful as a signal.
                                                        1.O.




      One implication of such a model is that the level of

dividends is now much less sensitive to the value of a , as

now (1-a) is only part of the net costs in paying dividends.

This provides an alternative explanation for the stability of
dividends, given that a has wandered above and below one in
recent years. Once dividends are used as a signal of tnormaltt
earning power, one would expect firms to be quite reluctant to
cut dividends in response to a temporary drop in earnings (or
to finance a large investment) since the dividend cut might be

misinterpreted by the market.

      For this signalling argument to be convincing, however,
several questions must be answered. First, are there cheaper

ways to signal profits than paying dividends? For example, commitments
to repurchase equity or debt would put the same financial pressure
on the firm, so provide the same signal,            yet appear
           to investors
tobe cheaper/since they imply lower tax costs. However, when
the tax costs of the signal are lower, firms have to signal more

aggressively in order to distinguish themselves from each other,
implying extra costs resulting from a drop in retained earnings.
It is not necessarily true that the total costs of the signal
are lower when the tax costs are lower.   There is a second
                                    that signal higher profits
problem with the argument in that increin dividends/result
in an immediate capital gain, yet the costs occur gradually and
            Thus
in the future../tIere may be incentive for current shareholders

to signal falsely to induce a jump in share price, then to sell
                                                              4l.



out before the costs must be paid. The taxation of capital gains
at realization could dampen incentives for such speculation.

More importantly, the threat of legal sanctions undoubtedly

provides a strong disincentive against such manipulation.
        In spite of the progress made, we still lack a full

explanation for the nature of dividend payments. However, there
seem to be enough possible approaches that the overall model of
the firm is not undermined by the existence of dividends.


D. Inf1ationandCoporateFinancia1St
        In the previous analysis, we implicitly assumed a stable
price level. What effect will the introduction of inflation have
on our results? The tax system is certainly not neutral with
respect to the inflation rate. in analyzing the effect of
inflation, let us first return to the certainty setting of
section lA and introduce a constant rate of inflation it
We   will first look at the new equilibrium conditions, and then
investigate the effect of an unexpected change in the inflation
rate. Using the latter results, we will then explore the effects

of an uncertain but neutral inflation rate.
        In the presence of a steady inflation rate, the firmts

investment incentives change for two primary reasons. First,
the real after tax interest rate will normally drop since the
inflation premium in the interest rate is tax deductible under
the corporation tax. If the nominal market interest rate is
r +   it (so   that r represents the real market interest rate),
then the real after tax interest rate is (riit)(l_T) -   it = r(l-T)   -   itT.
                                                               )i2.

 For example, if r = .03 with or without inflation, and T =
                                                               •5
the introduction of a ten per cent inflation rate causes the

real after tax interest rate facing the firm to drop from .O1

to -.035, a very dramatic change. A sufficient rise in r
could offset this drop. However, Feldstein and Summers (1978)
provide empirical evidence that inflation does not much affect
r .   Incentives   for real investment increase as a result.
      while it is true that individual taxes may tend to rise
with inflation since individuals pay tax on the inflation premium,

this disadvantage will only be conveyed to the firm through a
change in the market rate of interest, i.e. through a rise in
the real before tax interest rate. There is no evidence, however,
that this occurs.

      There is, of course, an offsetting increase in effective
tax rates on the firm since depreciation allowances decline in

rel value due to inflation when depreciation is based upon
historical           In addition, for firms not using LIFO
(last in first out) accounting procedures for their inventories,
expenses in production will be understated for tax purposes--the
cost of goods drawn out of inventory would Je assessed at the
dollar price from an earlier date. These factors discourage
real investment.



            might view the shift towards more accelerated
depreciation formulas for tax purposes as an attempt to
alleviate this effect of inflation.
                                                              11.3.




        Expressing the combined effects in the notation used

previously, whereas without inflation optimal debt finance of
 investment would imply s(1_T)      r(1_T),37 with inflation firms
 invest until s(l_T) + T(D_Da) =   r(1T)   -
                                               ItT, where D is the
depreciationallowance per dollar of capital in the tax law,
and where Da is the actual replacement rate per dollar of
capital.8      Inflation causes D to be less than
                                                       Da
        If the same percent of the capital stock depreciates both
in fact and in the tax law, but depreciation allowances are

based on historical costs, and if the capital stock has been

growing at g percent per year, then it can be shown that
T(D1a) = _ItT —-----    .39   If we again assume a ten percent
inflation rate, r = .03, and T =        along with Da = .1
and g    .02, then having depreciation allowances based on
historical costs causes the real after-tax interest rate faced

by the firm to rise by two percent. Since inflation also caused
the real interest rate to drop by five percent, there is a net
drop of three percentage points in the real cost of capital to
the firm.

      37The effects of deviations in tax formula for depreciation
from actual depreciation when there is no inflation continue
to be included in the definition of s. Modifications discussed
below, when uncertainty and costly bankruptcy exist, are ignored.
      8There are now several distortions in the composition of
investment. First, assets with different depreciation rates will
have different net rates of return in equilibrium. In addition,
marginal investments in the noncprorate sector will satisfy
s(1-m) + m(D-D ) = r(1-m)-mn, implying in equilibrium a different
net rate of return than in the corporate sector.
      391n order to estimate the net effect of a marginal change
in the inflation rate on T(D_Pa), we approximate the messy
                                                                       1.
       Let   us now look at the implications of inflation for the

equilibrium debt-equity ratio when there is no uncertainty in
the inflation rate. The condition for an optimal debt-equity

ratio ir equation (3.        ),   on the assumption that    = j, implies:
       c(D/E) =   r(T(1_ab))
Ho    does this change when inflation exists?                  -




(footnote    39 continued)



accelerated depreciation formulas in the tax law by an exponential
depreciation formula. We also assume that actual depreciation
 is exponential, and that, without
inflation tax depreciation and actual depreciation are equal.
Let us also assume that the firm's capital stock has been
growing at the rate g over time. This implies that t
periods ago, the real rate of investment (in current dollars)
was (D +   g)e_gtt per dollar of the current capital stock.
Of this investment, (Da +g)e a)tdt still exists. Tax
savings this period for depreciation allowances on the
investment t eriods ago is
                                  in current dollars. Total tax

savings this period from depreciation allowances per dollar
of the current capital stock is then

                         D)t               D+g)
                          a at       =                By definition,
  I
                                            a

                    As a result, T(D_Pa)        = TP(_.;.-_ - ])   =



::::_;:::'
                                                                115.




    If we use the same line of arguments as before, and continue

   to assume a        1, we find that:



           c(D/E) =   (r+t)(T_(l_ab))
  Therefore        the equilibrium debt—equity ratio increases when
   the inflation rate increases, as long as T > (1_ab), since the

   inflation premium on bonds is less heavily taxed than that on
       -     4.1
   equity.
           Let us nci look at the immediate wealth redistribution

   effects of an unexpected rise in the inflation rate, focusing

   first on the equity holders. As a result of earlier investments,
   the firm faces a schedule of depreciation allowances and interest
   payment obligations fixed in dollar terms. Due to the unexpected
   change in the inflation rate, the tax savings from depreciation
   allowances drop while the real value of interest payment

   obligations also drops. Back of the envelope calculations suggest
   that the two effects roughly offset.2 If a firm had not been

           1_o
           The use of the capital asset pricing model in nominal
   terms when there is inflation is justified in Gordon and
   Bradford (1979).
         le change in the real after tax interest rate facing the firm
   may have a small direct effect on     the function c(D/E) which
   is the flow equivalent to the present value of bankruptcy costs.
   However, if the expected costs are equal in all periods, then
   c(D/E) will not change.

     In calculating the gain from a drop in th real value of
debt, let us assume that one-third of the value of the firm is.
funded by debt, and that the average lifetime of debt outstanding
is ten years. The drop in the present value of debt payment
obligations is therefore:               10                     -l0(rYl
    1v[0(lT)_r(l_T)tdt+e_1Or(1_T)Ir(lT)e_(r+)(l)tat_e
   In calculating the loss in present value of depreciation allowances,
et us assume that exponential depreciation is a reasonable approximation
to actual accelerated depreciation formulas. If D is the ocrccnt
                                                                ii 6.




    using LIFO accounting, shareholders would experience an additional

    (though largely avoidable) loss through a real increase in

    corporate taxes.
          In addition to this small net effect of inflation on the

    profitability to equity holders of prior investments, there may
    also be a change in the future prospects of the firm.   If the

    real interest rate does not rise too much accompanying the change
    in the inflation rate, then it seems that the firm's investment

    incentives will have increased. This effective drop in the real
    after-tax interest rate (even taking into account the less
    accelerated depreciation allowances) makes all new inframarginal

    investments more profitable. The value of the firm's equity
   would tend to increase by the present value of these extra
    profits. Therefore, as long as the real interest rate does not
    rise too much, existing equity holders would tend to gain from
    an unexpected increase in the inflation rate, at least under
    the circumstances we have been examining.

          Even though existing equity may well rise in value in

    response to an unexpected increase in the inflation rate,

write-off or remaining capital allowed per year, then the fall in
value or depreciation a1ionce would then be:

  V[/7De_(Dr(i_T))tdt_
                  0
                       /TDe_n1T))tdtJ
   If we let   r .03, it = .06, T = •5 and D = .10 for a sample
clculaLion,   then the gain in the value of the debt would be .03V.
ith the same parameters, however, shareholders lose .09V as a
rsu1t
loss ofofonly
          the smaller real depreciation allowances, giving a net
              .0lV. While  both effects individually are large,
the net effect is small.
 existing bonds will surely drop in value. As a result, the
 debt-equity ratio (each measured at market, not book, value)
 will fall. Since this fall causes a drop in the wealth of
 individuals who for tax and other reasons prefer bonds, this

 fall will to a degree be maintained in equi1ibriurn.1
                                                       Conversely,
were the inflation rate to fall unexpectedly, there would be a

 tendency for the equilibrium debt-equity ratio to rise.
      When we allow the inflation rate to be stochastic, but

assume no uncertainty in relative prices, equity and bond
holders will face a distribution of possible wealth transfers

resulting from the stochastic inflation rate, with the relative
magnitudes of the distributions that described above. For a
given unexpected change in the inflation rate, it appears that
bond holders will be more strongly affected than equity holders.

This increase in the relative riskiness of bonds ought to result

in-a drop in the equilibrium debt-equity ratio.

      These conclusions about an increased investment rate and
an immediate drop in the debt-equity ratio, with perhaps even
a rise in equity prices, seem very much at odds with actual
observations. For example, several studies (e.g. Body (197))
indicate a negative correlation between the inflation rate and


            complication is that the rise in real tax revenues
resulting from the inflation may result in selective decreases
in tax rates or selective transfer payments which also alter
the distribution of wealth.

      In   equilibrium, though, the debt-equity ratio will rise
unless the redistribution of wealth is sufficient.
 stock market returns. What we have found is that it does not
 seem to be inflation per se that is the cause of the observations.

 Other factors must have accompanied changes in the inflation rate,

 whether by necessity or just historically, which have caused a
 drop in the tock market and in investment. For example,
 inflation tends to induce more restrictive government monetary

 and fiscal policies, possibly leading to a rise in the real
 interest rate and a fall in both investment and in the stock

market. A threat of price controls, imposed so as to lower
profit margins, could also induce these effects. In addition,

the degree of uncertainty will normally increase beyond that due
to a stochastic overall inflation rate. For example, relative
prices are more variable when the inflation rate is higher, as

documented by Vining and Elwertowski (1916), making business
more risky. A strengthened OPEC could also hav increased
the uncertainty in the economy. This higher uncertainty also
reduces the investment rate and the level of the stock market.

      The fact that the tax structure is not indexed does not in

itself lead to any unambiguous loss. One effect is to cause an
increase in the investment rate, reducing the gap between the

marginal return on capital and the marginal time preference rate.6
           of this
       orne/risk may be fairly easy to diversify away, however.
      6We showed above that in equilibrium, under simplifying
assumptions, s =   r   -   T g-t   .   In contrast, individuals
save until p = r(1-m) - mit, where p is their marginal time
preference rate. As long as
m < (ii÷),         as it normally will be, the distortion between
savings and investment incentives is reduced when it   increases.
                                                            14.9.



 However, we noted above (in footnote 8) that the composition
of investment is distorted due to inflation, given the tax law.

 In addition, there may be a rise in the equilibrium debt-equity

ratio, leading to higher bankruptcy costs. There is no presumption,
though, that indexing the tax structure, leaving it otherwise
unchanged, will be beneficial.


      Incentive forSathsadI,estrnerit
      In the models with no uncertainty, we concluded that
corporations would invest until the marginal return on capital
equalled the market interest rate, even though a corporate tax
exists. The corporate tax therefore did not distort savings
decisions, unlike the personal income tax. Noncorporate firms
would also invest until the marginal return on capital equalled
the   market interest rate, implying an efficient allocation of
capital between the corporate and the noncorporate sectors. To
what degree do these conclusions change when there is uncertainty
and   costly bankruptcy?
      Let us first examine the equilibrium marginal return on
capital in the corporate sector. Assume that the firm is considering
an extra dollar of real investment, financing   'y percent of it
with debt and the rest with equity. The firm chooses     y so
that the debt-equity ratio will continue to be optimal after
the investment. The firm will be indifferent to proceeding with
the investment if the expected rate of return on the investment

is just sufficient to compensate the bond and equity holders for
the use of their funds, given the risk that they bear.
                                                                                  50.



        In the context of the capital asset pricing model, assuming
a = 1   as found in Gordon and Bradford (1979), the indifference

condition implies


        (E.1) (       - yr)(1_T)    +
                                        Xbr    =
                                                   abr   + j(rm+dm_abrz) + CDy + CE(l/)

Here, r is the coupon rate on the bonds. The terms CD and
CE capture the effect on bankruptcy costs of a dollar of debt-

financed investment and a dollar of equity financed investment
respectiveiy.' We have assumed that returns on bonds and on
the riskiess asset receive the same tax treatment so that the

a weight on each is the same.
        Equation (E.l) states that the return received by equity

holders and debt holders (the left hand side) must equal the

risk free rate plus the appropriate risk premium plus compensation

for any change in expected bankruptcy costs. Rearranging the
equation gives an expression for the equilibrium marginal rate
of return on capital:
                  —                        a                   7-(l-a )
        (E.2)     s =   r(y   +   (i-'y)           - 'y(r-r)(—--j----T    )   +



                  j(rm+dm_abrz) + CDY+CE( l-)
                       l_T             1_T
        In   interpreting this equation, let us focus first on the

first term on the right hand side. Several earlier results in
the literature are special cases of this term, and ignore the


      'ese terms will be influenced by the nature of the
distribution of the return on the new investment , and its
covariance with the firmts existing investments.
                                                                 51.


 other terms. In Miller's (1977) model, at the equilibrium debt—

 equity ratio, ab = 1_T, implying here that s =
                                                    r   .   In
Stiglitz (1973), optimal finance of new investment is all debt,
so that y = 1, again implying s =
                                     r.  In Harberger (1962),
Feldstein (1971,.), and Shoven and Whalley (1972), there are no
person:l taxes and no debt, so y = 0     and    =   1, giving
S
    =-i:;:--
         Here, the story is much more complicated. The first term
embodies aspects of all the previous models. The second effect
captures the fact that for debt holders, T percent of the risk
is absorbed by the government through risky corporate tax

revenues yet only (l_cxb) percent of the risk premium is captured
by the government. The third term captures the size of the
market risk premium, while the last term captures the effect of

this expansion of the firm on expected bankruptcy costs.

        To what degree do taxes distort the investment decisions
of firms, conditional on the optimal form of finance, which we
noted above is also distorted by taxes? For no distortion to

exist, the marginal investment ought to earn the risk free rate
plus just enough so as to compensate for the social costs of the
risk and possible bankruptcy costs created by the investment.
If the marginal costs of risk bearing by the government were the

same as the marginal costs of risk born by the private sector
(as would be the case if risk is allocated efficiently across

investors), then the third term will measure the social costs
                                                              52.



of risk bearing.18 There is no presumption, however, that the

last term will capture properly the social costs of increased
bankruptcy risk, though we might assume that the effect of pure
expansion of the firm on bankruptcy costs would not be very

important.   If the expansion per se does not affect bankruptcy
costs, then the distortion created by the tax structure is

measured by the deviation of the first term from r .      Simple
                                             T-(l...a )
algebra implies that this deviation equals: ——j.—— (r - 'yr).

The equivalent distortion in Harberger (1962) is ——
The distortion here is less than a third as iarge.
                                                          r
      Our results differ from those in Harberger (1962) because

we explicitly allow for debt finance as an alternative to equity

finance, and take into account the effects of the personal income

tax. As Stiglitz (1973) noted, when a marginal investment is

financed by debt, there is essentially no corporate tax paid,
so no distortion.° Here, with y percent financed by debt, the
distortion is cut by V percent. As Miller (1977) noted, the
heavier personal tax on debt than on equity may offset the effect
of the corporate income tax, leaving equity as attractive as
debt on tax considerations, so implying no net distortion to


      18Mayshar (1977) derives the appropriate Pigouvian subsidy
for the case when this assumption is not valid.

      For   example, for T = .)#8, y = .3, r = .063 and r =
and a, =   .7,the distortion as measured hee is .017 in contrast
to a distortion of .08 in Harberger.
      '°If r =   r in the formula, this claim follows precisely.
However, since T percent of the risk is absorbed in corporate
tax revenues while Only a of the risk premium to bondholders,
the treatment under debt 1s slightly even more favorable.
                                                              53.


  investment.   Here the tax rate on debt is
                                               implicitly (1_ab)
 compared with the tax rate T on equity, and need not be equal.
 The tax disadvantage to equity now depends only on the

 difference between these two rates.     The total distortion is
 smaller because of a compounding of these two effects.

       We will examine the excess burden costs implied by this

 distortion in section III. It is apparent, however, that these
 results imply a much smaller distortion in investment and

 savings decisions created by the corporate tax than those found
 in many earlier papers.


 II.


       We have described the theoretical considerations influencing
 debt ratios in the economy. Tax implications suggest that high
 debt ratios will be favored while the
                                         possibility of costly
bankruptcy pushes in the opposite direction. In this section,
we look at the facts both to gain some understanding of the

development of actual debt ratios in the economy and to examine

• their consistency with the theory. The first task is to develop
a time series of debt-equity (or debt to total capital) ratios
for nonfinancial corporations.
                                                                         51..



   ?. Construction         of a Time Series of Debt Ratios
          The construction of a time series of debt to total capital
ratios at book value was
                                relatively straightforwar The total
sample of companies chosen was the 2,000 companies available on
the Standard   Poor's Cornpustat tapes. Only nonfinancial
corporations were included in our time series, however. Debt
consisted of the sum of long term debt plus short term debt
reported      in current liabilities. Equity consisted of the sum of
the conrnon stock and surplus accounts. In addition, the book
value of preferred stock was treated as           The debt ratios
                                                equity.
  in the table are the ratios              It should be noted that
                                     DB/(DB+E)
  not all of the companies on the Standard / Poor's tape had data
  available for all years. Hence, the atios shown in
                                                                   the table
  are    not for the same number of companies in all years.
        The   market   value calculations presented much more of a problem.
  It is simple enough to construct a         series   for common equity at
 market value. The year's closing price for each
                                                  company can
 simply be multiplied by the number of shares outstanding to
 arrive at the market value        of   equity. Serious estimation
 problems, however, arose in attempting to arrive at a market
 value for debt and preferred stocks since market prices of

 preferred and debt instruments are not available on the Compustat

 tapes. Fortunately, an unpublished          study    by   von Furstenberg,
 Malkiel and Watson (l98O),sponsore by the American Council of
 Life Insurance
                (ACLI),was available from which market values
                                                                      55.


 could   be estiniated.   In the 1CLI study a market value to book--
 value ratio was estimated for each two-digit industry in each

 year by means of a sampling of actual bond prices for
                                                            companies
 in each industry from the year-end editions of Moody's
 Bond Survey. We     converted
                           from book to market values by multiplying
                           ap ropriate rear's
 the book value figures by theMV/BV ratlo estimated in the ACLI
 study for the two-digit industry to which the company belonged.
 Since the MV/By ratios were estimated frcrn a sample of actual

 market prices, we   believe   that this technique gives us a close
 approximation to the true market value of debt.

    Similar techniques were used to estimate the value of
preferred stock. The ACLI study had estimated an average preferred
dividend yield by industry in each year. These estimates were

also arrived at by sampling actual price quotations each year.
We then estimate the value of the preferred stock for each of

the companies in our sample by multiplying that company's

preferred dividends as recorded on the Cornpustat tape by the

reciprocal of that year's dividend yield for the industry to
which the company belonged as estimated in the ACLI study.
The resulting debt to total capitalization ratios at market     were
estimated as Dj(D 1EM). The book and market value estimates are
shown in colurnn' 1 id 2 of Table 1.
   We have already noted that the data in columns 1 and 2 are not

based on the same numbers of observations. This could produce
seriously misleading estimates of the change in debt ratios over
time. For example, data may have become available for an
increasing number of hiqh debt firms over time leading to an
                                                                     56.

 upward bias in the time trend of recorded debt ratios.
  in an attempt to deal with this problem, columns 3 and t present
 adjusted debt ratios.

      in performing the adjusted calculations we took as a base
 year the Deriod for which the maximum rurnber     of   companies with
 both debt and equity measures were   available.        Then we looked
 at each pair of consecutive years to find the maximum number of
 firms for which all data were available in both years. For
 this common set of firms, we calculated the aggregate change

 (growth)in debt and total capitalization. This calculation
 was repeated for each consecutive set of years. Using the base
year for the level and the pairwise. series of growth rates to
record changes in that level, we obtained the adjusted measures
of aggregate debt and total capitalizaticn. From these we obtained

the   debt to total capitalization ratios in columns      3 and 1•
They embody the changes in debt-equity ratios for the largest
corzon set of firms available in each air of years. The
adjusted   series provides a better estirate of changes in debt-equity
ratios in that in comparing debt-equity ratios across time, it

assurres merely a common rate of change in debt and total capitalization
across firms at any date, rather than a coomon value of debt—equity
ratios across firms. It will be noted that these columns reveal            a

somewhat smaller increase in debt-equity ratios than are shown in
the first two columns.

  A further adjustment was made in co1unn five. Since 1973,          the
Comoustat tapes include data on the present value of mn-capitalized
                                                     TABLE 1
                                              Debt Ratios Over Time

        DB/(DB+EB)   DM/(DM+EM)    DB/(DB+EB)    DM/(DM+EM)           DB/   BB                DB/EARC   DM/EARC
        Unadjusted   Unadjusted    Adjusted to Common No. of Firms                to Common
                                                                      Adjusted
                                                                      No. of Firms and
                                                                      Includes Leases
                                                                      and Pensions
                                                                      After 1973
1957      0.219           0.158     0.2141            0.212
1958      0.218                                                                               .203       .187
                          0.123     0.2143            0.171
1959                      0.112                                                               .209       .197
          0.213                     0.237             0.156                                   .208
1960      0.225           0.1214    0.2142            0.168                                              .193
1961                      0.116                                                               .219       .205
          0.230                     0.21414           0.158                                   .229      .2114
1962     0.231!           0.173    0.2149             0.180
1963     0.2314           0.160                                                               .237      .225
                                   0.2146             0.165                                   .2).s5    .233
1961!    0.239            0.158    0.2147             0.157                                   .2148
1965     0.258                     0.262                                                                .236
                          0.157                       0.159                                   .256      .21414
1966     0.286            0.191    0.288              0.192
1967     0.310            0.181                       0.181                                   .267      .2147'
                                   0.311                                                      .279      .2148
1968     0.328            0.179    0.330              0.179
1969     0.3148           0.213                                                               .279      .231
                                   0.3149             0.213                                   .286      .233
1970     0.370            0.228    0.372              0.221!                                  .291
1971     0.367            0.2314   0.369                                                                .225
                                                      0.2314                                  .300      .235
1972     0.367        •   0.227    0.367              0.225                                   .302
                          0.280                                                                         .2149
1973     0.367                     0.367              0.279                 0.1497            .307
19714    0.381            0.363                                                                         .267'
                                   0.381              0.362                 O.l1              .306      .260
1975     0.375            0.316    0.3714             0.316                 0.1499            .300      .2148
1976     0.362            0.293    0.362              0.293                 0.148             .286
1977     0.358            0.321                                                                         .258
                                   0.358              0.321                 0.1473            .293      .270
1978     0.350            0.313    0.358              0.325                 0.1462
                                                                       58.


 leases and unfunded pensions which, in effect, represent debt not
 included In the balance sheet. Column five presents debt to total

 capitalization ratios adjusted not only for a common set of companies
 but also to include noncapi.talized leases and unfunded pension

 liabilities as debt from 1973 on.        Thus, at least from 1973 though
 1978, it is jssib1e to judge if accounting for lease financing
 and pensions would materially change any observations that could
be made on the unadjusted figures.
                                                              -


   The sixth and seventh columns of the table present a sorrewhat

different series of debt ratios. Here we measured corporate
debt a a percentage of the replacement cost of corporate assets.
These columns differ from the first coli.rns in several respects.
First, the company coverage is more IflcusIve in that all
non-financial corporations are included, not simply those included
in ti-ic Compustac tapeb. COflUJy LflC UCDL IUtdbULe Lb b IIYIIL.Ly
different from     earlier one in that all short and long term
                 the

interest bearing liabilities are included less interest bearing
liquid   assets. These data were estimated from the flow of
                                                                      funds
 accounts by George M. von Furstenberg (1977)). Finally, the
 debt ratio is figured not
                           against the total value of debt and
 eauity but rather against the replacement cost of assets including
 net fixed capital stock,
                          land, and inventories. The latter
 figures were obtained from the U.S. Bureau of Economic
                                                        Analysis
 and were also included in the
                                     von Furstenberg (1977) study.
 Finally,   the debt   at market   value measure was obtained by a
somewhat more crude adjustment than that done in        the   first
columns.     The adjustment was accomplished by assuming an
                                                            average
maturity    of corporate liabilities and imputing a capital
                                                            change
from recorded changin market interest rates.
                                                                            59.

       B.

            The table shows a fairly consistent
                                                             pattern, irrespective
  of the    method by which the debt ratios were measured. Debt ratios
  rise over     the period until the early 19703 and then stabilize or
  fall. The market value series tends to rise somewhat less than
 the book value series until 1973.               In l97, however, the debt
 to market value ratio rises sharply because of the collapse in
 the equity ruarket.While some of the sharp rise in
                                                    market debt
 ratios was revesed. as equity markets recovered during the
 late 1970s, it is still the case that aggregate debt ratios at
 mrket were almost double their 1957              level in 1978. We find in
 colur-ins 3    and   ,   however, that when     the series are adjusted to
 a   common number of firms, the rise in              debt   ratios is slightly
 smaller. Columns 6 and            7   show an even smaller increase in debt
burden.       This is so     because debt is compared with the replacement
value  of corporate assets, which rose sharply with the high
 inflation rates of the 1970s. In all the series,
                                                   however, there is
evidence      that the rise in
                                       debt-equity ratios is arrested by      l97
and tends to stabilize
                                 or fall slightly in the later years.
   The calculations in column 5 deserve
                                         special note. Here the
data are adjusted for leases and pensions
                                           after 1973.   It will be
noted that the fall in debt ratios since
                                          l971. is much sharper in this
lease-and pension... adjusted series           than    in the other book value
series in columns 1 and 3.
                                        Zpparently,    lease financing became far
less desirable in the late
                                                            the Financial
                                       l970s following a ruling of
lccounting     Standards Board changing the reporting requirements for
                                                                60.



leases. Thus, firms tended to cut back leases more sharply than
ordinary debt. This conjecture is confirmed by examining the
behavior of the subset of Cornpustat companies reporting leases.

From   19711- to 1978 there WaS   little   change in the (DB/DB±EB) ratio
not including leases and pensions. The l971i ratio was .393 while
the 1978 ratio was .3811-. When leases and pensions are included
however the ratio falls sharply from .511 in l971 to .1162 in 1978.
The major cause of the decline was the behavior of the lease accounts.
In   other words, the major factor causing a decline in the lease- and
pension—adjusted debt ratios was a cutback in lease financing rather
then retirement of straight debt. These calculations suggest that
there was a       sharper cutback in debt than is revealed by
the reported figures which do not include lease financing.
     These data are consistent with the predictions of the theory
when we allow for taxes, uncertainty, and costly bankruptcy.

The gradual increase in debt ratio over the early period can
reasonably he explained as follows:

     During the post-war period, corporate income taxes were set
at levels considerably higher than those of the 1930's and were
generally expected to remain at these higher levels.          Moreover,
during the 1950's and into the 1960's, it became more and more

generally accepted that'deep depressions such as occurred in the

1930's were highly unlikely. Indeed, by the mid-l960's financial
analysts probably became overonfident about the general
stability of the United States economy and about our ability to

"fine tune" away even mild recessions. in short, during the

post-war period, analysts came to believe both that the economy
had become more stable and that corporate taxes would remain at
higher levels.
                                                                61.



     The   theory developed above suggests that on both counts the
  debt-equity
   to the prewarratios should increase. Higher corporate taxes (relative
                  period)
 / increase the tax advantages of debt financing. An increasing
  recognition that the economy had become more stable suggests
  that the probability of bankruptcy involved in a given amount of
                                                 costs
  debt is lower and thus that expected bankruptcy/have   declined.
  Thus, for both reasons we would expect debt-equity ratios to
  increase oier the period, as indeed they did, according to the
  table.
     The cutback in debt-total capitalization ratios following the
  1973-714 shocks to the economy also seems consistent with the

  theory. Certainly few people believed in the    1960's   that the
 economy would suffer a 9    percent unemployment rate or that the
 inflation   rate   would be measured in double digits. Fewer still
 believed that both events could exist si!nultaneously. The

 sharpness of the 19714-75 recession made it clear that the economy
was not as stable as had formerly been believed. Moreover, the

higher inflation rates of the 1970's further increased risk

perceptions. High levels of inflation are associated with greater
variance in the rate of inflation and with a greater dispersion

of relative prices as has been shown by Vining and Elwertowski
(1977).. On both counts one would expect that a given debt-equity
ratio would carry an increased probability of bankruptcy. Hence
it is possible that the debt-equity ratios existing in 1973-714
were     considered higher than optirtal for the more unstable

economic environment. Certainly such a story is consistent with
the data showing some pull back in debt ratios during recent
years.
                                                               62.



          Our conjectures concerning changes in expectations about
the stability of the economy are consistent with data on actual
default rates for corporate bonds. The table below presents default

data from 1900 through 1977. The      default   rates listed are percentages
of the par values of bonds not in default at the beginning of a

given year that went into default during the year.

AVERAGE ANNUAL DEFAULT RATES FOR CORPORATE BONDS, 1900-77 (percent)
      •

                       DATE            RATE

                       1900-09          0.9
                       1910-19          2.0
                       1920-29          1.0
                       1930-39          3.2
                       191l0-1i.9       0.
                       1950-79          0.0!.
                       1960-69          0.03
                       1970-77          0.21
   Source:     T.R. Atkinson,        in Coroo     eBondQua1i, 1966
               for data through 1965, Smith Barney, Harris Upham ,    Co.,
               "Trends in Corporate Bond Quality,"1966-l977, for
               subsequent data.




          The experience of the l9Os and 1960s demonstrated that
default rates fell considerably below those recorded early in

the century. During the 1970s, however,


                     default rates did rise suggesting more instability

than was experienced during the 20 preceding years, although
default rates remained considerably below those of the earlier

years.
                                                                      63.


    C•
                                          tI2fl.P Debt Re t OS
    We
      have explained changes in debt ratios over time in terms
of the tax advantage of debt financing pushing debt ratios up
and the risk of bankruptcy and its associated costs restraining
leveraga.  It is interesting to ask whether the risk explanation
is consistent with the cross-sectiona1 pattern of debt ratios
observed    in the market. Our theory suggests that individual
                          inherent
companies with the greatest/risk of bankruptcy ought to have
the lowest debt ratios. In our empirical work, we hypothesized
that the companies with the largest instability of cash flow
              ones
will be the/most likely to experience liquidity problems and
thus to face an inability to meet debt service requirements,
at any given debt-equity ratio.

   The specific hypothesis tested was          Dt/(D÷Et) =
                     + t-(t-x)   )   f'   <0    where        is the

variance of cash flow measured over the period from t back to
t-x and (      + ) is    the average value of the firm over the
period during which the variance was measured. The sample
consisted of all nonfinancial corporations on the Standard /                Poor's
Compustat tape. Cash flow was defined as earnings available for

common equity plus interest plus depreciation and other noncash
charges. The variance of cash flow was measured by taking the
standard error of the estimate from an equation
                                                             CF1   a1 +     bit,
fit to either ten or fifteen years of data. Division by the
average value of the firm was performed so as to normalize the

instability measure. Debt ratios were calculated at both book
and market.
                                                                      61.


        table below gives some representative results. In
       The

 general, debt ratios are negatively related to the variance of
 cash flow. 70a The table indicates that firms with greater
 instability of cash flow do have lower debt to total capitalization
 ratios. The (book value) equations suggest a range of variati.
 in D/V ratios of about .07 for deviations of            plus or minus
 onestandard deviation from its mean. The relationship was a bit
stronger in the ten years to 1977 than in the ten years to 1972.
The relationship is also stronger when debt ratios are measured at

book rather than at market values. While the small "t" values arid
 low correlations indicates that our proxy for default risk i

undoubtedly inadequate, the results are at least consistent with
the theory developed above.


                              Coefficient of      Debt
  Tjae   Period                2                                            Correla-
                              cF/(DE)   (and      Ratio      No. of         tion


  15 years to 1977            -
                                  0.97
                                               _-_-- Observa
                                               Book Value
                                                                       tions;
                              (-3.66)                          1701           .09

             to 1977          - 0.13
  15 years
                              (-2.00)
                                               Market ValuE 1730             .
  10 years to 1977            -   2.2k         Book Value      1096
                              (-5.10)
 10 years to 1972             -   1.02         Book Value      1069          .12
                              (-3.91)




    5Oae realize that the  variance of cash flow is measured with
error, resulting in a bias towards zero in its coefficient., Our
concern here is to confirm the direction of the relationship rather
than to measure precisely the size of the effect.
                                                                        65.



  I   I I.
                              _flçyaflyQft
          In Part I, we described how the tax structure causes both

 firns arid investors to alter their behavior in various ways.

 However, wnen we consider various tax reform proposals in
 Part             IV, we will want to know the order of magnitude of the

 efficiency         casts when   individuals change their behavior in

 response to taxes. In particular, we will want to know how
 sensitive the size of the excess burden is to various tax
 parameters.          In this -prt,       we will attempt to estimate the

      costs resulting from the distortions affecting debt-equity,

      investment, dividend payout, and individual portfolio decisions.
  We will not, however, examine the costs of distortions affecting

  savings decisions, viewing these as beyond the scope of this
  paper.

       in the final section of Part III, we explore briefly how

various tax parameters affect the degree to which the tax

system is equitable, as defined by either a comprehensive income
tax or by an expenditure tax. While these considerations are
not quantified, requiring too many arbitrary assumptions, they
are certainly as important when evaluating tax reform proposals.
      •                           _____
             1.    Direct Measures of Bankruptcy Cost
             It is not surprising that reliable economic studies
estimating the costs of bankruptcy do not exist. The main
problem is that data are generally not available. The Securities
                                                                  66.


and Exchange Commission does not keep track of total bankruptcy
costs in any way that is generally accessible. Some private
lenders have records that show some, but not all, the costs of

a limited number of bankruptcies with which they have been
                  full data were available, however,
associated. Even if / there are several conceptilial difficulties
in   deciding what costs ought to be included. For example,
should the costs of a consultant       who was called   in to liquidate

a number of stores in the bankruptcy of one supermarket chainbe

included   as an administrative cost? This consultant may have
added sufficiently to the liquidation value of the stores so that
his net value added was positive rather than negative.

         a)   Estimating_the costs_ofpg
           In the hopes of shedding at least some light on the issue

 of bankruptcy costs, we have examined four recent bankruptcies
 in exhaustive detail. The data were collected from the Securities
 and Exchange Commission (SEC) and from the files of two large
 institutional lenders. In those files we could obtain the legal
 and administrative costs of the two institutional lenders as
 well as the costs of other institutional lenders in cases where
 a consortium of institutions joined together in pursuing settlement
 negotiations. We will refer to the costs of the itth private
 lender as         .   In   addition, certain general legal and
 administrative costs (cG), such as trustees fees andfees of
 outside legal counsel, were available in the files of the private
 lenders or the SEC. However, costs incurred by other private
                                                                        67.


    lenders were in general not available. We therefore
                                                         assume that
    the identifiable costs incurred by these two lenders (both the

    C and their share of the CG) as a percent of their holdings,
            of the firm's liabilities
                                           equal the total legal and
    administrative costs, CT, as a percent of the firmts total

    liabilities, LT, so that:

                                    EL
                  C
                  —=1
                   T EC.+
                       r1 --C
                          LT G
                  LT          EL.
                              i 1
           Table 2 below shows these cost estimates as a percentage
    of total liabilities.




                                     Table 2

                     Estimates of Bankruptcy Costs

                                                          Estimated Identifiable
                                                          Legal arid Administrative
    BusiQess                                Pre-petition Costs as a Percentage
                         Dates
Manufacturer of
Steel Products         June 77* ChXI       l8t, 000,000        2.118%
Manufacturer of
Ice Cream and          June 70—
Furniture              lug. 7       ChX      113,ooo,00o       8.90%
Manufacturer of
Phototypes et€ ing     Nov.         ChXI
Equipment                                    32,600,000        2.65/0

Discount Depart-
ment Stores            Nov. 73-
Operator               May 75     ChXI       90,800,000        6.25%

  *Not yet complete
                                                             68.



      For a number of reasons the cost estimates in
                                                    the above table
are biased downward. First, the cost      data are incomplete. Not
every disbursement is included and in sortie cases continuing
litigation is involved and substantial additional legal fees are

anticipated. Moreover, the time and expenses of the private
lenders' internal legal and financial staff is not included in
the estimates. In many cases the properly imputed costs of the
internal staff far exceeds the cost of outside expert counsel.
Finally,   the pre-petition liabilities significantly overstate
the true worth of the companies.    lssuming the value of the
settlements are only about one-third the value of pre-petition
liabilities (a reasonable assumption in these cases), the        -




estimates of percentage costs would be three times that shown in
the table.

         -It is interesting to note the circumstances involved

  in the bankruptcy
                   case showing the highest cost percentage in the
  table. It illustrates that firms in bankruptcy often do not
                                                                     opt
  for an early liquidation even when it is in the
                                                     best interest of      the
  Aondho1ders to do so. In this case, the private lenders believed
  it was in their interest to liquidate the firm
                                                 immediately in order
  to maximize the recovery for the holders of the senior
                                                            Securities.
  The trustee refused to formulate a plan of reorganization
                                                            until
  certain litigation against the company was resolved. This took
 three years and resulted in    a
                                   million liability. Z\bout two years
  later, the Trustee filed a plan that was rejected
                                                    by the creditors.
 At the end of almost
                        seven years, an acceptable plan was finally
                                                                69.

      approved.     As a result, legal fees ate up a substantial share of
      the value of the assets that were available at the time the firm

      went into bankruptcy. One might speculate whether there was any
      significancein the fact that the Trustee was a man in his 6 who
      was receiving lOO, 000 a year in trustee fees, the highest salary
      he had ever received.
        A detailed examination of these cases reveals that the legal
     and administrative costs may have been only a small fraction of
     the total costs involved. Examination of theL: individual cases
     showed that in some cases the bankrupt firm was unable to obtain
     trade credit and found its normal sources of supplies of inventories
     shut off. Moreover, these cases reveal that the companies
     themselves were often judged to be unreliable suppliers with an
     attendant    unfavorable effect on sales. Moreover, the onset of
     financial    difficulty often led to a loss of key personnel who
     preferred to work for a company whose long term outlook seemed
more secure. Finally, in the cases in the table involving retail
establ'ishments, there was a tendency for assets to shrink
drastically     during the period of financial distress.
             case of the operator of discount
-•         The /    department stores illustrates the typical pattern
when discount chains go into bankruptcy. First, charge account
customers stop paying their bills impairing the quality of the
receivables. Second, employees walk off with the merchandise, on
the shelves.                        .
                                                          .
                                                               70.

Third, the chain typically finds it impossible to obtain trade
credit, which severely impairs its ability to finance its
inventories. The very fact of bankruptcy can thus cause a drama tic
change in the stream of income and cash flow available for the
firm. Finally, a review of these cases revealed that the
mnegemnent of firms in or near bankruptcy generally found it
almost impossible to devote its time and energy to business matters.

         We therefore   conclude that while the identifiable legal
and administrative costs for a bankruptcy seem to be less than ten
percent of the par value of a firmts liabilities, this estimate is
often much too low. First, the firm is often worth much less than
its par value. In addition, omitted internal legal costs and the

disruptions in operation of a firm facing bankruptcy can easily

be very large.   It would be very difficult to measure these other
costs directly, however.
          There is another important aspect to bankruptcy proceedings
that bears on the cost issue. Court reorganizations, in contrast to
liquidations, often involve in addition a substantial transfer of claims
from senior bondholders to subordinated bondholders and equity holders.
Reasons offered for this court bias are, for example, that the equity
holders (and the trade creditors) and the trustees are usually local
people, while the senior debt holders are not from the local

community. Moreover, management typically owns substantial amounts
of the equity and the courts often decide that it is necessary to

give management a continuing stake in the company after reorganization
                                                                 71.



so as to give them an incentive to perform well. An additional
reason for bias may be that the courts often feel the lender can
afford to sustain some of the loss in order to permit the debtor
to survive.

         While we could not estimate independently the magnitude of

this transfer, we were able to assemble conclusive evidence that

such a transfer does in fact exist in court ordered reorganizations

in bankruptcy proceedings. We were able to find a sample
of recent bankruptcies where the estimated value of the securities
distributed to the senior debtholders was substantially less than
the total claim of those senior bondholders. Strict applications

of "me first" rules would imply that, in such a case, the senior
debtholders should receive everything of value the corporation is

able to distribute. The following table shows that in fact
subordinated debtholders received substantial settlements even

though the senior debtholders were not paid in full. Moreover,
since the equity holders received whatever equity was not distributed
to the bondholders, it is clear that even the equity owners received

some recovery.
                                                                             Value of
                               Toof                                          Securities
              _/)   of         Equity                             Completion Paid
    )im       Claim            in Post                                       to Senior
    eivod     Received         Plan            Interest           P.yrnent   I3ondholder
    Notes                                      Allowed    Rate    Per Plan   if Riskles

0070                     07°         0   '70       No      87°      198k

     07°             60 To     5 1 /0              No     N.A.      N.A.
                               (voting)

     0/0                 07°         QTo           Yes    N.A.      1978       607°
     01°                 QTo         Oiu           Yes    N.2½.     1978


        '1°              Qio         01°           No      97o*     ao25       68%
    6
L   0070                 07o        o7°            Yes     7o*       1990


76 7°                i/o            15/°           Yes     81o       1999      NA.
    2 11°            7910           53'/0          Yes     87°       1999




     Qf0             77ô            3970           Yes     N.A.     N.A.       N.A.

     0'iO            327°           231°           Yes     N.A2     N.A.


                                                                                      10
                         O           07°           Yes      810      1985      9770

     7o             1007°      27.570          -   Yes     N.A.      N.A.
                               (voting)
                                                                   73.


            While the table does not show the estimated market
                                                               value of
 the    securities   received bi the senior bondholders, we do have
 Drirtia    fade
             evidence that the senior bondholders did receie far
 less than the nominal amount
                              of their claim. The table does show
 the interest rate received by the senior bondhQlders
                                                      and, in some
 cases, the date when interest payments are to commence. Even if

we assume that the securities received were of the highest quality

and discount the interest payments to be received at the     AA
                      for newly issued securities,
long term corporate bond rate/ we find that the senior bondholders
in fact have received far less
 in   present Va he    thin they were due. The last column in the table
 doesprecisely that calculation for the cases in which the senior
bondholder received debt securities in settlement of their claims.
It will be noted that even under the polar assumption that the
securities received were riskiess, it is
                                         clear the senior bond-
holders      did not receive full payment. Since the securities
received were in fact      risky the argument holds a fortiorti.
           The United Merchants case, for example, represents a clear
departure from the "me first" axiom. The senior debt-holders.
received 35 percent of its claim in cash and 6 percent in notes.
The subordinated debtholders received no immediate cash but
                                                            were
paid    100 percent of their claim in debt securities.   The terms of
the debt securities received by the holders of subordinated debt
werh substantially more favorable than those delivered to the senior
debtholders. The subordinated debtholders received their original
interest rate and were entitled to full amortization by 1990,
while the notes delivered to the senior lenders accrued no interest
until July 1, 1985 and did not finally mature until 2025. In
addition, the restructured subordinated debt was elevated to
rank ari with the restructured privately held senior debt
in the event of a subsequent bankruptcy proceeding.
      These cases illustrate that in most instances subordinated

debt has enjoyed subsequent recoveries even
debt was not a id in full. One might wonder why the senior
debtholders would agree to such reorganizations where their
recoveries were far less than complete. A major consideration
is uncertainties regarding the timing and settlement of a future

plan. For example, in the United Merchants' case a majority of
the senior lenders felt that, as unsatisfactory as the plan in the
table was, it was preferable to the unknown terms and timing of

a plan that might be arrived at by independent trustee under
Chapter 10 of the Bankruptcy Act. Particularly, since the settle-
ment would involve immediate payment of 35 percent in cash, the
senior debtholders feared they could do even worse later. Another
reason for acceptance of "uncertainty" settlements is the acceptance
of a compromise plan of reorganization to resolve a highly complex
 litigation which, if prosecuted, might have taken many years to
resolve and would have impaired the business operations and growth
prospects of the company. This was the situation in the Equity

Funding case.
       In sum, senior lenders have been persuaded to "give up"
recoveries to subordinated lenders primarily because of the
combined effects of the high administration expenses of extremely

 long bankruptcies, concern about the delay, expense and
                                                                7ta.
 potential adverse results of litigated
                                        resolijo of disputes
 over the relative entitlements of holders
                                           of senior and subordinated
 debt, the benefits of "cash now" in a "quick
                                                compromise plan" as
 compared with more speculative
                                  recoveries from litigation of
 "Unknown cash x years from
                            now," and a desire in some cases to
 avoid other risks perceived to exist in
                                          long Chapter x cases.
 Finally, it should be noted
                             that the legal foundations for
 subordination has in recent
                             cases been perceived to be
                                                         sufficiently
 cloudy that senior lenders have approved
                                           substantial concessions
 rather than attempt to establish the full benefits
                                                    of senior debt
 status through litigation.
         Since the priority of senior bondholders'
                                                   claims on the
firm are more
              ystematical1y reccgnjzed in a liquidation than in a
reorganiztj0 they also have an incentive to push for
                                                          liquidation,
even when this is not efficient51
                                     Compounding this tendency is
 the fact that senior bondholders are due the
                                              par value of their
bonds in liquidation even if the market value of the
                                                      bonds is much
smaller due to a general rise in interest rates since
                                                       the bonds
were issued. In contrast,
                            other security holders would often have
an incentive to avoid liquidation
                                   even when economic efficiency
would call for it.


         511n principle, each security holder
                                              ought to receive in
a reorganization at least what he would have received
                                                      in a
liquidation• However, the courts seem systematically to underestimate
the liquidation value of a firm.
                                                                7)4b.




           Thus in addition to the direct costs of bankruptcy

mentioned previously, there are two further costs. First, since
the ownership share in the reorganized firm is very uncertain,

there are large financial risks for each security holder in a

bankruptcy proceeding. in addition, the choice concerning whether
to liquidate or reorganization, and in fact investment decisions

more generally, will often be made inefficiently because the sizes
of the transfers among security holders can be affected by their
decisions.

b)

     Because of the legal and administrative costs involved with

bankruptcy, firms and their lenders do prefer informal reorganizations
so as to keep the company out of the courts and to avoid the heavy
costs of bankruptcy itself. Indeed, the reluctance of private

lenders   to force bankruptcy implies a substantial dead weight loss
from the bankruptcy proceeding. The rule of thumb used by one major
institutional lender is "We'll be happy to give up 20 percent of

what we should get on our bonds in order to keep the company out of
the courts, in which case we might lose 30 percent or more." This
30 percent estimate is made up of 10 percent in administrative and
legal fees and 20 percent via transfers from the bond holders to

the equity holders.
           Court practices with respect to reorganizations during

bankruptcy thus influence informal reorganizations.    In informal

as well as formal reorganizations there is typically a substantial
 "give-up" from the senior bondholders to subordinated bondholders

and equity owners. Sometimes, reorganizations can be arranged
with little cost other than the aforementioned "give-up" by the
                                                                   75.



 bondholders. This could happen if all parties will agree to a
 settlement.   In many cases, however, it is not possible to arrange
 a relatively costless and simple reorganization because it is not
 possible to get the different securities holders •with different

 claims and interest to agree, given the legal ambiguity in the
 relative priorities of their claims. These disagreements can often
 lead to protracted negotiations and even to litigation involving

 heavy legal fees.
           Thus in a reorganization, the security holders collectively
 face potentially heavy legal bills, and in addition each faces

 much uncertainty (costly in itself) concerning the size of his

 ownership share in the reorganized firm. Thus, reorganizations
and bankruptcies are often quite similar--the principal cost in
both cases is the time and effort spent in negotiating a "work
out."   Moreover, in   many cases it is impossible to arrange an
informal reorganization because it is not possible to identify the

public bond holders and to find anyone who speaks for them.

          Even when a reorganization is easily effected without a

bankruptcy proceeding, substantial legal costs may still later
be incurred. A case in point is one concerning
a manufacturer of men's clothing.

This company's banks and major institutional lender entered into
an interereditors' agreement in 1977 that reorganized the
various creditors' claims and provided for additional bank
financing. Bankruptcy was not involved. The group is now being
sued for allegedly controlling the company's board of directors
and operating the company in a manner deleterious to the interests
                                                                   76.

 of   the company's shareowners. The suit claims damages almost
 three times as large as the total liabilities and capital of the
 company at the time the intercreditors" groups was formed. Thus

 far, the total legal expenses incurred and committed by the major
 institutiona! lender amount to close to 10 percent of       the   total
    of that lender. It is clear that even if the intercreditors'
 loan

group is successful in the litigation, the legal costs will
amount to a substantial percentage of whatever is ultimately
recovered on the investment.

      In summary,             reorganizations are typically 1es costly
than bankruptcy and,            pjesree, the reorganizations
can be carried out with rriinirtial transactions cost. However, the

terms of the settlement typically involve the       bonho1ders giving
  a
up/significant percentage of the face value of the bonds to obtain

the agreement of the management and equity holders. Moreover,
when disagreements arise as to the work out of the settlement,

reorganization may be as costly as bankruptcy proceedings. Finally,
with different classes of public bondholders, it is often impossible
to carry out an informal reorganization. Sometimes bondholders
will have a preference for bankruptcy over reorganization despite
the former V5   additional   costs because the firm in financial distress
may find that it can obtain additional financing only by going

through a formal bankruptcy procedure. The reason is that the only
way a new lender can get a priority lien is by lending to the bankrupt
estate. The creditors of a bankrupt estate do get paid first and
this priority arrangement cannot be made in an informal reorganization.
                                                                         71.

            appears
         It /  then     that by increasing the likelihood of financial
  distress,     a   highly levered capital structure imposes the possibility
  of   large and unpredictably variable costs on the firm and its

  security owners. Moreover, a highly levered capital structure
  imposes considerable extra monitoring costs on the part of lenders.

  These considerations may help explain the current practice of
 bondholders to set fairly stringent debt limits.        Thus, in many
 cases, even if the firm was willing to increase its leverage ratio,
 it would be unable to do so either because of covenants imposed by

 current bondholders or by the unwillingness of prospective
 bondholders to lend to the company.


2.     Indirect measure of bankruptcy cost

     Detailed examination of the experiences of firms while in

bankruptcy, as done above, provides information about certain
types of bankruptcy costs. However, not all efficiency costs
created by a high debt-equity ratio occur during formal bankruptcy.
Firrs in financial distress experience a variety of impediments
          their
that hinder / business activity and affect the stream of
operating arnings. These include difficulties in purchasing
inventory, selling products and retaining key employees. Even
before any signs of financial distress occur, however, the fi.rm

may find its flexibility limited. For example, a firm that has
borrowed up to the limits imposed by its lenders could be forced
to pass up a profitable investment opportunity because of an
inability   to obtain timely financing. This is so       because equity
financing generally involves long delays since registration is
                                                                     78.


normally   required by the Securities and Exchange Commission. In
addition, when a firm's debt-equity ratio is high, the managers,
acting in the interests of shareholders, face distorted investment
incentives because of the opportunity to pass on possible losses
to debt holders, to the degree that the covenants in the debt

contract do not explicitly prevent such behavior. (Shareholders
themselves   pay this eficiency cost, to the extent that bondholders
anticipate such behavior and   charge an appropriate interest rate.)
Substantial   costs can then arise even if the firm never
experiences a liquidity crisis. There is little possibility of

rreasuring such costs directly.

   However, we can approximate indirectly the total efficiency
costs through use of the first order conditions for an optimal

debt-equity ratio. In Section II, B.3, we showed that a firm,

when considering marginal debt vs. equity finance, will compare

                czpr(1_T)_arf with abr -
                                                 -
(l_p)r(1_T) +                              arf       c(D/E),   where c(D/E),
the extra costs (measured as a flow) arising from having a dollar
more debt instead of equity, captures all considerations other
than tax effects, which enter into the debt-equity decision.52

As such, c(D/E) includes efficiency costs beyond those occurring
during a formal bankruptcy.



         52However, costs incurred by existing bondholders, since
ignored in the marginal debt-equity decision, are also omitted
from c(D/E). To this extent, our estimate of marginal efficiency
costs will be too low. Our estimate will also be too low to the
extent that other social costs of bankruptcy (disruption in trade
or employment) are not passed on to equity holders through appropriately
higher prices.
                                                                       79.

          When the debt-equity ratio is in equilibrium, these two

 expressions will be equal, implying c(D/E) =                      +
                                                      r(T_(l_ab)
                                                       of
                                                 this equation
 (l_a)(l_T)p). If we can measure the right hand side/(let us denote
 it by c*), then we can infer the marginal efficiency cost at

 equilibrium of a dollar shift between debt and equity.

         Though the marginal efficiency cost at a point is not
sufficient to measure the total cost, we can still derive a rough

approximation to the total cost. To begin with, we presume that
c(0)    0--the marginal efficiency costs of adding the first dollar
of debt would be very small. In addition, we presume that

.cD/EI > 0     .    Given these assumptions, the value of c(D/E) as
D increases (with offsetting             changes in E), appears as curve GAB
in Figure 1.       The area OABD then describes the total efficiency
costs created by a levered financial structure with debt = D.           Let us
approximate the area OABD by a triangle, so that its area is


                                       Figure 1
                                   I

               Marginal
                   Costs




                           *


                               0


       One would normally expect the curve OAB to be convex,

since for relatively unlevered capital structures the firm runs

little risk of bankruptcy. Thus, this approximation will undoubtedly
be biased upwards by the shaded area in Figure 1.
                                                                  80.



             In order to get an idea of the quantitative importance of
the efficiency costs, we need values for c* and D .          In   measuring

c* ,   let   us assume that a = 1   (a figure consistent with our

theory basically consistent with the estimates in Gordon and

Bradford (1979)). We have no similar estimate of ab .         However,
in appendix A, we find that the interest rate on tax free bonds is

only 75/O of that on taxable bonds with comparable risk.           This

implies that ab ought to be around .75        .53   If we then assume

the corporate borrowing rate to be 6.3°/o (the commercial paper

rate in 197), then c* =         .0ll.   Given von Furstenberg's

(1977) estimate for corporate debt of 10 billion dollars in 1975,

our estimate of            is then 3.2 billion dollars. This
represents the annual efficiency costs arising from the existence

of risky debt.
             In Part    V, we will want to forecast how this efficiency

cost will vary if particular tax rates are changed. Our assumption
that a = 1, while supported by the estimates in Gordon and
Bradford (1979) under existing tax rates, is also implied by an
internal optimum for the dividend payout rates as shown in Section
lIC. We therefore assume it will continue to hold. If we then
continue to assume a triangular approximation to area OAD, then our

             531f the risk is the same on these bonds, then the risk
premium ought to be the same. If ar represents the expected
return on taxable bonds and a rç rpesents the expected return
on tax free bonds with compara1 risk (each as valued relative to
the equivalent amount of capital gains), then it must be that abrb
arf . Since rf :        .7 r, we find that a :
 it Is reasonable to suppoe that ac
                                                    czf . However,
                                       1., snce ac represents
the value in the market of tax fre interest relattve to a dollar of
capital gains, and capital gains are at worst relatively lightly
taxed. It follows that a
          5 In sect-ion I.D on inflation, we found that this use of
the nominal interf rate is appropriate when measuring the size
of the tax distortion favoring debt finance.
                                                                    81.


  measure of the efficiency cost is proportional to the square of

                    If r is not much affected by T       or   ab , as would
  be the case with the free flow of capital across international

  financial markets, then efficiency costs are proportional to
  (T(1a))2
            Let us reemphasize that this estimate of the
                                                         annual
 efficiency costs is very rough. Due to the triangular approximation
 in Figure 1, our figure probably overestimates the area OI½BD.

 In addition, however, area OABD represents only the costs born by
 the coalition of equity holders and the junior bond holders. True

 social costs of bankruptcy, and the moral hazard costs associated

 with risky debt, may well be quite a bit larger than this area OABD.

 Finally, the parameter estimates for a and ab used in constructing
 our estimate of bankruptcy costs, are imprecise.

          Whatever the precision of our estimate, however, we find
 that direct legal and administrative costs of bankruptcy seem to

 be a small fraction of the total efficiency costs of risky debt.

 In l97, for example, the total liabilities of bankrupt firms were
 1 billion dollars. For any plausible
                                        tht ough
 fraction   of   this total that   is lost/ bankruptcy costs, Which we
estimate to be no     larger than 1O/° in the previous
                                                          Section, these
direct costs are     very small relative to our    estimate of the
total efficiency costs. Our indirect estimate ought to be
                                                           much
larger, though, since it includes many costs of risky debt
described earlier in addition to legal expenses in bankruptcy.
For example, firms that never quite go bankrupt
                                                may spend resources
to avoid bankruptcy.
                      Also, investment incentives are inefficient
when debt is risky. We have no direct evidence on these costs to

compare with the indirect estimates presented here.
                                                                      82.



   For purposes of comparison, our estimates of the total costs
                                          they
are under half a percent of GNP in 1975, so/are small in an
aggregate sense. However, corporate tax revenues in 1915 were

only       10.6 billion dollars, so the excess burden costs could
he on theorder of 10% of corporate revenues. We explore below
how sensitive our estimates are to changes in the various tax
parameters.

B,     Efficiency costs arising from inefficient risk             bearing
      In    Section II.B., we noted that variation in individual tax
rates       implies an inefficiency in the allocation of risk across

investors. Here we attempt to approximate the order of magnitude
of these costs.

      Efficiency in the allocation of marketed lotteries would imply
that eah person at the margin would demand the same risk premium
in return for absorbing a given risk. With the current

tax structure, in equilibrium, in return for absorbing (1-c) per
cent of the uncertainty in a dollar of equity in a given firm,
each investor would just be willing to accept the after tax risk


premium        (1-c)   +   (i-m)   - max
                                            ((l-m)r, rf) .1këIiT1I±i
                                L1-m) d -
per   unit of risk,         +
                                            j max((l-m)r2,   rf
                                                                  ) will vary
across investors, implying the possibility of a Pareto improving

reallocation of risk from those charging a large risk premium to

those charging a small one.
                                                                            83.


           Let   us plot the marginal risk premium as a function of
a =        making the simplifying assumptions: 1) c = .2m,
2) rf =    .75r,55       3) d =
                                  .6r     ,   and   i) g =   r
when risk is distributed efficiently, all investors would have
                                                                 .   Recall       that



the same marginal risk premium. Figure 2 indicates that those with
the lowest risk premium (those holding "too little" equity) are
those in the highest tax brackets, for whom tax free bonds are
extremely attractive. Those in the zero tax bracket also have
little equity (have a low risk premium) as they receive no gain

from the relatively high capital gains component in equity. Those
who are just indifferent between taxable and tax free bonds have
the largest risk premium.


                               Figure 2
   risk
            .68r
 premium
            .60r   J


      •

            .3ri
                        • 35                        .68      . 9     1.0
             tax bracket .70                        .37      .25      .00


           55The evidence for this figure in Appendix A is derived
from longer term interest rates. It may be that were we to have
compared shorter term interest rates, the relative rates would
be different, with rf presumably being smaller relative to
since those holding shorter term bonds are mainly commercial banks.
                                                              8.

            How costly is this variation in the marginal risk premium
across investors? Theoretically, this cost is very complicated
to derive. For a marginal reallocation of a given risk from an
individual with a high risk premium to an individual with a low

risk premium, the efficiency gain is the difference in their risk

premia. In the example in Figure 2, the maximum such gain would
be .3r2 .      The total efficiency gains from reallocation would

be the sum of all such marginal gains, when this reallocation from

the initial equilibrium continues until all individuals charge
the same risk premium for each security.
            In order to approximate the order of magnitude of these

efficiency costs, we derive in Appendix B the size of the costs
under a set of simplifying assumptions. There we find that
annual efficiency costs resulting from the inefficient distribution
                                                                     2
of corporate risks across investors can be approximated by .O1rV,
where V is the total amount of risky securities outstanding.
If r is assumed to be .08, and we set V equal to the value

of corporate equity outstanding in 1975 (630 billion dollars
according to von Furstenberg), then this expression equals
.00007V =   11i million   dollars per year. To the extent that the
parameters and model chosen are reasonable, efficiency costs due
to inefficient risk bearing would appear to be very small.

C. Efficiency costs induced by the distortion in dividend payout rates
         Another major distortion created by the current tax structure

is that it discourages the payment of dividends by corporations,.
                                                                85.

 While the corporate income tax includes
                                         no such distortion, since
 dividendsand retained earnings are treated equivalently, the
effective personal income tax on dividends is much higher than
that on capital gains for individual investors. As a result,
individuals are led to alter their portfolio composition towards
assets with a higher capital gains component, and corporations
are    induced to cut their dividend payout rate. Unfortunately,
it is not even clear whether these changes in behavior have

efficiency costs or efficiency benefits, let alone what the
magnitude of the effect on efficiency is.    The problem is that
our theory explaining the payment of dividends is still very
incomplete.

           In Section I.C, we provided three possible explanations for

why dividends are paid: 1) since some equity investors, particularly
corporations, will prefer dividends to capital gains because 8
percent of dividends are excluded from tax, it may be that the

 value  of dividends in the market just equals that
                                                    of capital gains,
 2) dividends have the
                         advantage over capital gains of providing
 a means with lower transactions costs to fund consumption
 offsetting their tax disadvantage, and 3) dividends carry a
 signalling   benefit, again offsetting the tax disadvantage.
Unfortunately, each explanation for dividends has different
implications for the effect on efficiency of the tax distortion
discouraging    dividends.
      Under the first
                   explanation, individuals are indifferent, tax
reasons aside, between dividends and capital gains.
                                                     Therefore,
                                                                85A.

   the fact that their portfolios are shifted towards securities

  with a higher capital gains component has in itself no cost.
   Risk spreading will be inefficient as a result of this shift, but

  we have already measured that effect.
      Under the second explanation, any reduction in the cash

  component of the return on the portfolio of an individual who use.d
  the proceeds to fund consumption will result in higher transactions

  costs for that individual who then must incur the brokerage
             in selling shares to replace lost dividends.
  costs involve4/. To the extent that firms reduce their dividend

  payout rate, resulting in an increase in their internal funds,
  the transactions cost of firms will decrease if in response they
  are able to avoid some underwriting expenses involved in new

  issues of debt or equity. On the other hand, the transactions
  costs of firms will increase if in response they increase their

  repurchases of debt or equity. Of course firms of the former type
  will be much more inclined to reduce their dividends than the

 others. Without taxes, in equilibrium, the various transactions
 costs would be traded off against each other.
                                               Introducing
 taxes then results in   a tradeoff   between extra taxes and extra
transactions costs. Measuring the net increase in transactions
costs induced by the tax distortion would be very complicated.
   When dividends play a signalling
                                    role, as discussed in Section I.C.,
th2 firm, when choosing a dividend payout rate, trades off the
induced improvement in investor
                                  expectations resulting from higher
dividends   with the higher tax rate for investors on dividends
and the implied increase in costs     for the firm resulting from a
decrease  in its retained earnings. Here, investors may well be
indifferent between dividends and capital gains. The
                                                      only efficiency
costs involving the dividend payout rate are then the costs to
                                                                      86.


 the   firm of a reduced level of retained earnings. These costs
 would he smaller were the equilibrium dividend payout rate smaller.
 Therefore, any further tax distortion discouraging dividends
 would decrease the efficiency costs. Even if          the    total costs to

 the firm of     using   dividends as a   signal go up as a    result of this

 increase in the tax distortion, the real costs, in            contrast   to

 the tax costs, go down.
       Thus, depending on our explanation for why      dividends    are paid,

 t.he tox distortion discouraging dividends may have no direct

 efficiency effect, an efficiency cost, or an efficiency benefit.

 There    is   no a priori presumption which direction of effect          is


 more important.

D. Distortion favoring noncorporate vs. corporate uses of capital
   Another frequently measured distortion created by the corporate
income tax is the implied disincentive to invest in. corporate rather

than noncorporate businesses.7 According to Shoven (1976), the
annual excess burden costs created by the distortion in capital
allocation betwee.n corporate and noncorporate uses is on the order

of six to fifteen percent of corporate revenues, or about 1-.26 billion
dollars in 197. What do our models imply, in comparison?
    In section I.E, we showed that when we allow for uncertainty and
bankruptcy, the equilibrium rate of return on capital in the corporate


    55algnored here as elsewhere is the fact that a business may
shift from a corporate to a noncprorate status as a result of the
corporation tax.
                                                                        86A.


sector   (correcting for the risk premium and the bankruptcy premium)
will exceed the equilibrium rate of return in the noncorporate sector
   T-(l--ab)
by —=———       (r-Yr)   .   Using plausible parameter values for 19'75,

this implies that the rate of return on capital in the corporate
sector will be 27.1'° higher than in the noncorporate sector. 55b
Shoven (1976), in contrast, assumes that as a result of differential

taxation on the returns to capital in the two sectors, the equilibrium

rate of return on capital in the corporate sector will be 53.0%
higher than in the noncorporate sector.SSc

    The excess burden costs implied by such a distortion should be

approximately proportional to the square of the size of the distortion.
Our results then imply excess burden costs only                    =   .267    the
size of the distortion costs found in Shoven (l976). In 1975,
we then forecast excess burden costs due to the misallocation of

capital between corporate and noncorporate uses of 1.1 billion dollars.
Note that this distortion, which has been the standard distortion

considered in the public finance literature, seems to be only about
a third as costly as the distortion in debt-equity decisions.


    SSbwe assume T   = .Ii.8,   %   = .75, r = .063,   r =    .08, V = .3.
    SSCIn Table 2, he shows that the tax rate on noncorporate capital
is 31% while that on corporate capital is                    If
                                                     the after tax
                                                       .

rates of return are to be equal, the before tax rates of return must
differ as asserted.

    5,dmis approximation is very rough. Had we measured the rate
of return in the noncorporate as a percent of the return in the
corporate sector throughout instead of the converse, the excess
burden implied by our results would be .386 the size of that, in Shoven.
                                                              86 B.




       Since this estimate of the excess burden costs is approximately

proportional to the sguare of the size of the tax distortion, it is
                     t-(1-a )        2
proportional to                  )(r-Yr)]
                 [(—--------------—
                                       . When considering the

effects of tax changes in the next section, we will use this
approximation.



  B.    Progressive taxation and taxation of corporate earninq-s
       So far, we have explored only the efficiency effects of the

 tax treatment of corporate earnings. To what degree does the

existing tax structure also create horizontal and vertical inequities
       Let   us assume first that a comprehensive income tax is the
normative model in judging horizontal and vertical inequities.

Under this tax, the relative net of tax rates of return on
                                                           any
security for two individuals ought to be 1-rn1 , where      and
                                                 i—--—        in1

in2
       are
        the marginal tax rates on labor income for the two
individuals. This condition is implied by equal tax rates on
all forms of income. The condition is essentially met for taxable
bonds, ignoring any capital gains component in the return. For
equity, however, the relative rates of return are        d(1—m1)+g(i-c1)
where        d is the dividend yield and    g the capital gains rate
                                                                    87.


  on that security, and c1 and c2 are the effective tax rates
  on   capital gains for the two investors. This ratio will         not equal

                 implying that the current tax is not a comprehensive
  1-rn1
           ,
    In2
  income       tax.     Moreover, a comprehensive income tax would presumably

  require that capital gains be taxed on accrual at the tax rate

 on labor income.

       Similarly,       the current tax is not consistent with a consumption
 or expenditure          tax. Under a        consumption tax, the net of
 tax rate of return on any          security ought to be the same for all
  investors       (and equal to the pre-tax rate of tax). Yet as long
 as individuals invest directly in corporate securities rather
 than invest through pensions or Keogh plans, the net of tax
 rates of return will not be equal.

    I     the tax system is to be       consistent with either a comprehensive
income tax or with a consumption tax, it is necessary that the

ratio of pre-tax rates of return on debt and equity equal the
ratio     of post-tax rates of return--under a comprehensive income
tax, both would be taxed at rate m , while under a consumption
tax neither would be taxed. Does the corporation tax also create
inequities? When individuals purchase a share of stock, their
incoc,e is the return on this financial security--dividends and
caoitl gains. An equitable individual tax would be concerned
just with this income, not with the income of the coxporation
necessary       to support these payments. Under this view, the
corporation tax is not an equity issue.6 An ambiguity arises
when comparing closely held corporations to partnerships. Here.
a legalre-classifi.cation will change the definition of the

   6Writers           frequently argue to the contrary. Claims that the
 double taxation" of dividends is inequitable would be an example.
                                                            88.-89.
individual's ir1corne while no substanive change has occurred in
the individual's position. The corporation provides a device for
onstDJning the receipt of income through retentions, unavailable
in a partnership. If capital gains were taxed fully on accrual,
this ;ould not be an issue, however,5 so the corporation tax is
not ineitable per se. However, by discouraging incorporation,
the crporetion tax diminishes use of the corporation as a device
to exploit the lower tax rates on capital gains.




 IV. Evaluation of Proposals for Tax Reform
A. Criteria for evaluation
      We have shown in the previous sections that the current
procedures for taxing corporate earnings create non trivial excess
burden costs and deviate from an equitable tax, as defined either
                                                                90.



by a comprehensive income tax or by a consumption tax. in light
of these efficiency and equity problems with the current tax
structure, many proposals for tax reform have been suggested.

        In this part,   we will compare briefly the relative merit
o séveraIpossible directions of change in the tax code. in
most cases, we estimate the efficiency gains and revenue costs
created by a small change in a tax rate. Were the tax structure

optimal, then the efficiency gains relative to the revenue costs
ought to be the same for all taxes. When this ratio is different
for two different taxes, then there is an opportunity to change
the two tax rates so as to maintain tax revenues yet lower the

excess burden created by the tax structure. That tax rate with
the   highest ratio of efficiency gain relative to revenue cost is

then a prime candidate for reduction. Our results will point out
which directions of change in the tax structure ought to be most

favorable. However, they will not indicate how large a change would

be appropriate.
        in comparing the effects of different tax changes, we will

focus on the distortions in corporate financial policy, and in
the allocation of capital between the corporate and the noncorporate
sectors.8 Omitted most prominently is the distortion in savings
behavior. To include this would require a theory of the market
interest rate, a theory which is clearly beyond the scope of this


      8Inefficiency in the allocation of risk across investors
is too small to merit attention.
                                                                91.



 paper. We also ignore distortions affecting the dividend payout
 rate, as even the direction of change in excess burden costs here
 is unknown. In addition, we explore solely partial equilibrium

efficiency effects, ignoring any secondary effects through shifts
 in demand among commodities. Thus the story told is incomplete
 and must be supplemented with other findings. The effects we do

 capture, though, are large enough to merit close attention.

          In addition to comparing efficiency gains with revenue costs
 for each tax change, we will also point out how each tax change
 will affect the equity of the taxation of income, and how each
 taxchange may result in windfall transfers of wealth across individuals.
 We will not attempt to compare, though, the relative importance
 of    effects on the equity vs. the efficiency of the tax structure.

B. Proposal Evaluation
          this section we will evaluate alternative tax proposals.
          In

Each of the tax changes we will compare is listed in Table 1 along
with   the implied effects on the excess burden and on tax revenues.

In calculating effects on efficiency, we focus on distortions in
corporate uses, and distortions in the allocation of risk across
investors. Other distortions are ignored, however. In particular,
we make no attempt to measure the inefficiency in savings decisions,
nor can we measure the efficiency effects of distorted dividend
payout rates. The results are therefore incomplete. However, they
are also dramatic.
                                                              92.



                               Table 1
                              Estimates of
              Efficiency and Revenue Effects of Selected Tax Changes



                                            Efficiency        Revenue
                                            — Gain             Loss


1.    l°/° decrease in 'r                    171 million     123 million
2.    .01 decrease in c                     238   million    193 million

3.    1'/°of dividends deductible
      under the corporate tax                     0           70 million
1..   lu/oof interest payments
      taxable under the corporate tax        1l5 million    -2Il5 million
                                                                   9.

            From the first line in Table 1, we see that a small cut in
 thecorporate tax rate/would result in an effic iency gain a lmost
half again as large as the revenue loss. In other words, the last
dollar collected under the corporate income tax effectively costs
the private sector 2.1 dollars, one dollar in lost income and l.li. dollars in

increased inefficiency. Were distortions in savings decisions
included, the efficiency effect would be even larger. Either this
tax is much more expensive than other taxes, in which case it ought

to be reduced, or it is more equitable , which we find unconvincing.
Alternatively,
/   marginal government expenditures ought to be more than twice as
"valuable" as marginal private expenditures.
            The implications of cutting the effective capital gains tax
       C,
rate,/are very similar. This change lessens the degree to which
taxes discourage equity finance. Again, a dollar of government
revenue effectively costs the private sector more than two dollars.
            In spite of the discussion concerning the double taxation of

dividends, we find no clear efficiency gain from allowing corporations
to deduct part of their dividend payments, and yet clear revenue
costs. One way to understand this result is to recognize that
corporationscan avoid this tax by repurchasing shares instead of
paying dividends. To the extent they pay            dividends, it
must result from compensating advantages to dividends. As we
discussed in section IV.D, it is unclear whether the resulting

changes in dividend payout rates produce efficiency gains or
efficiency losses.
                                                                  94..


        In the fourth line of the table, we find the even more dramatic
result that   by eliminating to a small degree the deductibility of
interest payments under the corporate tax, there would be both an
efficiency gain and a revenue gain. Though the distortion in
savings decisions may be increased           by this change, the cost
of this further distortion would have to be very large to undermine

the attractiveness of this tax change.

       Each of these computations describes the effect of a small

tax change. For larger tax changes, the efficiency gains would
be smaller relative to the revenue losses. This occurs since the
excess burden varies as the square of the distortion while tax

revenue changes approximately linearly with the distortion.
       In the rest of this section, we present our derivation of

the figures in Table 1, and discuss some of the equity implications

of these tax changes. In addition, we present a brief discussion
of the -effects of shifting entirely to a partnership trethnent of

corporate income or to an expenditure tax.
       1. Reduction in the corporate tax rate

       The principal efficiency effect of reducing the corporate tax
rate is to lower the distortion favoring debt over equity finance
and the associated costs. The size of the initial excess burden

is proportional to (.T-(1-ab))2, as was argued in Section III.A.2.
We have estimated       to be .75 using the results in Appendix A,
and assume that this value will remain unaffected by the change

in the corporate tax rate. A one percent reduction in      'r   would
then lead to a ll-.1'Y° drop in the excess burden or a gain of 132 million

dollars per year.
                                                                   97.



            The size of the excess burden from the distortion of investment
                                      r-( 1_ab)
    decisions was proportional to[(_=___)(ryr)]2.         If   r drops by
    one percent, then, according to the triangular approximation to
    Figure 1, D will drop by 2.1 percent. This change together with
    the change in    r   implies that the excess burden on investment will
    fall by 3.14%, or by 39 million dollars. The total efficiency gain
    is therefore 171 million dollars.

           What equity considerations would enter into this tax change?
    As noted above, changing the corporate rate does not directly
    affect the degree to which the personal tax approximates an equitable
    tax. Since debt equity ratios will fall, however, more of savings
           invested
    will be/in equity, where the tax treatment is relatively less
    equitable than under a CIT. (Consumption tax advocates might view
    this shift towards equity as an improvement, though.) In addition,
                                                    ordinary
    more partnerships may incorporate, further shifting/income into
    capital gains.

           Who will receive the windfall transfers implicit in the cut
    in the corporate tax rate? On first glance, one would expect
•
    substantial capital gains on equity. However, if equity outstanding
    is initially in equilibrium (q = 1), this may not be the case.
    When the amount of equity outstanding is again in equilibrium, it
    must be that equity holders still value the returns (after corporate
    tax) from a dollar of marginal real investment at a dollar. Equity

    may rise in price immediately, but firms will expand the supply of
    equity, cutting back on the supply of bonds, until the price falls
                                                                      96.


backtowards
   its original level. Anticipation of this eventual drop may
restrain the initial rise. Even though in equilibrium the new marginal
 holder   of equity values the returns from a dollar of real investment

 at a dollar, the increased intramarginal holdings of equity will
 be valued at more than a dollar, so consumer surplus will have
                  could
 increased. There /     be no substantial windfall changes in price,

 but   there will be windfall gains in utility. Since those in higher
 tax brackets have relatively stronger preferences foruity over
 corporate bonds, it is this group which will mainly experience

 these windfall gains in utility. In addition, existing bondholders,
 having a lower probability of bankruptcy, will also experience

 windfall gains.
          How large would the revenue loss be from such a tax change?

 In 1975, a one percent cut in the corporate income tax rate, if
 corporate behavior did not change, would have caused a drop of )-i-06

 million dollars in corporate tax revenues. The resulting            o6
 million dollar increase in corporate revenuwouldaccrue to
 shareholders. If their average marginal tax rate is .157 (the figure
 used by Feldstein and Summers (1979)), then taxes on share holders
 would increase by 6.s- million dollars. In addition, however, tax

 revenues will increase due to the shift towards equity finance.

 According to the triangular approximation to Figure 1, a one

 percent drop in     r will lead to a 2.1 percent drop in D . Given
 the availability of tax free bonds with rf =       .75r   ,   the   marginal

 tax rate on bonds ought to be 2570 .    In   contrast, the marginal
                                                                 97.


                                                              a level
 tax rate on equity income would be (1-(l-.I8)(l-.l57)) = .56,/.31
 higher than that on debt. The shift in financial structure towards
 equity would then imply a revenue gain of .j5lr (.021D) = 180 million
 dollars . We assume r = .063 and D = -10 billion dollars (as in
 von Furstenberg (1977)).     In addition, capital will shift slightly
 towards the corporate sector, where it is taxed more heavily. The
 change in the excess burden of 39 million dollars is approximately

 tAK, where t is the tax distortion and AK is the amount of
 capital shifted to the corporate sector. Therefore, 39 million
 dollars   also measures the increase in tax revenue resulting from
 this shift in capital. Thus the net revenue loss would be about
 123 million dollars, compared with a decrease in the excess burden
 of 171 million dollars.

           On net, there appear to be large efficiency gains from a cut
 in the corporation tax rate, although there may also be some equity
  costs. Larger
/ changes in the   corporate tax rate will not   appear as favorable,
 however, since the excess burden declines as      the square of the
 existing distortion.
        2. Increases in the capital gains tax rate
         Advocates of a comprehensive income tax argue that an increase
 in   the effective capital gains tax rate would be desirable on

 equity grounds. What efficiency implications would such a change
 have?

         An increase in the capital gains tax would cause an increase

 in debt-equity rates, increasing the excess burden created by a

 levered financial structure. In Section III.A.2, we showed
                                                              98.


                                                         63
that the excess burden was proportional to (1-(1-ab))2         Here,

ab is a weighted average of the values         for each investor.

A uniform .01 increase in the effective tax rate c implies an

approximately one percent change in ab ,   given that c is small.
This change in ab then implies a 6.6% increase in excess burden

costs, given our assumption that ab =    .75, or
                                              a loss of 212 million dollars..
                                       also
          This one percent change in ab/ implies, according to
the 'triangular approximation to Figure 1, that D will increase by

        This change, together with the change in ab, implies that
the cost of the investment distortion will increase by 2.1 or

by 27 million dollars.
       Counter balancing these costs is the fact that the distortion

in the dividend payout decision is diminished. Unfortunately, it is
not clear whether this reduction in the distortion is an efficiency

gain or loss if we assume that dividends are used as a signal.

       In addition the increase in the capital gains tax rate cuts

the size of the inefficiency in private risk bearing. Inspection
of the argument in Section III.B shows that these excess burden
costs will drop approximately two percent as a result of a one

percent rise in the capital gains rate. Nevertheless, such a rise
in capital gains taxes implies an efficiency gain of just .8 million
dollars. However, the amount of risk born by the government
increases, while costs of bearing this risk will be ignored by the

firm in its investment decisions.


       6we assume that the dividend payout rate readjusts so as
to maintain a=1 at the new equilibrium.
                                                                                 99.


      the capital gains tax were maintained as a tax on realizations,
       Ii

then there would be an additional cost resulting from this tax
increaseThis
          dueistosoan even stronger lock in effect in securities
                    because
hldings./ an investor can postpone payment of tax on his accuiiula ted
capital gains without penalty by postDoning the sal.e of the asset.
          Increasing the capital gains tax through including
                                                            and thus
p3rt of corporate retained earnings in individual income, / taxing

capital gains on accrual to the extent that retained earnings equal
capital       gains, is one procedure which would not have this extra
cost.
   An unexpected increase in c will make equity less attractive.

However, in equilibrium the returns from a dollar of real invest-
ment will continue to be worth a dollar on the stock market                  .   Intra-

marginal       holdings of     equity will drop in value, implying a loss in
utility for those with the strongest relative preference for equity.
In addition, existing bond holders will be worse off due to the
increased chance of default.
   liow      much revenue will be raised by a .01 increase in the
effective          tax rate   c ?   If   the stock market grows normally at 8Y°
a year on a         base   of 630 billion (as reported in von        Furstenberg
(1977) for 1975), then the extra revenue, assuming no change
in b2havior, would be 50i million dollars. However, individuals
will tend Lo shift towards debt. Assuming the triangular

approximation in Figure 1, the amount of debt will increase by 33Yo
when        ab =                                       If   the   combined tax rate
                                                              100.



on equity exceeds that on debt by .31 (as argued above), then the
drop in revenue due to this shift towards debt would have been in

1975 .31r(.033D) =   28   million, assuming r = .063.   In addition,

due to the rise in ab capital will flow to a degree to the non-
corporate sector. As noted before, the size of the revenue loss
due to this movement will approximately equal the efficiency loss,
which we measured to be 27 million dollars.    The net revenue gain

would therefore be 193 million. This is to be compared with the
238 million increase in the excess burden, ignoring any effect on

dividends.

       We should note, however, that achieving a .01 increase in

the effective tax rate c may not be easy. Increasing the statutory
rate might cause little increase in the effective rate due to further
                                            constructive
postponement of realizations. It may be that /       realization at
death or partial taxation on accrual, however feasible, would be
necessary in order to raise the effective tax rate.
       3. Partial deductibility of dividends under the corporate tax
       It would seem that an alternative way to lower the tax

disincentive to equity finance would be to allow corporations to
deduct at least part of their dividends from their taxable income.

Let us assume only one percent of dividends is made deductible.
What efficiency and equity effects would this tax change have?
If the tax rate on dividends is lowered by this device, then the
amount of dividends and new issues of equity will increase until

again a=1 , so that dividends and retentions are valued equally,
and q=l .    There is no necessity that ab change at all in this
                                                                    101.


 process.  If it does not, then the equilibrium debt-equity ratio
 does not change. Also, the equilibrium allocation of capital between
 the corporate and noncorporate sectors will not change. The tax
 disincentives to dividends drop slightly due to this change.

 However, by the arguments in Section III.C, it is not clear whether
 this is an efficiency gain or loss.
        How much will tax revenues change as a result of this tax

change? If there were no change in dividend payout rates, then

corporate revenues would drop by .01tDiv =     1   million dollars in
 1975 when corporate dividends were 32.1 billion dollars.     However,
shareholders will be taxed at an average marginal rate of .157

(according   to Feldstein and Summers (1979) on this income, implying

an offsetting revenue gain of 2-- million dollars.     In addition, the
dividend payout rate will presumably increase in response to the tax

change. According to Feldstein and Summers (1979),. the average
personal marginal tax rate on dividends is higher than that on
capital gains by .2t, while with this change, the corporate rate

is lower by .oo5.6 Our only estimate of the responsiveness of
dividends to the relative tax rate is in Feldstein (1970), based on

English data, where the elasticity of dividends to the opportunity
cost in retained earnings was .9. Under this proposal, the

opportunity cost in retained earnings declines by .9/O, implying a
forecasted increase in dividends of .8'o   .   Tax revenues would
then increase by (.235)(.o08)(32.1) = 60 million dollars in 1975,

when dividends were 32.1 billion dollars. This gives us a total

       6We ignore here for lack of information the decrease in
corporate tax revenues due to different relative tax rates on
dividends and capital gains for corporate holdings of equity.
                                                                   102.



revenue loss of 70 million dollars. In contrast, there is no presumed
effect on efficiency, ignoring any effects on the dividend payout
                                            /
rate or on savings decisions.
        Are there any important equity consideratiop.s raised by such
a change? We argued above that changes in the corporate tax structure

do not affect the equity of the tax system per se. However, an
increase in the dividend payout rate implies that a higher percent
of the return to corporate shares is taxed at ordinary rates, pushing
the tax treatment closer to that in a comprehensive income tax.

        ii.    Limiteddeductibility of interest payments under the
              corporation tax
         If   the tax on equity is high compared with that on debt,
another possible change to reduce this difference is to lower the

degree to which interest payments are deductible under the corporation

tax. Let us assume that one percent of such payments are no longer
deductible. What efficiency and equity effects would ensue?
         If we rederive the expression in Section III.A.2 for marginal

excess burden costs from debt finance, we find that it now equals

(r(.r_(1-ab(1-.O1T))). When ab =      .75, the   distortion drops by 1.6%,
and the excess burden by 97     million   dollars. However, when we
reexamine the conditions for an equilibrium capital stock in the

corporate sector, we find that s_r increases by             -    due
to   the heavier taxation of debt financed capital. In addition, the

amount of debt will drop by 1.6%, using the triangular approximation
to   Figure 1, causing V to drop. These changes cause a further shift
of   capital to the noncorporate sector, increasing the cost of this

distortion    by Ii.6%or by 52 million dollars.
                                                                103.


      How much revenue would be gained by this change? If the
market value of corporate debt is IiJ-0 billion dollars and the average
long term interest rate is about .09, figures taken from    1977,
then, with no change in behavior corporate tax revenues will increase
by 190 million dollars. Since corporate revenues drop by this

amount, tax payments by shareholders drop by 50 million dollars,
assuming their average marginal tax rate is .157.      However, due to
the drop in the distortion favoring debt, the amount of debt will

drop. By our triangular approximation to Figure 1, the debt decreases
by 1.6U/o when ab =    .75.   If the tax rate on equity is .31 higher
than   that on debt, then revenues increase by 137 million dollars.
However, the shift of capital from the corporate to the noncorporate
sectors causes a revenue loss comparable to the efficiency loss,
or about 52 million dollars. Thus, not only is there a total

revenue gain of 2115 million dollars, but, in addition,

efficiency costs drop by 7 million dollars.

       Are there any   offsetting   equity costs? Since debt equity
  ratios drop, somewhat more income will appear as capital gains,

  making the tax system less equitable from the point of view of a
  comprehensive income    tax. In addition, the hi.ghar corp3rate taxes
  may make the   firm se2m more risky to existing bondholders, resulting
  in a capital loss for them. Of course we must also remind the reader
 that we continue to ignore the resulting increase in the inefficiency
 of savings decisions.
     5. Partnership treatment of corporate income
     So far, we have examined just marginal changes in the tax law.
  A more comprehensive proposal would be to eliminate the corporate

  income tax entirely and attribute all profits proportionate1y to
  shareholders to be included in      their taxable income, taxable at
                                                         lou.


ordinary rates. This treatment would be equivalent to the treatment
of partnership income under the current laws. To the extent that
share prices rose by an amount different from the proportional
share oi retained earnings, then the difference would he treated

 as a capital gain and taxed accordingly. This proposal      is

developed in great detail in McLure (1979). What     efects       would

 this proposal have?
    To the extent that share prices do rise by the proportional
 share of retained earnings, then all income derived from corporate
 earnings, whether arising from bonds or equity, would be taxed at

 ordinary rates, as required under a comprehensive income tax.

 However, inspection of firm accounts suggests that capital gains
 and retained earnings do differ substantially. in any case, a
 much smaller share of the income from owning corporate shares ought

 to take the form of capital gains, an improvement from the point

 of view of a comprehensive income tax.

    What efficiency gains would arise? Since the tax treatment
of income from debt and equity is identical under this proposal,

the tax distortion in financial policy would be eliminated,
 implying a drop of 3.2 billion dollars in excess burden costs.
Also, there would no longer be a difference in the tax treatment

of corporate vs. noncorporate capital, implying that the 1.1
billion dollar distortion cost from the inefficient allocation

of capital would be eliminated. Since c =   m   , ignoring   the

deviation between capital gains and retained earnings, private
                                                            105.


risk    bearing will also be efficient,a gain of 1 million dollars
per year.6 In addition, the distortion in the dividend payout
decision would be eliminated. However, by the arguments in
Section III.C, it is not clear whether this is an efficiency gain

or loss, when dividends are used as a signal. However, savings

decisions may be further distorted, as those with high tax rates
find one relatively desirable asset (equity) less desirable.


   To get a very crude revenue estir.ate, we continue to assume

that the average marginal tax rate on equity is .31     above   that on
bonds.    Uider this   proposal, the tax rate on equity .i1l become just
eouel to that on bonds for those currently holding equity. In
addition, other individuals will shit from debt to dciuity, to
avoid bankruptcy costs, but this will have no tax consequence.
Therefore, the revenue loss ought to be on the order of 3l of the
return on corporate equity, or 23.- billion dollars in 1917,
asuoiing 630 billion in equity (as in von Furstenberg (1977))
and a before tax total    rate of return of l2'°. This is to be cornp3rad
   6However, the risk born by the governmeflt through its tax
revenues will increase, implying inefficiency in investment
decisions since the firm will ignore the costs to the government
of bearing this risk.
                                                                  106.



 with a ti-.3 billion dollar reduction in excess burden costs.

  This figure, though, omits any efficiency effects of the change
  in the size of the distortion affecting dividend payout and, more

  importantly, savings decisions. Our discussion also ignores
  possible difficulties in implementing such a proposal.


   6. An expenditure tax

   An alternative major change in the tax system would be to
eliminate any personal taxes on the return to savings, whether from

anterest receiDts, dividends, or capital gains. Such a tax has been
advocated on     both   efficiency and equity grounds by a number of
economists. Its most important advantage is undoubtedly its

elimination of the distprtion in savings decisions created by the
t3xatlon   of    returns to savings, an aspect not developed in this
                the

ccer. Let us axolore, however, what irnpl ice tions this change weuld
have in the areas we have explored.
    Optimal corporate financial policy implies, according to
Section III.A.2, that c(D/E) = r(T_(lh)). If an expenditure tax
.;ere imposed and the corporation tax repealed, -then this distortion
will disappear. However, if the corporation tax were left in
 place, and    < 1.0 initially, then the distortion would
increase by (l-ab)r.       If     =   .75 initially,   we would extrapolate
the additional excess      burden costs to be 3.5 billion dollars. This

suggests that proposals for an expenditure tax, if          not accompanied
by a repeal of the corporation tax, ought to be accompanied at
least by a reduction in the distortion favoring debt finance within

the corporate income tax.
                                                               l0T.



           If the corporate income tax were left in place, then there
would also remain a distortion between investment in corporate

and noncorporate uses. Due to the increased use of debt finance

under this situation, the distortion might well be smaller than
it    is   currently. However, it would be eliminated entirely if the
corporate income tax were also eliminated.
           Adoption of an expenditure tax would also imply an elimination
     of the distortion in risk bearing. However, since the efficiency
  costs here were only on the order of          million dollars, this
  effect is small in compsrison.
 The    distortion in the dividend payout decision would also he
 eliminated under an expenditure tax. Whether this is on efficiency
 gain or loss is unclear, however.
    Further ar4alysis of an expenditure tax is beyond the scope of
 this paper. However, it is clear that tax reformers must worry
 siriultarieouslv about the corporation tax when advocating a movement
 towards an expenditure tax.


 V. Conclusions
    In this paper, we have developed a model of corporate financial
 deciscns when there is both uncertainty and the possibility of
 Costly bankruotcy. We then used this model to measure tia nature
 of    the distortions in behavior induced by the existing tax structure,
 and their excess burden ccsts. We finally explored the effects on
 efficiency costs and revenues of various possible modifications
 of existing taxes.
       Our major conclusions are:

 1) As long as firms are competitive, explicit incorporation of
 bankruotcy costs is essential if a model is to explain the observed
                 fiirr'ifl   strurture.
                                                                108.


2)   Debt-equity ratios historically increased steadily since

World War II until l97, and have only declined slightly since
then. We might infer from this rise an increasing optimism (or
decreasing pssimism) about future prospects until the early 1970's.

3) The efficiency costs arising from tax incentives to increase
debt-equity ratios are substantial, being on the order of 3
billion dollars a year, or approximately lO"/° of corporate

tax revenues.

)    However, distortions in the allocation of capital between
corporate and noncorporate uses do not appear to be as large as

previously   thought.   In particular our estimate is one-quarter to
         the size
one-third/of previous estimates.
5)   As a result of the distortions affecting debt-equity decisions,
any of several directions of tax change aimed at lessening the

distortion in debt-equity ratios would appear attractive.
                                                             109.




                                 BIBLIOGRPHy


Auerbach, Alan J., "Wealth Mxrnization and the Cost of Capital,"

                                          95 (Aug., 1979), pp. 13-1i6.
Auerbech, Alan    J.   and Nervyn A. :King, "Corporate Financial Policy,
   Taxes, and Uncertainty: An Integration," N.B.E.R. '7orking

   Paper          Narch 19'79.
2aumol,    William J. and Burton C.   Malkiel, "The Firm's Optimal
   Debt-Euity Corbination and the Cost of Capital," Quartl
   JourofEçonomics, 81 (Nov., 1967), pp. 517-578.
3httacharya, Sudipto, 'Irnperfect Information, Dividend Policy,          and
    'The   Bird in the Hand' Fallacy,' The Bell Journal of Economics,
   10 (Spring, 1979), pp. 259-2O.
Elack, Fischer, "The Dividend Puzzle," Journal of       Portfolio Manaement,
   2   (Wint:er, 1976), pp. 5-8.
         Fischer and Myron Scholes, "The Effects of Dividend Yield
  nd Dividend Policy on Common Stack Prices and Returns,"
  Journal of Financial Economics. 1         19 ), pp. 1-22.
Eoy, Zvi, "Corni-non Stock as a He;e gainst Inflation," Boston
   University    School of Managerer.t Zorking Paper, January, 1975.
Boskin, Michael J., "Taxation, Sa'in and the Rate of Interest,"
                                      £ (April,   1978), pp. 53-523.

Bra:lford,   David F., "The   Incidcnce   and l1ocative Effect of a Tax

   on Corporate Distributions," Discussion Paper fr7738,      Center   for

   Operations Research and Econometrics, Universite Catholique

   de Louvain, Belgium, August, 1977.
                                                             110.


Bradford,    David F., "Tax Neutrality and the Investment Tax
   Credit," N.B.E.R. Working Paper 269, August, 1978.
Brennan, Michael J., "Taxes, Market Valuation and Corporate
   Financial Policy," National Tax Journal, 23 (1970), pp. Li7 1i27.
Bulow, Jeremy I. nd John B. Shoven, "The J3onkruptcy Decision,"
   The Bell Journal of Economics, 9 (Autumn, 1973), pp.
Chen, Andrew H. and E. Han Kim, Theories of Corporate Debt
   Policy: A Synthesis," Jon           nance, 31 (nay, 1979),
   pp. 57l-381.
Ciccolo, John H., "Four Essays on 4onetary Policy," Unpublished
   doctoral dissertation, Yale University, 1975.
Diamond, Peter A., 'The Role of a Stock 4arket in a General
   Equilibrium Model with Technological Uncertainty," Americ
   Economic Review, 57 (Sept., 19E7), pp. 759-76.
Fema, Euqene    and erton Niller, lcn1c! (ew Yo:I::
   Holt, Reinhart arid Winston, 1972).
Feldstein, Martin S., "Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behavior,"
   Revieqflq±, 57 (January,                  1970), pp. 59-72.

Feldstein,   Martin S., "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation,"

    Journa1ofPo1itca1Econo, 86 (April,         1978), pp. 529-552.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Lawrence Summers, "Inflation and the
   Ta:ation of Capital Income in the Corporate Sector,"          pp1
   Tax Journal, 32 (Dac., 1979).
Feldstein, Martin S. and Lawrence Summers, "Inflation, Tax Rules,

   and the Long-Term Interest Rate," BrookisPerflcQjiomic
   Activi,      1978:1,   pp.   61-99.

Gordon, Roger H., -"Tobin's q and the Rate of Investment: A
   Reappraisal in a World with Debt as Well    as   Equity Finance,"

   mimeo, February, 1979.
                                                              111.



Gordon, Roger H. and David F. Bradford, 'Taxation and the Stock

     Market Valuation of Capital Gains and Dividends:      Theory and
     Empirical Results," September, 1979.

HEugan, R.    ?h.   and L. W.   Senbet, "The Tniinifirce of Bankruntcy
   Costs    to the Theory of Optinal Capital Structure," Jou:na1of
   nce,              (May, 1978), p. 383-393.
Harberger, Arnold C.,            tnandWeiare (Bnston: Little,
   Brown and Conpany,       197!).
Hirschle ifer, Jack, ThitFient. Intertdceo.tal (Engi-.;ocd
   Cliffs: Prentice—Hall, 1970).
Jensen,M. C. and W. H. Meckling, 'Theory of the Firm: Managerial
   Behavior, A;ency Costs and O.;nership Structure," Journal of
   Fonomcs (Oct., 1976), pp. 3o-36o.
}Zir, E. Hen, Th e-jn Variance Theory of Optimal Capital Structure
   and Corporate Debt C3pacity, Joura1ofFirce, 33 (Yrch,
   1978).
Kim, E. Hzn, Lewellen, Wilbur G. and John       J. McConnell, "Financial

   Leverage    Clienteles: Theor',' nd    Evidence," JourrRlof
   ancia1Econornics,   7 (March, 199), pp. 83-110.
King, Mervyn A., Public Policy and the Cooraticn (London:
   Chapman and Hall Ltd., 1977).
King, Mervyn A., "Taxation and th Cost of Capital,"
   Ecoromic Studies, l4i (January, 19Th), pp. 21-36.
r•yshar, Jorarr, "Should Government Subsidize Risky Private Projects,"
                              67 (March, 1977), pp. 20-28.
                                                                    112.


MoCulloch, J. Huston, "Tne Tax-Adjusted
                                        Yield Curve,'t JaLQ

         jic, 30   (June,   1975), pp. 811-830.

McLurC, Jr., Charles B.,
  ('hhinton, D.C. : The Brooki.ngs Institution, 1979).
Miller, erton H., "Debt and Taxes,"                               32

  (iay, 1971), pp. 261-275.
Miller, Nerton H. and Franco Modigliarli, "Dividend Policy, Gro:;th
   rid the   Valuation of Shares,"                                 (October,

   1961), pp. 1l-33.
Miller, Marton H. and Myron       Scholes,   "DividendS and   Taxes,"   mirneo,


   University      of Chicago Graduate School of Business, August, 1978.

Modigliani, Frarico andMerton H. Miller, "The Cost of Capital,
   Corporation Finance, and the Theory of Investment,"
   EcoiçS, B                 (June,   i98), pp.   261-97.

Myers,
          Ste:art C, "Determinants of Corporate Borro';iflg," Qxra
                              5 (Nov., 1977), pp. 1k7-r(5.

 Rosenberg, Barr and James Guy, "The Prediction of Systema't.iC Risk,"
   University of California at Berkeley Graduate School of
   BusineSs A±tinistratlol) Working Paper 133, 1975.
                                                                 The
 Ross, Stephen A., "The Determine t ion of Financial Structures:
                                                                                  8
    Incentive Signalling Approach,"
    (Spring,   1977), pp. 23-0.
 Shoveri, John B. and John ina11ey, "A General EquilibriUrti Calculation
    of the Effects of Differorti-al Taxation of Income from Capital
    in the U.S.,"                            c2c, 1 (Nov.,        1972),

    pp.' 281-321.
 Shoven, John:., "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects o Taxes
   on Income from Capital," Journal of Political Economy,
                                                      — 8L
    (December, 1976), pp. 1261-1283.
                                                                 113.

 Stiglitz,    Joseph E., "A Re-Examination of the Modigliani-Njller
    Theorem,"                               59 (Dec., 1969),
    00.    781-O3.
St11]tz, Joseph E., "On Some Asocts of the Pure Theory of
    Corpor&t.e Finance, Bankruptcies and Take-Overs," The      Bell
    f Economics, 3 (Autumn, 1972), pp. 58-82.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., "On the Irrelevance of Corporate Financial
    Policy," merican Economic Review, 6L (Dec., 19714), pp. 851-866.
Stiglitz,    Joseph   E.. "Taxation, Corporation Financial Policy, and
    the Cost of Capital," Journal of Public Economics, 2 (Jan.; 1973),
   pp. 1-314.

Tobin, James, 'TA General Equilibrium Approach to Nonetary Theory,"
                                              1   (February, 1959),
   co. l-29.
U.S. President, Economic Peoort of the President (Washington, D.C.:
   U.S. Government Printing Office, 1977).
       Daniel R. and Thomas C. Elwertowski, "The Relationship
Viriing.

   Between Relative Prices and the General Price Level," Anjeric:an
   Economic Review, 66         1976), pp. 699-703.
                           (Sept.,
von Furstenbrg, George M., "Corporate Investment: Does Market

   Valuation Matter in the Aggregate?", Brooking.sPpersonEconomic
   Activity, 1977:2, pp. 3147-397.
von Furstenberg, George N., Nalkiel, Burton G., and Harry S. Watson,
   "The Distribution of Investment Between Industries: A Micro
   economic App1icatin of the 'q' Ratio," in Catal, Efficienç1.
   and Growth , edited by George M. von Furs tenberg (Washington,
   D.C. : American Council of Life Insurance, forthcoming).
white, MichelleJ., "PublicPolicy Toward Bankruptcy: Me-First.
  and Other Priority Rules," mirneo, July, 1979.
                                                          1114.




                     Glossary of Symbols




 c        implicit accruals tax rate on capital gains

c(D/E)    icrease in annual bankruptcy costs resulting from an
          increase in the firm's debt/equity ratio via replacement
          of equity with debt.

  CD
          increase in annual bankruptcy costs resulting from a
          dollar of debt financed real investment

  CE      increase in annual bankruptcy costs resulting from a
          dollar of equity financed real investment

          rate of return on the ithsecurity through dividends,
          taxable to the individual at ordinary rates

  dM      rate of return on the market portfolio through dividends,
          taxable to the individual at ordinary rates

     D.   tax depreciation allowance per dollar of capital

     Da
          actual replacement rate per dollar of capital
                                                              /

     g    yearly rate of growth of the capital stock

     g    return on the ith security taxable at capital gains rates

     gM   return on the market portfolio taxable at capital

          gains rates
     m    marginal tax rate on interest income for an individual

     n    marginal tax rate on dividends for an individual

     N    number of shares of equity outstanding

     p    percent of a firm's after-tax profits paid out as dividends
                                                           115.


q       stock market value of the present value of returns
        from a dollar of marginal real investment
r       market interest rate on corporate bonds

rf      market interest rate on tax-exempt bonds
r       riskless market interest rate
    z
S       pretax   marginal return on capital (after depreciation
        and expenses)
a       relative value of a dollar of dividends compared with

        a dollar of capital gains in the stock market

crb
        relative value of a dollar of interest receipts compared

        with a dollar of capital gains in the stock market
        riskiness of the ith security measured as

        percent of debt finance used to finance new investments
        stochastic   element, with mean zero, of the return on
        a dollar real investment

        before tax risk premium on the uncertain returns from
        a dollar of real investment

        corporate tax rate
                                                                    A-i.
                             APPENDIX A
          Comparison of Taxable and Tax-Free Interest Rates




     this Apoenclix, we attempt to estimate the relationship
     In

between equivalent taxable and Lax-free long-term bonds and,
implicitly, the marginal tax rate of rnargina 1 buyers of taxable
i.sues. VTe do so by comparing the equilibrium yields of tw
securities of the s3me corporate issuer: one taxable and one
tDX exept.    If two securities are identical in all respects
except that of taxability of interest       returns, we can write

the following ecuilibriurn relationship: Letting r and                rf
stand     for the taxable and tax-exempt yields of bonds of the same
quality, an investor will be indifferent between the two issues if
            -'
        r(i—m) =    r,   thus, m     1 —
                                           If
where     m is the marginal tax rate on bond           interest for the

investor. Since r and rf are assumed to be equilibrium yields
in the inrkct, then m must be the marginal tax rate of the

rorgiridiinvest.or. All invasors with higher marginal tax rates
will be investing in tax-exempt bonds, while all investors in
lower brackets will buy taxable bonds. At the margin, the tax
bracket of the investor indifferent between the two securities
determines the equilibrium yields. That investor pays the
highest tax rate of all investors who own the taxable bond.
     The usual     difficulty with   such an exercise     is the difficulty
of   finding     ccrrparable taxable and    tax-free   issues.
                                                                       A-2.


 Foutunately,   it is possible to find a sample of several

corporate issuers who simultaneously sell tax-exempt and taxable
bonds. In recent periods, corporations have often been able to
finance    part of    the exoc±nditure for a particular plant with tax-

exempt industrial revenue bonds. These bonds are issued by the
local municipality, but all debt service requirements ere the
responsibility of the corporation. Since the bond interest is
exempt rom oersonal income taxes, these bonds yield less than
equivalent taxable securities. Obviously,the firm would choose
to do all of its horroing with these types of securities, but
                                             by the U.S. Treasury
the    total araunt    of each issue    is limited/to 5,7OO,OOO. Thus,
firms will often finence a new plant with industrial revenue bonds

(up to the maximum 1 ira it) and then finance the rerna indar with
raaular    t:eble securities. This gives           us a chance   to see how

corporate bo:ds are oriced in          the   market when they differ only

with respect to the tax status of the interest paid.

      During   l9, we could    find      such joint issues,   where   the

terms of two issues were sufficiently similar to rule out any
other influence On the yields of the bonds. The data are
presented in Table 1. The data suggest that rf = .775r and
that the tx bracket of the marginal investor, was approximately

22 1/2 percent in 1978.
                                                                1-3.



                                    Table 1
                        Simultaneous Taxable and Tax-Exempt Issues



Date          Company           Yields to Maturity             rf!r
                                   r           r
               Exel md           9.25         7.125            .770

L/2z/7B        Carolina Frt.     9.875        7.50             •759
               Carriers Corp.
7/25/78        Haverty          10.0          7.75             .775
               Furniture
8/S/73         Luchenby          9.75         7.75             .795
               Furniture
iC.'1O/'73     Perini Corp.      9.5          7.75
       Mean                                                    .775


       socond method to estimate the tax bracket of the marginal
r.vestor in     taxable (corporate) bonds is to compare the yields
of -oexb1e     and tax-exempt issues of the same quality. Here we
carcd the yields of taxable and tax-exempt long-term issues
of    ecuivalent rating    during calendar year 1978. Of course, this
cooerison controls less well for quality and other variations.
For example, an AA bond           quality
/ .   rating may not imply the same/for the two types of
securities. Moreover, while an attempt was made to control for

euiva1ence of call protection, it was simply not possible to
ensure that the bonds compared were equivalent in all rcspects
evertheiess, the estimates obtained were similar to those

described above although they suggest a somewhat higher tax
                                                                             A-



bracket      for the marginal investor. During 1978 the ratio

rf/r     generally ranged between . 5             and .70.

   Finally,   it is interesting to nate that J. liuston 1cCulloch
(l95)    has prodiced           esLirates for the tax bracket of the
marginal     ii:ves tot   in   taxable go\ rr-ment bonds. NeCulloch 's
methodolcjy is quite different- -he estimates marginal tax rates
by looking at ho.: yields differ on long-term government bonds
selling at par and at discounts. The former                  bonds give   all of

t3eir promised yield in fully txable coupon payments while                    the
latter   give some    of their yield in favorably taxed capital gains
(the difference between the market and redemption prices of the

bonds). NcCu].loch estimates the effective tax rate that best
explains the prices of U.S. Treasury securities lies somewhere
in the range .22 to .30           implying    a range for rf,/r of .70 to .'8.
   Takn; al tne eiserice into account arid giving  speclai waicjht
to our e5timates based on the issues in Table Al where the best

control was exercised over quality and terms of the two issues
cortioared, ce es.imaLe that                 is   cooroximately equal to 3/
of r for long—term securities.
   It should be noted, however, that these estimates apply only
to long-term bonds. It appears that the tax rate for the marginal

buyer   of   shcrt-terrt issues is considerably higher than 2 percent.

Comparing     short-term orim housing notes (the highest quality
government-guaranteed, tax-exempt security ave ilable) with U.S.
Treasury bills of comparable maturity over year-end periods from
1961 through 195 produced an average effective tax rate of 12
                                    -
percent.
                                                                       B-i.


                            APPENDIX B

      Approximation of the Excess Burden From Inefficient
                         Risk-Bearing



     In section III.B, we noted that the marginal risk premium
on a security for a given investor would be
            g +           - ---y rnax((l-m)r,         rf)
This will vary systematically across investors
due to the variation in tax rates across investors.             In this

appendix, we would like to approximate the efficiency gains from
redistributing risk among investors until all investors have the

same risk premium at the margin.
     In order to do this, we first make the following simplifying

assumptions on relative magnitudes:
(1) c = .2m,   (2) rf =   .77r   ,   () d   =
                                                .6r    ,    (1.) g =   r
With these assumptions, we can express an investor's risk premium
as a function of his a =         .   This relationship is plotted in
Figure 2.
     We now would like to estimate the total efficiency gains
resulting from a reallocation of risk across investors. In order
to approximate the order of magnitude of these efficiency gains,
let us make the following assumptions: i) the distribution of
investors (weighted by their equity portfolio) across values of a
is uniform between .35 and i.o,66 and 2) each individual's risk

premium is proportional to his holdings of risky

      66 the TAXSIM file, the distribution of individual's
marginal tax rates is slightly heavier at the higher tax rates,
but introducing tax-free investors ought to at least offset
this.
                                                                   B-2.


     securities.

           Assumption 1, along with our earlier assumptions, then
     implies that the distribution of the marginal risk premia assigned

     to each share takes the simple form shown in Figure Bl.Taxpayers

 with      a va 1e of a greater than .68 have a risk premia between
     .60r z and .68r z while those with a value of a less than
     .68 have   a risk premia between .3)--rz   and .60r z



                                    Figure -]


                         5.79

                     density
                         1.95


                                                   6Or       . 68r.,

                                         risk premium

           Assumption 2, applied to Figure 3, implies that at the new
 equilibrium when all individuals have the same risk premium,

     67
          This assumption essentially follows from the capital asset
Drict- model. To see this, let the individual's utility function
a-
be     2) where p, the mean return on the portfolio, equals r 'x
       ::-ere a2, the variance of the return on his portfolio,
£cls x'2x. Here
          available
                       r is a vector of expected after tax returns
                        assets, x is a
                                    vector of the dollars invested
      sa: security by the individual, and      is a matrix of
ccarLnceS of after tax returns among the securities. Manipulation
of          first-order conditions then gives
                 1
 x    =              (r—ar), where r_crr represents the after tax risk
            2
 premium.       As asserted, x is proportional to the after tax risk
 premium.       The   qualification is that f itself depends on x
                                                                                             B-3.


     this       common risk premium will be .53r •68

     y assumption 2, the efficiency gain when an individual trades
         n initial risk premium of x to the market equilibrium
         premium of         p    is    just               -   x)(M)I, where AA         measures

 e difference in             the      number of securities the individual owns

Tcetwen the two equilibria --                      the marginal efficiency gain
c:ines           from p   -x to zero, giving              an average of (        P-x) per unit
 c:—.nge in holdings. Also by assumption 2, we                             have that
     =    - l)A, where A is the initial holdings. Combining
 t:-se results and summing over individuals, we find that the
 tc.tal efficiency gain from spreading risk efficiently wcul be
          .Cr z                         .53r                          .68r
                                                                       I                  .53r
VH.Lcz      I
                    -I(.icrz_x)(-__---             -   l)dx    +
                                                                   ).79/       (.53r-x)(—------ -l)c1x]
                                                                     .6Or
 =   .0. 0lrV , where V is the                     total amount of risky securities
 :ts tending.
       Let      represent the new equilibrium risk premium. Then
     :-ust be that the number of securities that individuals with                                 an
 :il risk premium below p will buy will just equal the number
tt   those initially above p will want to sell.. ssurnption 2
iiies that if the initial risk premium were x, then the desired
c:-.-e in         holdings      will be (,         - i)A,     where A is the amount of
 tiel holdings. Summing this expre.ssion over all                                individuals,
                             .6Or
                      1.95/                   -
                                                  l)cix                           l)dx   =   0,
                       .3lrz             .

                                                  60
-ereinitial
       the        amount of initial holdings is replaced by the density
                  holdings. Simple algebra implies P.=                         .53r
    -'This number is too large by about five percent since what
is being traded is risk in units equal to those in a share before
tx. yet          the government has absorbed about five percent of the
c::ginal risk through the capital gains tax.
