                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INFLATION, TAX RULES, AND INVESTMENT:
                   SOME ECONOMETRIC EVIDENCE


                       Martin Feldstein


                     Working Paper No. 577




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138

                         November 1980




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and project in Capital Formation. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                            NBER Working Paper #577
                                                                     Noyember, 1980




                    Inflation, Tax Rules, and Investment:
                          Some Econometric Evidence


                                  ABSTRACT


       This paper presents econometric evidence on the effect of tax Incentives

on business Investment in the United States in the period from 1953 through

1978. The analysis emphasizes that the Interaction of inflation and existing

tax rules has contributed substantially to the decline of business investment

since the late 1960's.

       Because the investment process is far too complex for any simple econometric

model to be convincing, I have estimated three quite different models of invest-

ment   behavior. The strength of the empirical evidence rests on the fact that
all   three specifications support the same conclusion.

       More generally, the analysis and evidence show that theoretical models

of macroeconomic equilibrium should specify explicitly the role of distort ionary

taxes, especially taxes on capital income. The failure to include such tax

rules can have dramatic and misleading effects on the qualitative as well as

the quantitative properties of macroeconomic theories.

       This paper was presented as the Fisher—Shultz Lecture at the Fourth

orld Congress of the Econometric Society, 29 August 1980, in Aix—en—Province.




                                              Martin Feldstein
                                              National Bureau of Economic Research
                                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                              Cambridge, Massachusetts 02318

                                              (617) 868—3905
                                                              EVIDENCE1
       INFLATION, TAX P.ULES PND INVESTMENT: SOME ECONOMETRIC

                             By Martin Feldsteifl2




                                                                  devoted
         My subject in this lecture is one to which Irving Fisher
                                        effort: the effect of inflation on
considerable analytic and econometric
                                formation.3 Nowadays, every student learns of
financial markets and capital
                                                 increase in the steady—state
Fisher's conclusion that each percentage point
                                                                        the
inflation rate raises the nominal interest rate by one percent, leaving
                                     Moreover, since the supply of saving depends
real rate of interest unchanged.
                                                           funds also depends on
on the real rate of interest and the demand for investable
                                    in the rate of inflation would have essen-
the real rate of interest, a change
                                                           "essentially" no
 tially no effect on the economy'S real equilibrium. I say
                                     economist, James Tobin, reminded us in the
 effect because another great Yale
                                        in the nominal interest rate could cause
 l961 Fisher Lecture that an increase
                                               in their portfolios, thereby reducing
 households to substitute capital for nDney

 the real interest rate.
                                              xtost theoretical analyses of macroeco-
           The Fisher—Tobin analysis, like
                                        of the taxes levied on capital income.
 nomic equilibrium, ignores the role

                                             Fisher—Schultz Lecture at the World
            lThis paper was presented as the                research is part of
  Congress of the Econometric Society, 29 August 1980. The
  the NBER Program on Taxation and of the Bureau's special study of Capital
                                                                       and the
  Formation. The financial support of the National Science Foundation
  NBER is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                  assistance with calculations and
            2i am grateful to Charles Horioka for
                                        for earlier collaborative work. I bene-
  to James Poterba and Lawrence Summers
                                     results presented at the NBER and the Harvard
  fited from comments on preliminary
                                              an earlier draft by several
  Public Finance Seminar and from comments on                       not 'be attri-
  colleagues. The views expressed here are the author's and should
  buted to any organization.
                                          —2—




While   this may have been a reasonable simplification at some time in the past,
it   is quite inappropriate today. Taxes on capital income with marginal rates

that    are   often between one—third and two—thirds can have profound effects on the

real macroeconomic equilibrium and on the way       in   which inflation affects that

real equilibrium.

               A simple example will illustrate the potential for substantial depar-

tures from Irving Fisher's famous neutrality result. Consider an economy in

which    saving and the demand for nney are both perfectly inelastic,          in which

there is no inflation, and in which the marginal product of capital is 10

percent. If we ignore risk and assume that all           marginal   investments are debt

financed, the rate of interest in the economy will also be 10 percent.                A


permanent      increase in the expected rate of inflation from zero to five percent

would raise the nominal internal rate of return on all          investments   by five per-

cent which would in turn raise the equilibrium rate of interest in the economy

from 10 percent to 15 percent. All       of   this is just as Irving Fisher would have

 it.

               But now consider the introduction of a corporate tax of 100         percent

 on the profits of the business with a deduction allowed for the interest

 payments. It is easily shown that, if economic depreciation is allowed, the

 interest rate that firms can afford to y remains 10 percent in the absence of

 inflation. But inflation now raises the interest rate not by any increase in

 the inflation rate but by that increase in inflation divided by 1—           .5 If       is
                                      —3—



50 percent, the five percent increase in expected inflation raises the interest

rate by 10 percent to 20 percent. This is easily understood since the 10 per-

cent increase only costs a firm a net—of—tax 5 percent, just the amount by which

inflation has raised the nominal return on capital.

          In this example, the effect of a 5 percent inflation rate is to raise

the real rate of interest received by savers from 10 percent to 15 percent.

Their real net—of—tax rate of interest will, lowever, depend on the extent to

which the interest income is subject to personal tax. If every lender's tax

rate is exactly equal to the corporate rate, the real net rate of interest will

be unaffected by the rate of inflation.6 But nre generally, individual tax

rates differ substantially7 and the real net—of—tax return rises for those indi-

viduals with tax rates below the corporate rate and falls for the others. If

saving is sensitive to the real net return, these changes will alter the capital

intensity of the economy which in turn will change the nrginal product of capi.-

tal. The effect on the final equilibrium of a change in the expected rate of

inflation will depend on the capital—labor substitutability, on the distribution

of individual and business tax rates, and on the interest sensitivity of saving

and sney demand (as well as on the correlation between these sensitivities and

the personal tax rates). In general terms, inflation will raise capital inten-

sity in this idel if the rate at which savers are taxed is less than the tax

rate on borrowers.
                                          _14 —




           Introducing   a more realistic description of depreciation radically

alters this conclusion. In calculating taxable profits, firms are generally

allowed to deduct the cost of capital investments only over several years.

Because these deductions are usually based on the original or "historic" cost of

the assets, the real value of these depreciation deductions can be substantially

reduced during a period of inflation. This raises the real tax rate on invest-

ment income and therefore lowers the real interest rate that firms can afford to

offer. The change in the nominal interest rate may be greater or less than the

change in inflation and depends on the balance between the positive effect of

interest rate deductibility and the adverse effect of original cost depre-

ciation. This conclusion can be extended directly to an economy with equity as

well as debt finance (Feldstein, Green and Sheshinski, 1978) and to an economy

with government debt (Feldstein, 1980a).

         In short, the impact of inflation and of monetary policy depends critically

on   the fiscal setting. It   is therefore unfortunate, but all too       common, that
theoretical analyses of    inflation   and of monetary policy ignore the tax struc-
ture and   assume that all taxes are lump sum levies.

         Because   capital tax   rules differ     substantially among countries,   infla-

tion can have very different effects in different countries on the rate and com-

position of capital accumulation. In the past several years, I have tried to

explore the theoretical relationship between inflation and tax rules and to

measure the impact of inflation in the United States on effective tax rates

 (Feldstein and Summers, 1979) and on the yields on real capital, on debt and on

 equity.8 Those studies, together with the results presented in the current

 paper, have led me to conclude that the interaction of inflation and the
                                           —5—




existing   tax rules has contributed substantially to the decline of business

investment in the United States.

            The rate of business fixed investment in the United States has

fallen quite sharply since the mid—1960's. The share of national income devoted

to net nonresidential fixed investment fell by more than one—third between the

last half of the 1960's and the decade of the 1970's: the ratio of net fixed

nonresidential investment to GNP averaged 0.0140 from 1965 through 1969 but only

0.025 from 1970 through 1979.9 The corresponding rate of growth of the nonresi-

dential capital stock declined by an even greater percentage: between 1965 and

1969, the annual rate of growth of the fixed nonresidential capital stock

averaged 5.5     percent;   in the 1970's, this average dropped to 3.2 percent.-°

           The present paper shows Ixw U.S. tax rules and a high rate of infla-

tion interact to discourage investment. The nature of this interaction is

complex and operates through several different channels. For example, while

nominal interest rates have been unusually high in recent years, the deduc-

tibility of nominal interest costs in the calculation of taxable profits implies

that the    real net—of—tax interest rates that firms pay have   actually become

negative!     In   itself, this would of course encourage an increased rate of

investment. But, since existing tax rules limit the depreciation deduction to

amounts based on      the original cost of the assets, a higher rate of inflation
reduces    the   nximuin real rate of return that firms can afford to pay. The

effect of inflation on the incentive to invest depends on balancing the change

in the cost of funds (including equity as well as debt) against the change in

the n.ximum potential return that firms can afford to pay. This explanation of

investment behavior, which is close to Irving Fisher's own approach, is deve—
                                             —6--




loped   Lore precisely in section h of the present paper and then related to the
observed variation of investment since 1955.
           The interaction of tax rules and inflation can also be seen in a
simpler and Lore direct way. The combined effects of original cost depre-.
ciation, the taxation of nominal capital gains, and other tax rules raises the
effective tax rate paid on the capital income of the corporate sector by the
corporations,      their owners arid their creditors. This reduces the          real net rate
f return     that theultimate suppliers of capital can obtain on nonresidential
fixed    investment. This in turn reduces the incentive to save and distorts the
flow of saving away from fixed nonresidential. investment. L'ven without spe-
cifying the mehanisra by which the financial markets and managerial decision-s
achieve this reallocation, the variations in investment durmn- the past three
decades can be related to changes in this real net rate of return. This
approach is pursued in section 3 of the present paper.
           In addition to these two approaches, I have also examined the imilica-
tions of inflation in a can-ital stock adjustment model of the type developed by
Jorgenson and his collaborators.11 Those results are presented in section 5 of
 the    present paper.


 1. on Estimatind False      i'lodels
                   focus in this paper is on assessing the extent to      which    invesLneflt
              1y
 responds to changes in the incentives that are conditioned by            tax rules.
             calculations based on      previous research are then used    to   evaluate
 Separate

 the    effect on investment of the interaction between inflation and the tax rules.
              Despite the extensive amount of research that has been done on invest—
 isent behavior, there are still many economists who question woether inves tsient
                                         —7—




does    respond significantly to what might generally be called "price incentives"
and not just to business cycle condit,ions.1-2 One itmortant reason for these
doubts is tlie failure of previous studies to reflect correctly the impact of
inflation. When the price incentive variable is significantly sismeasured, it
is   not surprising that its impact   on investment is   understated. A further, and,

I believe, more fundamental reason, is that      the   investment process is far too

complex for any    single econometric nDdel to   be convincing. Iloreover, making a

statistical   rdel rxre complicated in an attempt to represent some particular
key features of "reality" or of rational optimization often requires imposing
other   explicit and implausible assumptions as    maintained hypotheses.
            The problem posed for the applied econoetrician by the complexity of

reality and the incompleteness of available theory is certainly not limited to

studies of investment. In Irr experience, there are relatively few )roblems in

which   the standard textbook procedure of specifying "the correct      rdel" and then

estimating    the unknown parameters can produce convincing estimates. 1uch rnre
common    is the situation in which the specifications suggested by a rich economic
theory overexhaust the information n the data. In time series analysis,          this

exhaustion    occurs rapidly because of the limited     degrees of freedom. But even

with    very large cross—section samples, collincarity problems reduce the effec-

tive degrees of freedom and make it impossible to consider all of the variables

or functional forms that a rich theory woul.d suggest. These problems are exa-

cerbated by    the inadequate character of the data themselves.       Even when irifor—

mation    is available and nasurement errors are small, the accounting Iriasures

used    by business firms and national income accounts rarely correspond to the
concepts of economic theory.
                                           —8--



           The   result of all   this is that in practice   all econometric secificu—
tions are necessarily "false" raoeiLs.      They   are false models not only in     the

innocuous sense that the residuals reflect omitted variables but           also   in the
more serious     sense that the omissions and other misspecificatioiis make it

impossible to obtain unbiased or consistent estimates of the parameters even by

sophisticated transformations of the data. The applied econornetrician, like the

theorist, soon discovers from experience that a useful otdel is not one that is

"true" or ttrealisticfl but one that is parsimonious, plausible and informative..

           Unfortunately, econometric research is not often described in such

humble   ternis. The resulting    clash between the conventional textbook interpreta-

tion   of econometric estimates and the obvious limitations of false sdels has
led   to an increasing skepticism in     the Irofeion    about the usefulness of econo—
metric evidence. While some of this skepticism may be a justifiable antidote to
naive optissism and exagerated claims, I believe it is hosed on a misun-
derstanding of the potential contribution of        empirical   resarch in economics.
            I airi convinced that   econometric   analysis helps us to learn about the
economy and    that   better econometric methods help us    to make sorereliable
inferences from the evidence.        ButI would reject   the traditional view of sta-
tistical inference that regards the estimation of an econometric equation as

analogous to the "critical experiment" of the natural sciences that can, rith a

single experiment, provide a definitive answer to a central scientific cjuestion.

I would similarly reject an over simplified Bayesian view of inference that pre-

sumes that the economist can specify an explicit prior distribution over the set

of all   possible     true models or that the likelihood function is so informative

that it permits transforming a very diffuse prior over all          possible   models into a

very concentrated posterior distr ibut ion.
                                          —9—




            Although   I. am very sympathetic to the general Bayesian logic, I think
that such well—specified priors and such inforLiative likelihood I'unction3 are
incompatible with the "false models" and inadequate data with which we are
forced   to work. I think that the    learning process is gore   complex. Perhaps the

phrase   "expert inference" best captures what I have in mind. The expert sees

not one study but many. He examines not only the re,ression coefficients but

also the data themselves. He understands the limits of the data and the nature

of the institutions. He forms his juc1ements about the importance of omitted

variables and about the plausibility of restrictions on the basis of all this

knowledge and of his understanding of the theory of economics and statistics.

In a general way, he behaves like the Bayesian who combines prior information

and sample evidence to form a posterior distribution, but, because of the

limitations and diversity of the data and the nodels that have been estimated,

he cannot follow the formal rules of Bayesian inference.13

            As a practical matter, we often need different studies to learn about

different aspects of any problem. The idea of estimating a single complete

model that tells about all the parameters of interest and tests all implicit

restrictions is generally not feasible with the available data. Instead, judge—

ments    must be formed by studying the results of several studies, each of which
focuses on part of the problem and makes false assumptions about other parts.

            The basic reference on this type of "expert inference" isn't Jeffreys,

Zeilner or Learner.     It is the children's fable about the five blind :en who exa-

mined an elephant. The important lesson in that story is not the fact that each

blind man came away with a partial and "incorrect" piece of evidence. The

lesson is rather than an intelligent maharajah who studied the findings of these
                                                —10--



five men   could   probably piece together a good judgmental picture of an
elephant, especially if          he   had previously seen some     other   four—footed aLuial.
            The    danger,   of course, in this procedure is that any study based on a

false   nodel may yield biased estimates of the effects of interest. Although
informed judgment may help the researcher to distinguish innocuous maintained
hypotheses from harmful ones, some doubt will always remain. In                   general,

however,   the biases in different studies will          not be     the sane. If the biases
are   substantial, different studies will point          to significantly       different conclu-

sions. In contrast, a finding that the results of several quite different

studies all point to the same conclusion suggests that the                  specification    errors

in    each of the studies are relatively innocuous.
           When the data. cannot be used to d stinguish among alternative plausible
models, the overall economic process is underdentified. This may matter                       for

some purposes but not        for      others. Even if the process as a whole is underiden—

tified, the implications with respect to some particular variable (i.e., the

conditional predictions of the effect of changing some variable) may be the

same for all      nodeis   and   therefore   unaffected by   the   underidentification. This

'partial identification' is achieved, because the data contain a clear Lssage

that is not sensitive to nodel specification.

           Of course, not all issues can be resolved in this satisfying way. For

many problems, different plausible specificatione lead to quite different

conclusions. When this happens, the aspect that is of interest (i.e., tne pre-

dicted effect of changing a particular variable) is effectively underidentified.

No matter how precisely the coefficients of any particular specification may

appear to be estimated, the relevant likelihood ñ1rction is very flat. In these

cases, estimating alternative nodels to study the                same question can be a uzeful
                                            —11.-


reminder    of   the limits of our knowledge.14
2.. Usin;_Alternative i1odels of' lnveGtment        }chavior

             The    potential advantage of using several alternative nrsimonious
models    is well illustrated by the analysis of       investment behavior. There are a
wide variety of empirical issues that are of substantial importance for both

understanding the economy and assessing the importance of different government

policies. How sensitive is investment to tax incentives? To interest rates? To

share prices? To the expectation of future changes in tax rules or market

conditions? And what is the time—pattern of the response to these stimuli?

While an estimate of tithe correct ndel"        of investment behavior could in   prin-

ciple answer all of these questions at unce, it is in practice necessary to pur-

sue different questions with different studies. The purpose of the present study,

as    I indicated in the introduction, is to assess the extent to which changes in
tax incentives and disincentives —       and rticularly those changes that are due

to    inflation —   alter   the flow of investment. Focusing on this issue ireans that

some assumptions must explicity or implicitly be made about the other issues and

that the estimated effect of the tax changes is conditional on those assump-

tions. I find it       quite   reassuring therefore that estimates based on three quite

different   kinds of rdels all point to the same conclusion about the likely
magnitude of the response to inflation and to effective tax rates.
         The current state of investment theory also indicates the need to exa-
mine alternative s'dels. Wnile there is probably considerable reement about
the   essential features of a very simple theoretical del of investment
behavior, there is much less concensus about the appropriate framework for
applied studies of investment behavior. The disagreements about empirical
specification can conveniently be grouped in four areas.15
                                             —12—




Tec hnolo
         The traditional capital stock adjustment irodels assume that           capital    is
homogeneous and that the purpose of investment is to increase the size of this
homogeneous stock until, roughly speaking, the return on th last unit of capi-
tal is   reduced   to the cost of   funds.    An alternative and rore   realistic   view

sees   capital as quite heterogeneous. There are two aspects of such heteroge-

neity. First, capital consists of a large nuroer of different kinds of equip—

meet and structures. At any point in time there ny be too much of one kind of
capital and too little of another. A simple aggregate relationship loses this

potentially important information. A much sore fundamental kind of heteroge-
neity is associated with the flow of new investment opportunities. Each year,
new investment possibilities are created by innovations in technology, taste and
market conditions. This exogenous flow of new investment opportunities with
high rates of return can induce investment even when the total stock of capital
is too large in the sense that the marginal product of an equiproportiona]-
increase in all types of capital is less than the cost of funds or the value of
Tobin's q—ratio     is less than oneJ6

            Even within the fracework of homogeneous capital rrodels, there has

been much debate about the choice between putty—putty models in which all

investment decisions are reversible and the putty—clay models in which invested

capital has   a    permanently fixed capital—labor ratioJT While the truth no doubt

lies somewhere between these extremes (old equipment and processes can be

modified   but not costlessly 'melted down' and reformed), the nre complex
putty—clay model is undoubtedly a more realistic microeconomic description than
the putty-putty model.
                                         —13—



          Closely   related is the   issue   of replacement investment, a quite

significant issue since roughly one—half of gross investment is absorbed in

replacement. The simplest nodel of replacement is that a constant fraction of

the homogeneous capital stock wears out each period. A more realistic descrip-

tion would recognize that output decay is not exponential but varies with the

age of the equipment. r4ore generally, the timing of replacement and the level

of maintenance expenditure are economic decisions that will respond to actual

and anticipated changes in the cost of capital and other inputs.18


Market Environment:

          The conventional Keynesian picture of investment that motivates the

accelerator model of investment and most other capital stock adjustment models

asswnes that each firm's sales are exogenous. The firm is assumed to take the

price of its product and the level of its sales as given, and then to select the

capacity to produce this level of output. A more general specification would

recognize that the firm sets its own     level   of output, taking as given either the

market price of its product or the den'and function for its product.

          There are analogous issues about the nature of the markets in which

the firms buy inputs. The simplest assumption is that these markets are perfect

and that the market prices do not depend on the quantities purchased. A more

realistic description would recognize that the short—run supply function of

labor to the individual firra is likely to be less than infinitely elastic and

that, for the economy as a whole, the short—run supply price of capital as well

as labor is an increasing function of the quantity purchased.19

          Closely related is the sensitivity of adjustment costs to the volume of

investment. The simplest assumption is that there are no adjustment costs and
                                         —14-


that the total cost of any total investment is independent of the speed at which

it is done. In contrast, the managerial and planning costs riny be a significant

part of the cost of capital acquisition arid may rise exponentially with the

rates of net and gross investment. Abel (1918) has shown Iw a capital stock

adjustment ridel can be extended to include adjustment costs and how doing so

can explain why the firm increases its rate of investment only slowly even when

the marginal return on installed capital substantially exceeds its cost.


Financial Behavior:

           There remains much controversy about the role of internal and external

finance and about the related issue of the factors determining the cost of funds

to the firm. The simplest sdel assumes that the costs of debt and equity funds

are independent of    both   the debt—equity ratio arid the volume of the firm's

external finance. More general analyses reject the extrerac Modigliani—1iler
result and recognize that, beyond a certain point, increases in the debt—equity
ratio   raise the cost of funds. Similarly, it is frequently argued that the

availability   of retained earnings lowers the cost of funds (at least in the eyes

of management) and therefore affects the timing even if not the equilibrium

level of investment.20

           Tax rules significantly affect the costs to the firm of debt and

equity finance. The implications of this obvious statement have been the sub-

ject of much research and debate in the past few years.2- At one extreme is the

conclusion of Stiglitz (1913) that U.S. firms should finance marginal investments

exclusively by debt, retaining earnings to avoid the dividend tax and using the

retained earnings to finance intramarginal investments. Auerbach (1918),

Bradford   (1919) and King (1911) have argued that retaining earnings does not
                                          —15--



avoid   the dividend tax but oniy postpones       it   without lowering its present value;

this implies that retained earnings are substantially less costly than new

equity funds and that the capital stock should be expanded even if the market

valuation of additional capital is less than one—for—one.22 These types of

conclusions reflect a world of certainty and one in which all           individual
investors have the same personal income tax rates. Although complete models

with   uncertainty and diverse individual tax rates have not yet been fully
worked out, it    is   clear from partial studies (e.g., Feldstein and Green (1919)
and   Feldstein and    Slemrod (1930)), that these extensions can significantly alter
conventional    results.


Expectations and the Decision Process

           With a putty—putty technology and reversible investment, expectations

are irrelevant. But when an investment commits the firm to a future capital

stock with a fixed capital—labor ratio, expectations about the future are

crucial. Although simple moving averages of past variables are the most common

representation    of the process by which expectations are formed, this si:aplifica—

tion iy cause serious aisspecification errors in some contexts. Helliwell and

Glorieux (1970) and Abel (1978) have developed forward looking models of

expectations. Lucas (1976) has emphasized the potential instability of all            such
fixed—coefficient average representations while Sargent (1978) and Summers

(1980) have shown both the possibility and the difficulty of developing even

quite simple models of factor demand that are consistent with rational

expectations.

            Even when investment models acknowledge that expectations are

uncertain, the assumption of risk neutrality is usually invoked to simplify the
                                             -16-

analysis.     In fact, investment behavior may be substantially influenced by              risk
aversion, changes in risk perception, and           the   pursuit of strategies that reduce

the risk of major capital conrnitments.

             In each of the cases that I have been describing, the researcher must

choose (implicitly or explicitly) between a sore tractable but usually less

realistic assumption and an assumption that is sore realistic but also              sore    dif-

ficult   to apply statistically. In general, the choice has           gone   in favor of the

more tractable but less realistic specification. Moreover, implementing any one

of the sore complex assumDtions often makes it too difficult to implement some

other sore realistic assumption, thus inevitably forcing the researcher to

choose among false nodels.

           The work of Jorgenson and   his   collaborators23 well illustrates this

problem of choice. In each case, Jorgenson and his colleagues have selected the

more tractable but less realistic assumption. Because they impose the further

restriction that the technology of each firm is Cobb—Douglas, the data are

required only to determine the time pattern of the response of investment to

prior changes in the desired capital stock.2 There is no separate estimation of

the effect of tax rules and no specific tests of the implied effect on invest-

ment of changes in tax rules and inflation. In section 5             of   the present paper,

I adopt the general Jorgenson specification but relax the constraint that the

technology    is   Cobb—Douglas and also the constraint that the response of firms to

the   tax induced changes in the user cost of      is the same as their
                                                     capital

response to other sources of variation in the user cost of capital. The               results

indicate   that a correct measurement of the impact of inflation in the context

of this nodel substantially increases its explanatory power and that with the
                                             —11—



correctly    measured variables the data are consistent with an elasticity of'

substitution of one and with the assumption that firms respond in the same iay

to all    changes    in the user cost of capital.

             Of' course, the support for this conclusion is conditioned on all            of
the other false intained assumptions. I have, wever, also examined two

other quite different sdels that do not impose these constraints. The analysis

of section    3,    which relates investment   to the real   net—of—tax rate of' return

received by the suppliers of capital, avoids any reference to financial market

variables. While it is therefore          obviously completely uninformative about many
potentially       interesting issues, it avoids conditioning the estimated respon-

siveness of investment on any theory        of   corporate finance. The specification in

terms    of the    flow   of investment avoids the assumption of homogeneous capital or
a   putty—putty technology. Again, this makes the rrdel uninformative about

important issues but avoids constraining the results by some obviously strong

assumptions of a false sdel. There are of course potential biases in this

approach since it fails        to distinguish different reasons for changes in invest-
ment and   omits variables that may be significant (e.g., changes in government

debt, international capital flow, or other factors that would in principle be

reflected in financial variables).

            The third approach, presented in section ,         avoids   some of these

problems but, of course, at the cost of introducing new ones. This specifica-

tion relates the flow of investment to the difference between the cost of funds

to the firm and the maximum potential        rate of return that the firm can affor to
pay on   a standard       investment project. The financial   cost   of funds   is thus

explicitly included. This however requires specifying the "true" cost of debt
                                      -18-


and equity funds and their relative importance. The specification does however

avoid restrictive assumptions about technology arid other aspects 01' investment

behavior. But, like the other two specifications, this return—over—cost speci-

fication is a false rodel whose coefficients might well be biased.

            The strength of the empirical evidence therefore rests on the fact

that all three quite different specifications support the same conclusion that

the heavier tax burden associated with inflation has substantially depressed

nonresidential investment in the United States. The magnitude of the effect

implied by each of these three dels indicates that the adverse changes in the

tax variables since 1965 have depressed investment by more than one percent of

GNP, a reduction which exceeds 1O percent of the rate of investment in recent

years.


3. Investment and the Real Net Rate of Return

            Individuals divide their income between saving and consuming and, to

the extent that they save, those resources are distributed among housing,

 inventories, plant and equipment, and investments abroad. Individuals wake

these decisions not only directly, but also through financial intermediaries,

and through the corporations of which they are direct and indirect shareholders.

         The rst fundamental determinant of the extent to which individuals

 channel resources into nonresidential fixed investment should be the real net—

 of—tax rate of return on that investment, a variable that I will denote

 Although   the idea of the real net—of—tax return is conceptually   simple, its

 calculation involves a number of practical as well as theoretical difficulties.
 Because of data limitations, the calculation is restricted to nonfinancial cor-
 porations even   though total nonresidential fixed investment refers to a somewhat
                                           —19—



broader set of firms. The real net return is defined as the product of the real
pretax return on      capital   (H) arid one minus the effective tax rate (l_ER) on that
return.
            The pretax return is estimated as the ratio of profits plus interest

expenses to the value of the capital stock. Profits are based on economic

depreciation and a correct measure of inventory costs; capital gains and losses

on the    corporate   debt are irrelevant since the calculation deals with the corn—

bined return to debt and equity. The value of the capital stock includes the

replacement cost value of fixed capital and inventories and. the rarket value of

land. The pretax rate of return is shown in column 3 of Table i.26

            The effective tax rate on this capital income includes the taxes paid

by the corporations, their shareholders and their creditors to the federal

government and to the state and local governments. The shareholders and credi-

tors consist not only of individuals but also of various financial intermediaries

including banks, pension ftnds, and insurance companies. In an earlier study,

Lawrence Summers and I did a detailed analysis of the distribution of corporate

equity and debt among the different classes of shareholders and creditors and of

the relevant irarginal federal tax rates for each such investor (Feldstein and

Summers, 1979). More recently, James Poterba and I refined this analysis and

extended it to include the taxes paid to state and local governments. The

effective rate of tax is shown in column L of Table 1. The resulting net—of—tax

rate of return is shown in the fifth column.

            The pretax rate of return varies cyclically as well as from year to

year but has experienced no overall trend.27 The average return from 1953

through 1979 was 11.0 percent. The effective tax rate was quite high in the 1950's
                                      —20-.



                                     Table I

               Investment and the Real        Net   Return to Capital



                                                              Cyclically Adjusted Return
   Investment Investment    Pretax   Effective       Net              Effective   Net
   GNP Ratio   Capital      Return   Tax Rate       Return    Pretax Tax Rate Return
                Ratio
       (n/y)   (I/K)          CR)     (ETH)          (r)       (HA)     (ri)         (RNA)


                 (2)          (3)      (11)          (5)       (6)       (i')         (8)
        (1)


                                     0.7145         0.029     0.105        NA               NA
1953 0.027     o.0110      o.ii11
               0.033       .0.107    0.687          0.0311    0.117     0.7511        0.029
19511 0.023
               o.o14i       0.132    0.665          0.01411   0.130     0.712
1955   0.028
                           0.1114    0.724          0.032     0.111                   0.0314
1956   0.031   o.o1411
               0.0140      0.105     0.711          0.030     0.1114    0.715
1957   0.029
               0.023       0.090     0.707          0.026     0.113     0.113                     .

1958   0.017
               0.028       0.112     0.673          0.036     0.125                   0.038
1959   0.020
               0.030        0.1011   0.665          0.035     0.122     0.7114        0.035
1960   0.022
                            0.103    0.6614         0.035     0.1211    0.689         0.038
1961   0.019   0.027
                                                              0.130     0.6143        o.o116
1962   0.023   0.033        0.117    0.615          0.0145
               0.033        0.1211   0.606          0.0149    0.136     0.629
1963   0.023
               0.0111       0.1314   0.562          0.059     0.1141    0.591
19614 0.029                                                                           0.062
1965 0.0110    0.057        0.1145   0.551          0.065     0.1145    0.573
               0.0614       0.1115   0.560          o.o614    0.137     0.595
1966 0.0115
                            0.130    0.5614         0.057     0.126     0.603         0.050
1967   0.038   0.052
                                     0.626                    0.123     0.663         0.04i
1968   0.037   0.051        0.130                   0.0149
                            0.117    0.673          0.038     0.113                   0.027
1969   0.038   0.051
                                     0.705          0.028     o.io6      0.792        0.022
1970   0.031   o.o140       0.096
                            0.100    .0.677         0.032     0.112      0.782        0.025
1971   0.025    0.032
                            0.108    0.625           0.0111   0.113      0.720        0.032
1972   0.028    0.037
                                     0.701           0.031    0.102      0.795        0.021
1913 0.0314     o.o116      0.105
                            0.082    0.901           0.008    0.096      1.079       —0.008
19714 0.031     o.o110
                            o.o86     0.7211         0.0214   0.115                   0.017
1975 o.oi14     0.017
                            0.095     0.681          0.030     0.1114    0.850        0.017
1916 0.015      0.019
                                      0.683          0.031     0.109                         NA
1971 0.020      0.026       0.097
                                                     0.027     0.i014           NA           NA
1918 0.025      0.033       0.091     0.722
                                             —21—



    and   then declined sharply in the 1960's; at the individual level this reflected

    a significant reduction in personal tax rates while at the corporate level this

    reflected changes in depreciation rules and the statutory corporate tax rate.

 Since the mid—1960's, the effective tax rate has nrwed sharply and somewhat errati-

 cally upwards, primarily reflecting the overstatement of capital income that occurs

when inflation distorts the measurement of depreciation,
                                                                  inventory profits,

 interest payments, and capital gains.28 The growth of state and local taxes and

various changes in personal tax rates contributed somewhat to this overall

 increase. The real net rate of return shows a general pattern that reflects the

changing effective tax rate as well as the cyclical and year—to—year fluc-

tuations in the pretax rate of return. This key rate of return varied around

3.3 percent in the 1950's, rose by the mid—60's to 6.5         percent   while averaging
5.0       percent   for the 1960's as a whole and then dropped in the 1970's to an

average of      only   2.8 percent.

             Since   the net rate of return varies cyclically, its estimated    impact
on investment can reflect cyclical as well as xre fundamental influences.              To
separate these effects, the equations in this section relate the investment              rate
to    a cyclical measure of     aggregate demand as   well as to the real net return. It
is    also useful to consider two InDre explicit ways of focusing on the irxre fun-

damental changes in the real rate of return. A cyclically adjusted measure of

the real net return was calculated as follows. First, the real pretax rate of
return (n) is adjusted by regressing it on the difference between GNP and capa-
city GNP      and then calculating the rate of return for each year at a standard GNP

gap of 1.7 percent; this variable, denoted RA (for adjusted) and shown in column
6   of Table    1, eliminates cyclical but not year—to—year variations in the pretax
                                        —22—


return. Since there is no trend in the pretax return, eliminating random as

well as cyclical variations in the pretax return would leave only a constant.

              The cyclical and random fluctuations in the effective tax rate were

eliminated in a sore fundamental way by using the explicit statutory provisions.

Using a nthod developed in an earlier study (Feldstein and Summers, 1978) and

described sore fully in section 1 of the present paper, I calculated the real
net rate of return that a firm could afford to pay on the debt and equity used
to finance a new investment that, in the absence of all taxes, would have a real
yield of 12 percent. This net rate of return varies from year to year because
of changes in the tax rules and in the anticipated rate of inflation. The ratio
of the net rate of return on a mix     of   debt and equity to the assumed 12 percent
real   pretax return xasures the changes in the effective tax rate that are

not due to fluctuations in the pretax rate of return, the rate of current

investment, or other year—to—year fluctuations. More formally, this ratio

equals    1—ETRA and the ETRA value is shown in column 1 of Table 1.29

              Combining the adjusted pretax return and the adjusted effective tax
rate gives the adjusted net return (RNA = RA (1—ETRA)) shown in column 8       of
Table    1.

              Although this variable is purged of cyclical variation, it still

reflects year—to—year variation in the pretax return. Eliminating all such

variation and treating the pretax return as a constant implies that all of the

variation in the net return comes from the effective tax rate variable. This

possibility is tested below in the context of a sore general specification in

which both RNA and 1—ETRA are included separately.

              The basic specification relates the ratio of real net investment to

real GNP (In11) to the real net rate of return (RN) and the Federal Reserve
                                                 —23—


Board's measure of capacity utilization (UcAP).30 I use annual data and lag both

regressors one year31:

                 n
                It
 (3.1) —             = a0   +
                                a1   RNt...1 +   a2   UCAPt_l +
                Yt
where Ut   is   a random disturbance about which nre will be said below.

           Although quarterly data could have been constructed, much of the basic

information that is used to calculate the net return variable is available only

annually; the within—year variations in a quarterly series would therefore be

largely interpolations of doubtful economic iieaning.32

           A lag in response has been found in all previous investment studies

and reflects the delays in decision—making and in the production and delivery of

plant and equipment. The lag also avoids the obvious problem of simultaneity

between concurrent investment and capacity utilization or other nasures of

busirtess cycle activity. More general lag structures and other possible

explanatory variables have been considered; those results are also described

below.

            All of the specifications are estimated by least squares with a first—

order autocorrelation correction. The autocorrelation correction algorithm

estimates the first—order autocorrelation parameter simultaneously with the

other coefficients using a procedure that is equivalent to maximum likelihood if

the disturbances are normally distributed. This correction adds to the eff i—

ciency of the estimates and, more importantly, avoids the potentially serious

downward bias in the estimated standard errors about which Granger and Newbold

(19714) have so persuasively warned. For many of the basic specifications I have

also checked the constraint implied by the first—order transformation and found
that it cannot be rejected; I have also estimated the specification in first
difference form and found similar coefficients. The evidence on this is pre-
sented   below. (I might also add that simple OLS estimates without autocorrela—

tion correction also produce essentially the same results.),

           The basic result is shown in equation 3.2:



(3.2)
          —     =   —0.014 +   0.459
                               (0.095)
                                           + 0.028
                                             (0.025)
                                                       UCAPt1 + 0.29 ut_i
                                                               (0.25)
           Yt
                                                                 =    0754
                                                            DWS = 2.04
                                                            SSR = 3.438 (io)
                                                            1954—78


with standard errors shown   in parentheses and the coefficient of uti indicating
the   first—order autocorrelation correction parameter. Before looking at other

specifications, it is useful to consider briefly the magnitude of the estimated

coefficients. Since the net return variable had a standard deviation of 0.013

for the sample period, a imve of RN from one standard deviation below the mean

to one standard deviation above would increase the investment ratio by about

0.012, approximately 1.5 times its standard deviation and 45 percent of its

25—year average value. Since the capacity utilization variable has a standard

deviation of 0.044, a two—standard deviation increase in this variable would

raise the investment ratio by about 0.0025 or only one—fifth of the change

induced by a similar change in RN.33

           Reestimating equation 2.2 in first—difference form (for 1955 through

1978) shows that the estimated coefficient of RN is quite robust: its coef-

ficient is 0.471 with a standard error of 0.113. The capacity utilization coef—
                                         —25—



ficient   falls to 0.008 with a standard error of 0.021 and the Durbin—Watson

statistic indicates negative serial correlation. To test the constraints

imposed by the first—order autocorrelation adjustment, I estimated the ordinary

least squares regression of the investment ratio on its own lagged value and on

one— and two—period lags in RN and UCAP. The reduction in the revised sum of

squares was only 6 percent and the corresponding F—statistic of 0.51 was far

less than the 5—percent critical value of 3.55.

           Using the cyclically adjusted measure of the net return (RNA) gives

greater weight to the cyclical capacity utilization variable and slightly lowers

the estimated effect of changes in the fundamental determinants of the net




            n

(13)
           It   =   —0.023 + 0.386    RNAt_i +   0.0I5     UCAPt..i +    0.63ut...i
                            (0.106)              (0.023)                (0.20)


                                                                            =    o.m6
                                                                   DWS =         2.076
                                                                   SSR =         3.3     (io)
                                                                   1955—77

           Several different ire general distributed lag specifications were

also estimated. There is some weak evidence that the mean lag between RN and

the investment ratio is longer than a year and that the cumulative effect of

RN on the investment ratio is larger than equation 3.2 implies. For example,

when the variable RNt....2 is added to the earlier specification, its coefficient

is 0.20 with a standard error of 0.l1; the sum of the coefficients on                      and

RNt1 becomes 0.60. Second—order polynominal distributed lags with a four or

five year span and a final value constrained to be zero imply that the coef—

ficients   of Hilt_i and RNt_2 are significantly different from zero but that
                                            —26—


further coefficients are not; the sum of the coefficients varies between 0.5

and 0.55, depending on the exact specification. Further lags on the capacity

utilization variables are never both positive and significantly different from

zero.
           Redefining the investment variable as the ratio of net investment to

capacity GNP has essentially no effect; the coefficient of RN rises to 0.50

(standard error 0.10) and the capacity utilization coefficient remains essen-

tially unchanged at 0.026 (s.e. =        0.026).
           All   of   the equations are estimated using the net rate of investment

because I believe that the Commerce Department's very disaggregated procedure

for calculating economic depreciation, while far from perfect, is better than

the alternative of studying gross investment and assuming that depreciation is a

constant fraction of the past year's capital stock. Nevertheless, as a further

test of the robustness of the conclusion that RN is important, I have estimated

such a gross investment equation:


                                                                                             n
(3.1) I               —0.123 + 0.3lL   RN 1 +      0.106   UCAP ...1   +     0.163           +
                                                                                                 O.O5Out_i
                             (o.ob2)            (0.028)                     (0.030) ____         (0.295)
          It                                                                          It—i

                                                                                 =   o.'is
                                                                           DWS   =   1.98
                                                                           SSR =     2.70 (io)
                                                                           l954—78


These   coefficients confirm the       importance of RN but suggest that the net invest-

ment specification       overstates the importance of RN relative to UCAP. However,

the very large coefficient of the lagged capital variable, implying an

implausible 16 percent annual depreciation rate for plant and equipment, is a

warning against giving too much weight to this specification.35
                                         —27—


          The results are not sensitive to the use of capacity utilization to

measure the effect of aggregate demand. Using the unemployment rate for men

over 19 years old leaves the coefficient of RN at 0.51 (standard error =       0.077)
while using the proportional gap between GNP and capacity GNP leaves the coef—

ficient of RN at 0.105 (s.c.       0.070). A one percentage point decline in this

unemployment rate raises the investment ratio by a relatively small 0.0016;

similarly, a one percentage point decline in the GNP gap raises the investment

ratio by only 0.0010. Additional accelerator variables (i.e., a distributed lag

of proportional changes in GNP) were insignificant when capacity utilization was

included in the equation.

          Several additional variables that are sometimes associated with

investment were added to equation 3.2. Three of these variables were each

insignificant and    changed the coefficient of RN by less than 0.02: the ratio of
corporate cashflow to GNP lagged one year; the ratio of the federal government

deficit to GNP lagged one year;6 and a time trend. When the one year lagged

value of Tobin's q variable is included,37 its coefficient is 0.011 (with a

standard error of 0.o71) and the coefficient of RN drops slightly to 0.391

(s.e.   0.117).

          The actual inflation rate (lagged one year), and    the   predicted long—

term inflation rate38 (also lagged one year) were completely insignificant and

had very little effect on the coefficient of RN. Including both the actual and

expected inflation rates did not change this conclusion. The full effect of

inflation on investment is captured in the current specification by the RN

variable itself.

          All   of   the specification experiments described in the past several
                                                 —28—


paragraphs have also been repeated with the cyclically adjusted RNA variable

with very similar results.

               The specification in terms of the net return assumes that investment

responds equally to changes in the pretax return and in the effective tax rate.

Two tests of this assumption indicate that it is consistent with the data. If

instead of using RNt_i equation 3.2 is reestimated with                  and l_ETRt_i as

separate variables, the sum         of   squared residuals actually rises; i.e., the two

variables actually explain less than their product does. An explicit statisti-

cal test is possible if RN in equation 3.2 is replaced by its logarithm; since

in RN =   in   H +   in   (1—ETH), the equality of the two coefficients of ln R and in

(1—ETR) can be tested explicitly.39 Neither coefficient is estimated very

precisely (each has a t—statistic of less than 1.5) and the equality of the two

coefficients is easily accepted (the F statistic is only 0.51).

           Estimating       the analogous decomposition for the cyclically adjusted

variables, i.e., replacing RNA           by   RA and l—ETRA, is interesting because it sheds

light on the question of whether the year—to—year noncyclical variations in the

pretax return matter. Two things should be noted. First, this substitution

reduces the explanatory power of the equation as measured by the corrected

this favors keeping the simple specification in terms of RNA. Second, if both

variables are included separately, the coefficient of the HA variable is much

less than its standard error (0.033 with a standard error of 0.172) while the

coefficient of the ETRA variable is statistically significant and economically

important: _Q.QI with a standard error of 0.017. This suggests that year to

year fluctuations in the pretax return have not been important but that the rise

in ETHA from about 0.57 in the in..id—1960's to about 0.85 in         the   m.id—1970ts was

enough to reduce the investment ratio by more than one jrcentae point.
                                            —29—


            An important indication of the plausibility and             reliability   of any

siraple nodel is the stability of the coefficients in different subperiods.

Equations 3.5 and 3.6 show the result of splitting the sample in half:


             n
(3.5)
           —It
                 = —0.066 +   0.14148
                              (0.078)
                                                +    0.090 UCAPt_i — 0.62
                                                    (0.0214)            (0.25


                                                                             =     o.78
                                                                        DWS = 2.20
                                                                        SSR = 1.291 (io)
                                                                        19514—66




(3.6)
                 = —0.222 +   0.14143   RNt_i
                                                +    0.0141    UCAPt_i + 0.581.÷_i
                           (0.108)                  (0.025)             (0.321-'



                                                                            = 0.839
                                                                        DWS = 1.148
                                                                        SSR = 0.930 (lo—)
                                                                        1967—78


The   coefficients of RN are remarkably similar and the relevant F—statistic indi-
cates that the hypothesis of      equal   coefficients for the two subperiods cannot be
rejected   at the 5 percent levei.140

           A further test of the robustness and usefulness of an equation is its
performance in out of sample forecasts. The basic specification was reestimated
for the period from 19514 through 1970 and this equation was then used to predict
the investment ratio for each year from 1971 through 1978. These predictions

are based on the two lagged variables only (R11t..i and UCAPt_i) and do not use

the lagged disturbance (ut_i) or any lagged dependent variable. The results
                                       —30—



shown in Table 2 are remarkably good. The mean absolute prediction error
           is only two—thirds of the mean year—to—year change   (0.0050) in the
(0.0035)
investment   ratio. The year—to—year changes are also predicted quite well, with

the correct sign in 6 of the 7 years and a mean error that is only one—third of

the average change.

             To conclude the discussion of the net return mndel of investment beha-

                                                  for understanding the decline in
vior, it is useful to consider its implication

the investment ratio since 1966. The first column of Table 3 shows that the

investment ratio fell from 0.0I5 in 1966 to less than half that value in the

last four years of the sample period. The 1965 value of RN was 0.065, the

highest of any year in the sample and the 1965 value of UCAP was 0.896, the

second highest value and only slightly below the 1966 UCAP value of 0.911.

Column 2 uses the estimated effect of changes in RN (i.e., 0.I59 from equation

3.2) to calculate the investment ratio for each of the 25 sample years con-

ditional on RN =    0.065; i.e., each figure in column 2 equals the corresponding
                                                           Similarly, column 3 uses
figure in column 1 plus 0.59 times (0.065 —      RN_i).
the estimated effect of changes in UCAP to calculate the investment ratio con-

 ditional on UCAP =   0.896.-   It is clear from the figures in column 2 that the

 fall in RN can account for st of the decline in the investment ratio since

 1966 and that the post—1966 fluctuations in UCAP cannot
                                                             account for much of   the

 decline.     If RN had been kept at its 1965 level, net, investment from 1970 to

 1978 would have taken an average of L.1 percent of GNP instead of the actual

 average of only 2.5 percent, an increase of two—thirds. By contrast, main-
                                                          would only have raised the
 taining the high 1965 level of capacity utilization
                                                                     worth
 average investment — GNP ratio by 0.5 percentage points. It is also
                                              —31-



                                            Table II

                         Actual and Predicted Investment Ratios




                                    Ratio                        Change in Ratio

                Actual     Predicted        Predicted   Actual      Predicted   Predicted
                             (RN)             (MPI'u—                 (RN)        (1PIR—
                                               COF)                                coF)
.
                  (1)         (2)              (3)        (2)          (5)           (6)




     1971       0.025        0.019            0.02b       —           —              —



     1972       0.028        0.020            0.027      0.003        0.001         0.003

     1973       0.03L4       0.028            0.033      0.006        0.008         0.006

     l971       0.031        0.027            0.026     —0.003       —0.001        —0.007

     1975       0.0i1        0.015            O.OO1     —0.017       —0.012        —0.022

     1976       0.015        0.012            0.012      0.001       —0.003         0.008

     1977        0.020       0.020            0.016      0.005        0.008         O.OOI

     1978        0.025       0.022             —
                                                         0.005        0.002          —




    Predictors are based on equations fitted through 1970 only. Columns 2 and 5
    are based on the specification of equation 3.1 vhile columns 3 and 6 are based
    on the specification of equation 1.6.
                                          —32—



                                        Table III

                            Actual and Conditional Ratios of
                          Net Nonresidential Investraent to GNP



                                                                                         V

 Year        Actual                               Conditional On*
                             RN=         (JCAP=                     MPNR—COF=   UCAP=
                            0.065        0.896          0.0           0.0143    0.896
                (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)


 1954        0.023          0.040       0.023           —             —          —
 1955        0.028          0.043       0.031
 1956        0.031          o.o4i
                                                                     0.039      0.035
                                        0.032          0.035         o.04i      0.033
 1957        0.029    .     0.045       0.030                        0.036      0.032
 1958        0.017          0.033       0.019          0.023         0.024      0.021
1959         0.020          0.038       0.024          0.024         0.024
1960                                                                            0.031
             0.022          0.035       0.024          0.026         0.026      0.028
1961         0.019          0.033       0.022                        0.023      0.026
1962         0.023          0.037       0.027          0.026         0.024
1963         0.023
                                                                                0.032
                            0.033       0.026          0.025         0.025       0.029
1964         0.029          0.036       0.030          0.032         0.030      0.033
1965         0.040         0.043        o.04i          0.042         0.040
1966                                                                            0.043
             0.045         0.045        0.0145         0.048         0.045      0.045
1967        0.038          0.033        0.037          0.042         o.o4i      0.036
1968        0.037          o.o4i        0.038         o.o4i          0.038      0.039
1969        0.038          o.o46        0.039         0.043                     0.040
1970        0.031          0.043        0.032         0.038          0.038      0.033
1971        0.025          0.042        0.028         0.031          0.033      0.032
1972        0.028          0.044        0.032         0.033          0.034      0.037
1973        0.034          0.046        0.036         0.039          0.038      0.039
1974        0.031          0.047        0.032         0.041                     0.033
1975        0.014          0.040        0.015         0.030          0.038      0.018
1976        0.015          0.034        0.019         0.024
1977                                                                            0.027
            0.020          0.036        0.023         0.028          0.033      0.027
1978        0.025          0.04i        0.027         0.034              —           —



*Colurs   2, 3 and 14 are based on equation 3.2; columns 5 and 6 are based on
equation 4.7.
                                      —33—



noting   that if the 1965 level of RN had been reached a decade earlier, invest-

ment during that decade would have averaged an additional 1.2 percent of GNP.

Equation 3.2 can also be used to estimate an approximate but explicit effect of

inflation on the investment ratio. In an earlier study, Lawrence Summers and I

estimated the change in the tax liability on corporate source income that is

caused by the interaction of inflation and the tax iaws.)2 For example, in 1977

(the last year of our study) inflation raised the tax liability by $32.3 billion

or 1.9 percent of the corresponding capital stock.)3 The estimate of RNt_i in

equation 2.2 implies that a 1.9 percentage point increase in RN for 1977 would

raise the 1978 investment ratio by 0.009 to 0.031k; this value is shown in column

l of Table 3. Similarly calculated values for earlier years indicate that the

interaction between inflation and the tax rules reduced investment in'the 1970's

by an average of 0.8 percent of GNP or about one—third of the actual level of

net investment.


1. Investment and the Rate of Return over Cost4

           In the absence of taxes, the simplest specification of a firm's

investment behavior is that it invests whenever the rate of return on an

available project exceeds the cost of additional funds. More generally, the

costs of changing the rate of investment and the uncertainty associated with

investment returns make the firm's decision problem nre compiex)5 It is

nevertheless useful to describe the firm's rate of investment as responding to

the difference between potential rates of' return and the cost of funds.

           In terms of the traditional marginal efficiency of investment schedule

that Keynes borrowed from Irving Fisher, an upward shift of the marginal effi—
ciency schedule or a downward shift in the cost of funds will increase the rate

of investment.        If' we select a particular rate of investment, we can sasure the

upward shift of the marginal efficiency schedule by what happens to the internal

rate of return at that rate of investment.16 A rise in the difference between

the internal rate of return and the cost of funds should induce a higher rate of

investment.

         This idea can be extended to an economy with a complex tax structure

and with inflation. A change in the tax rules or in the expected rate of infla-

tion alters the rate of' return on all projects (in a sense that I will make nre

precise below). These fiscal and inflation changes therefore act in a way that

is equivalent    to shifting the marginal efficiency of investment schedule in a
simpler economy.
         When we switch          from a taxiess economy to one with company taxes and
depreciation    rules, the concept of the internal rate of return must be extended

to what I shall call the maximum potential net return (MPNR). For simplicity, I

shall describe this first for the case in which the firm relies exclusively on

debt finance. I shall then note how the analysis is easily extended to include

equity finance as well.

            In a taxless economy, the internal rate of return on a project is the

maximum rate of return that a firm can afford to pay on a loan used to finance

that project.     If' Lt is the loan balance at time t and xt (for t =       l,2,...,T)   is

the net cash flow of the project in year t (before interest expenses), the

 internal rate of return is the interest rate r that satisfies the difference

equation:


                             =           —
 (I.i)        L.t —   Lt_l       rL..1       xt
                                                      —35-..



where L0 is the initial cost of the project and LT = 0.                       Solution of equation

4.1 is exactly equivalent to the familiar definition of r as the solution to the

polynomial equation:



                                T              xt
(4.2)             L0            E

                                t1            (i+r)

            When a tax at rate T is levied on the net output minus the sum of the

interest yment and the allowable depreciation (d), the nRximum potential

interest rate (MPIR) is defined according to



                        =                     + T(xt — dt — rLt...i)
(Ii.3)    Lt —   Lt_i       rLt_1    —
                                         xt

where LT = 0 and L0 equals the initial cost of the project minus any investment

tax credit.

            If xt is the real cash flow of the project, inflation at a constant

rate iT   has the effect of increasing the nominal cash flow to (1+iT)t xt and the

MPIR rises to the value of r that                   solves:


                       =            — Ci + 11)t xt +                 + )t xt — cit
(14.1k) Lt —   Lt_i        rLt..i                              [(i                   —
                                                                                         rLt_il.

Although    in a taxless world the MPIR would rise by the rate of inflation, the

relative importance of historic cost depreciation and the deductibility of nomi-

nal interest yments determines whether r rises by more or less than the

increase in TV.
                                            —36—



             The   calculation of the MPIR is made operational by specifying the real
cash flow from a hypothetical project and the associated series of allowable tax
depreciation.       I adopt here the same   specifications that I used in   Feldstein

and Summers (1918). The hypothetical project is a "sandwich" of which 66.2 per-

cent of the investment in the first year is a structure that lasts 30 years and

the remainder is an equipment investment that is replaced at the end of 10 years

and 20 years.1 The internal rate of return in the absence of taxes is set at 12

percent for both the equipment and structure components. The net output of the

equipment is subject to exponential decay at 13 percent until it is scrapped

while the net output of the structure is subject to 3 percent decay. The depre-

ciation rules, tax rate, and credits are than varied from year to year as the

law changes.

              The expected rate of inflation in each year is calculated from the

consumer expenditure deflator using the optimal ARDIA forecasting procedure of

Box and Jenkins (1970).8 The calculation assumes that forecasts made at each

date are based only on the information available at that time and that the ARI1A

process estimated at each date is based only on the nDst recent 10 years of

quarterly data. The calculation of the 1PIR is based on the entire sequence of

forecasted future inflation rates and not on any single average long—term

expected inflation rate)9

              If firms did finance marginal proj ects exclusively by debt, it would

be sufficient to relate the net rate of investment to the difference between
the   MPIR   and the long—term nominal interest rate (as well as to capacity utiliza-
tion or      some other measure of cyclical demand). The correct assuniption about

the marginal debt—equity mix       is not clear. In the current analysis,     I have
                                                    —37—



assumed that firms use debt and equity at the n.rin in the same ratio that
                                                                           they

do on average, i.e., that debt accounts for only one—third of total finance.

The notion of the MPIR must therefore be extended to the Maximum Potential Net

Return (MPNR) defined as the riximum net—of—corporate—tax nominal yield that the

firm can pay           on the mix    of   funds that is one—third debt and two—thirds equity.

Since debt and equity are treated very differently by the corporation tax

(interest payments are deductible but dividends are not), the MPNR will not

equal the MPIR.

                 The   nthod of      calculating the MPIR in the all—debt case can neverthe-

less be applied directly to find the value of the MPNR. In the special all—debt

case, the MPNR =           (l—T)r;   the solution of a difference equation like 4.14       iS ther—
fore equivalent to finding MPNR/(1—t) in the all—debt case. More generally,
however, regardless of the mix of debt and equity finance, the solution of
equation 4•14 can be interpreted as equivalent to                   MPNR/(1_T). Since I is   known,

this yields MPNR directly. Annual values                   for MPNR are presented in column 1     of

Table    14•



                 Note that the MPNR is defined        in terms of a hypothetical project with a
fixed    pretax yield of 12 percent. All of the year—to—year variation in the MPNR

is due to changes in tax             rules   and expected inflation. An alternative MPNR
series    has also been calculated in which the pretax rate of return is allowed to
vary; more specifically, MPNRVP (v for varying profitability) replaces the 12
percent        assumption with a cyclically—adjusted          profitability series for each year's
new   investment that is very similar to the RA variable discussed in section 3 of
the present paper.51 The MPNRVP series is presented in column 2                    of Table 14.

                The MPNR is    the net nominal amount        that   firms can potentially afford
to   pay for funds. The actual net nominal cost of funds is:
                              —38—


                             Table IV

           Potential and   Actual Net   Costs of Funds




                                                MPNR-    MPRNVP—
         MPNR         MPNRVP            COF      COF       COF

          (i)          (2)              (3)      ()        (5)

l954     0.087        0.078          0.078      0.009     0.000
1955     0.089        0.084          0.077      0.012     0.007
1956     0.089        o.o71..        0.067      0.023     0.008
1957     0.091        0.073          0.070      0.020     0.002
1958     0.090        0.075          0.058      0.032     0.011
1959     0.090        0.081          0.060      0.031     0.022
1960     0.090        o.o8           0.059      0.031     0.018
1961     0.090        0.081          0.o1-9     0.0.i1    0.032
1962     0.093        0.088          0.056      0.037     0.032
1963     0.09b        0.091          0.056      0.038     0.035
1961.t   0.099        0.098          0.055      0.0L4     0.043
1965     0.102        0.102          0.058      0.0b3     0.01t3
1966     0.101        0.097          0.067      0.034     0.030
1967     0.101        0.092          0.061      0.040     0.031
1968     0.097        0.037          0.066      0.030     0.021
1969     0.093        0.015          0.0Th      0.020     0.001
1970     0.097        0.073          0.078      0.019    —o.oo6
1971     0.102       .0.081          0.075      0.027     o.oo6
1972     0.105        0.082          0.071      0.0314    0.010
1973     o.io6        0.072          0.095      0.011    —0.022
19714    0.111        0.062.         0.11414   —0.0314   —0.082
1975      0.110       0.083          0.108      0.002    —0.025
1976      0.109       0.080          0.107      0.002    —0.027
                                                  —39—



(14.5)     COF      I
                    3
                             (1—T) j +   .3 (e +ir)

where I is the long—term bond interest rate and e is the real equity earnings

per dollar of share value.5' The cost of funds series is presented in column 3.

             The current section of this paper examines a nrdel that n.kes the rate
of net investment a function of (1) the difference between the potential and
actual cost of funds and (2) the rate of capacity utilization:


(14.6) I =              b0    +   b1 (MPNR — COF)t_i     +   b2   UCAPt_i + Ut.
           Yt


Columns 14 and 5 of Table 14 present the time series of this yield difference.

These figures indicate that the incentive as low in the 1950's, became quite

powerful in the mid—1960's, began to fail in the early 1970's and then dropped

very sharply in the mid—1970's.

             The pattern of the past decade reflects the fact that, because of

historic cost depreciation, inflation raised the I.1PR rather little while the

cost of funds rose substantially.52 Between 1966 and 1976, the cost of funds

rose by four percentage points while the MPiR rose by less than one percentage

point.53

            As in section 2, the current analysis            uses annual data and lags both
regressors      one rear. Equation 14.6 and a variety of related specifications have

been estimated by least squares with a first—order autocorrelation correction.

Specific tests for the basic specifications show that the implied constraints

are not binding, i.e., that the first—order autocorrelation correction is not
                                       _140_



inferior to a rrore general first—order ARMA process. Estimates in first—

difference form also produce very similar coefficients to those obtained with

the autocorrelat ion transformation.

            The basic jrameter estimates


(.7)   I      =   —0.00 + 0.316 (MPNR—coF)t_i + 0.013 UCAPt_i + 0.70
                         (0.066)               (0.020)              (0.17)

       Yt
                                                                    =    0.78I
                                                              DWS = 1.79
                                                              SSR = 2.936 (io)
                                                              1955—71


indicate the yield differential has a powerful effect and the variations in

capacity utilization are also important.

            Since the return—over—cost variable had   a   standard deviation of 0.017

over the sample period, a sve from one standard deviation below the mean to one

standard deviation above would raise the investment ratio by 0.011, approxima-

tely 1.3 times its standard deviation and L0 percent of its 25—year average

value. A two standard deviation nove in capacity utilization would raise

investment by o.oo6, or only about half as much.

            Using the varying—profitability measure of the potential net return

reduces the corresponding coefficient:




(.8) i =          —0.031 + 0.219 (MPNRvP—coF)t_l + 0.069 UCAFt_i + 0.71 ut_i
       —                  (o.o9)                  (0.020)         (0.17)

       Yt

                                                               j2    =   o.78
                                                               DWS = 2.02
                                                               SSR = 2.931 (io—)
                                                               1955—77
                                          _14 1—




However, since this measure is much core variable (the standard deviation of

I4PNRVP—COF is 0.028), a two—standard deviation iiove implies a slightly bigger

change of 0.012 in the investment ratio.

           Lagged values of the regressors were insignificant and polynomial

distributed lags of different lengths for the return—over--cost variable did not

alter the implications of equations 14.6 and 14.7. Redefining the investment

variable as a ratio to capacity GNP had no effect on the coefficients.

Sinilarly, substituting for capacity utilization the unemployment rate for nen

over ae 19 or the GNP gap ratio did not significantly alter the coefficient of

the return—over—cost variable. Moreover, a distributed lag of proportional

changes in past output was insignificant when capacity utilization was      included
in   the equation.

           The switch from   the   net investment equation to a gross investment

equation   caused some reduction in the coefficient of the return—over—cost
variable (to 0.215 with a standard error of 0.072), but the extremely small and
totally insignificant coefficient of the lagged capital stock variables (0.002
with   a standard error of 0.093) n.kes this gross investment specification

implausible.

            A time trend and   a   lagged ratio of corporate cash flow to GNP were

tried as additional variables; neither was significant and the coefficient of

the return—over—cost variable remained unchanged. A lagged ratio of retained

earnings to GNP was "mildly significant" (a t—statistic of       1.3) but left the
coefficient    of the return—over—cost variable unchanged. The lagged ratio of the

federal government deficit to GNP had a surprisingly positive coefficient but

its inclusion did not alter the coefficient of the return—over—cost variable.
                                            —12—


The one—year lagged value of Tobin's q ratio td a coefficient of 0.012 (with a

standard error of 0.009), while the coefficient of the return—over—cost variable

remained essentially unchanged at 0.289 (with a standard error of 0.068).

Neither the current inflation rate nor the expected inflation rate was statisti-

cally significant.

             A powerful test of the appropriateness of equation                 is obtained by

estimating separate coefficients for the rate of return (MPNR) and cost of funds

(COF) variables:


R.9)          = —0.055 + o.169     MPNRt_i — 0.319       COFt1 +     0.071k UCAPt1 +   O.66u1
                         (0.261)               (0.068)               (0.021)           (0.20)
        Yt

                                                                         j2     =   0.775
                                                                          DWS   =   1.81
                                                                          SSR   =   2.895   (io)
                                                                          1955—77


A   comparison of the sum of squared residuals of equations )4.7 and 4.9               shows    that
the coefficients of !.IPNR and COF do not differ significantly. The separate
coefficient of COF in    equation   1.9   is   almost    identical   to the combined return—
over—cost    coefficient in equation 14.7;     the   coefficient of the return variable is

larger but so too is its standard error.

         The   separate estimate of the MPNR coefficient in equation 14.9 is also
particularly important because the MPNR         variable     reflects only the interaction

of tax rules and inflation but not the market interest rate or equity yield.

The finding that the MPNR coefficient is even larger than the COF coefficient is

therefore powerful evidence of the effect of the tax—inflation interaction.55

         A test of the stability of the basic coefficients over time also pro—

vides reassuring support about the plausibility and reliability of the model.
Equations 1.l0 and .11 show the result of splitting the sample in half:



R.io) i =          —0.036 + o.65 (PNR_coF)t_i + 0.065 UCAPt_i + O.8lu_
                           (0.266)             (o.o'o)         (0.21)
          Yt

                                                              j2       =      0.599
                                                              DWS      =
                                                               SSN     =      2.276   (lo_14)
                                                               1955—66



(.1l) I = _0.01          +   0.300 (MPNR—COF)t_i + 0.081 UCAPt_i — O.O2ut_1
                             (0.030)              (o.oii)            (o.b3)
          Yt
                                                                       =      0.963
                                                              DWS      =      1.75
                                                              SSR       =     0.201 (io)
                                                               1967—77



The coefficients are quite similar and the F—statistic of 0.695 indicates that

the hypothesis of an unchanged structure cannot be rejected at any conventional

level of significance. The results for the varying—profitability specification

are even irore striking: the coefficent of the return—over—cost variable is

0.206 (s.e. =   0.089) in the first half of the period and 0.200 (s.e. = 0.033) in
the second half.

           Out—of—sample forecasts based on estimating equation 1.6         for   1955

through 1970 are shown in Table 2. The agreement between the actual and pre-

dicted investment ratios is quite close. The nan absolute prediction error

(0.0035) is the same as with the net return equation of section 2 and only two—

thirds   of the nan year—to—year change in   the investment ratio. The year—to—
                                      _L4 1_




year changes are predicted even nre closely and both turning points are

correctly indentified.

           The parameter estimates of equation i.7 can be used to analyze the

sharp decline in net investment since 1966. Column 5 of Table 2 shows the

investment ratio which in principle would have been observed if the return—over—

cost had remained at its 1965 value of 0.013. Instead of dropping to an average

of only 0.025 from 1970 through 1977, it would have averaged forty percent

higher, 0.035. By contrast, even if the capacity utilization rate could

have been kept at the overheated level of 0.896, the investment ratio in the

1970—77 period would only have increased twenty percent to 0.030.

           The specific contribution of inflation to the decline in the value of

the return—over—cost variable is difficult to determine. One simple way of

measuring this effect is by a regression of the return—over—cost variable on the

predicted long—term inflation rate. The coefficient in this regression (—1.27

with a standard error of o.ii) and the rise in the long—term inflation variable

by   0.031 between 1965 and 1976 together imply that inflation reduced the return—
over—cost by 0.0432 during this period. The coefficient of the return—over—cost
variable (0.316 in   equation h.7) implies     that inflation reduced the investment
ratio   by .01k over this period. This equals almost all of the 0.015 fall in the

investment ratio caused by the decline in the return-over—cost6 and nre than

half of the observed decline in the investment ratio between 1966 and 1977.


5. The Flexible Capital Stock Adjustment Model

           The flexible capital stock adjustment rdel developed by Jorgenson and

his collaborators is the direct descendent of that great work—horse of invest-

ment equations, the accelerator. Instead of the accelerator's assumption of a
                                        — 5—



fixed   capital—output ratio, the nore general   nodel   allows the capital—output

ratio to respond to changes in the cost of capital ownership and therefore to

changes   in tax rules and inflation. Implicit in the simplest version of      this


model   are   a number of very strong and generally undesirable assumptions,

including homogeneous capital, a putty—putty technology, constant proportional

replacement, myopic and risk—neutral decision—making, and a known, exogenous

financial mix. The present section accepts these assumptions in order to focus

on the problem of measuring the effect of inflation in the framework of this

popular and influential ixodel. The analysis shows that the traditional imple-

mentation of the nodel has not given adequate attention to inflation and that

any attempt to analyze the recent investment experience on the basis of that

implementation would be misleading.

              The analysis here is limited to investment in equipment. The proce-

dure of estimating separate investment equations for equipment and structures is

traditional in this framework because the tax rules differ for the two types of

equipment. The implicit assumption of two independent investment demand         Th.nc—


tions, one for equipment—capital and the other for structure—capital, is clearly

a poor description of reality. To the extent that investments in structures and

equipment are decided as a package, the nodel of the previous section is a pre-

ferable specification.57

              The basic nodel is well—known and can be summarized briefly. Each

 firm has a desired capital stock at each time (Kt) arid, to the extent that its

actual capital falls short of the desired capital, the firm immediately orders

capital goods to eliminate the difference. The sum of installed capital and

 capital—on—order is thus equal to the desired capital stock at the end of each
                                              —6—

period. This implies that in each period the net stock of outstanding orders is

increased or decreased by exactly the change in the desired capital stock,
 *    *
     Kt_i. Since there are delivery delays, the observed net investment can
be represented by a distributed lag distribution of these orders:


                     T           *      *
(5.1)     I      =   E
                            v (Kt_ — Kt__i).
                     j =1



               This specification is based on an implicit assumption about replace-

ment investment: The existing stock decays exponentially at a constant rate d,

requiring   replacement investment of dKt1 to be nude in year t     to naintain the

capital   stock. Since firms know the delivery lag distribution     exactly, they can

anticipate the replacement investment that will be required in each future year

(up to the length of the longest delivery lag) and can therefore order replace-

ment investment far enough in advance to make exactly the required replacement.

Gross investment is therefore given by:


           g
                     T           *      *
(5.2)     It =                 (ic_ — Kt...j_i) + dKt_i
                     j=1


               With a constant elasticity of substitution production function, the

first order conditions of profit maximization imply that the desired capital

stock is related to the level of output (Q), the price of output (p) and the

annual cost of capital services (c) according to:8



I
5.3j
           *
          Kt
                —a a,¼p/c)a
                —
                                 t
                                            —7—

    where c is the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor and a is the

    capital coefficient •in the production function. Substituting 5.3 into 5.2 yields:



               = aa
    (5.)                   Wj [(/C)a_ t-j - (p/c)at_j_i Qt--i) + dKt_i


    The accelerator nde1 implicity assumes o0 while the Cobb—Douglas technology

    assumed by Jorgenson and his collaborators ixplies c=l. In the present section,

    I shall show that the flexible ndel witha>O is imore strongly supported by the

    data than the simpler accelerator nxdel. The n.ximum likelihood estimate of c

    is less than one but the likelihood function is too flat to reject the

    Cobb—Douglas assumption .59

               The annual cost of capital services reflects the price level for

    investment goods (p1), the real net cost of funds (R), the exponential rate of

    depreciation (d), the corporate tax rate (T), the investment tax credit60 (x) and

    the present value of the depreciation allowances per dollar of investment (Z):


                   P1 (i_tz_x) (a + d)
              = ______________________
                          1— T



               Inflation affects the value of this crucial variable in two important

    ways through the cost of funds (a) and through the present value of depreciation

•
    (z). In their original study, Hall and Jorgenson (1967) assumed a fixed nominal

    interest rate of 20 percent for the cost of funds. In the nest recent of the

    Jorgenson studies, this assumption was replaced by the specification that

    R =   (i—r)i   where i is a long—term bond interest rate (Gordon and Jorgenson,

    1976). This overstates the cost of debt capital (by ignoring inflation) and
ignores the role of equity capital. The expected real net cost of debt capital

is (l—T)i —    it (where   is expected inflation) since the   debt   is repaid in

depreciated dollars.61 Column 1 of Table 5 presents this n'asure of the real net

cost of debt. Despite the rapid rise in the Baa rate itself, the real net cost

of debt funds actually declined since the mid—1960's.

          The cost of equity capital (e) is the ratio of equity earnings per

dollar of share price. The conventional earnings—price ratio can be misleading

when there is inflation since it is based on book earnings rather than real eco-

nomic earnings. Book earnings overstate real earnings by using historic cost

depreciation and some FIFO inventory accounting but also understate real ear—

flings by excluding the real reduction in the value of outstanding debt that

occurs because of inflation.62 The correct earnings price ratio is presented in

column 2 of Table 5. The cost of equity funds clearly rose substantially since

the rnid—1960's even when the conventional series is appropriately corrected.

          Defining the real net cost of funds (R) as a fixed—weight average with

one—third debt (the average ratio of debt to capital for the past two decades)

implies :63




(5.6) R   =     I3 [(l_T)i —i   +e
                                 3



This series, presented in column 3 of Table 5, shows no trend ftoxa the

mid—1950's through the mid—1960's but then a gradual but substantial rise to the

mid—1970' s.

          The second important way in which inflation affects the cost of capital

 services is through the value of depreciation. Since depreciation allowances
                                                              Table V

                              Correct and Incorrect Measures of the Cost of Capital Services


.'

                                             Net
                                           Nominal      Depreciation
               Real Net Cost of Funds      Cost of       A1loances      Relative Cost of Capital Services
     Year     Debt   Equity Combined       Fuiids    Correct Incorrect Correct Incorrect   No        No
                                                                                        Inflation Inflation
              (i)       (2)         ()       (14)     (5)          (6)     (1)      (8)
                                                                                          No.1
                                                                                             (9)
                                                                                                    No.2
                                                                                                      (10)


19514       —0.013    o.o6        0.0140   0.069     o.6144      0.549    0.2141   0.221    0.211    0.237
1955        —0.010    o.o6        o.o14i   0.068     0.677       0.582    0.236    0.218    0.207    0.233
1956        —0.008    0.059       0.037    0.063     0.713       0.6014   0.230    0.223    0.211    0.233
1957        —0.0014   0.065       0.0142   0.068     0.703       0.613    0.2146   0.2314   0.216    0.2142
1958         0.000    0.053       0.035    0.057     0.7145      0.620             0.228
                                                                          0.227             0.2114   0.235
1959         0.001    0.051       0.034    0.057     0.7149      0.625    0.226    0.2314   0.215    0.235
1960         0.000    0.055       0.037    0.061     0.739       0.629    0.233    0.233    0.216    0.237
1961         0.005    0.01414     0.031    0.050     0.781       0.633    0.215    0.230    0.2114   0.231
1962         0.006    0.064       0.0144   o.o6i     0.756       0.652             0.218
                                                                          0.231             0.205    0.230
1963         0.006    0.062       0.0143   0.060     0.776       0.671    0.224    0.2114   0.203    0.225
1964         0.006    0.058       o.o14i   0.058     0.782       0.673    0.206    0.203    0.190    0.210
1965         0.006    0.062       0.043    o.o6i     0.7714      o.6i14   0.2014   0.197    0.2014   0.2014
1966         0.009    0.076       0.053    0.073     0.7140      0.675    0.226    0.206    0.190    0.213
1967         0.012    0.067       0.0149   0.068     0.757       0.676             0.208
                                                                          0.217             0.189    0.210
1968         0.008    0.068       0.0148   0.071     0.749       0.676    0.221    0.214    0.185    0.213
1969         0.004    0.075       0.052    0.083     0,718       0.677    0.253    0.239    0.2014   0.234
1970         0.011    0.084       0.059    0.092     0.695       0.617             0.241
                                                                          0.263             0.205    0.234
1971         0.006    o.o6i       0.0142   0.078     0.762       0.714    0.2114   0.216    0.190    0.207
1972         0.008    0.062       0.0144   0.076     0.767                0.206    0.206
                                                                 0.7114                     0.182    0.199
1973        —0.003    0.085       0.056    0.099     0.717       0.7114   0.222    0.202    0.176    0.198
L97         —0.034    0.116       0.066    0.146     0.629       0.1114   0.2144   0.202    0.169    0.195
1975        —0.001    0.100       0.067    0.119     0.678       0.714    0.236    0.203    0.168
1976        —0.005    0.080       0.052    0.1014    0.707       0.7114   0.2114   0.200    0.169    0.190
1977        —0.012    0.1114      0.072    0.127     0.663       0.715                      0.163
                                                                          0.2145   0.197             0.198
                                         —50—


are fixed in nominal terms, the real present value of the depreciation (z) is

reduced when the rate of inflation rises. This present value should be calculated

using a nominal cost of funds or, equivalently, the future depreciation allowan-

ces should be restated in real. terms and then discounted at the real cost of

funds. Column 14 of Table 5 presented the nominal cost of funds; this is the

real cost of funds (shown in column 3) plus the expected rate of inflation.6

The    values of   Z presented in column 5 reflect changes in this discount rate as

well   as   changes in the depreciation ruies.65 In the early years, Z rises signi-

ficantly but, since 196i, Z has drifted down because of the rising discount rate

despite the continuing acceleration of depreciation.

             The importance of specifying this discount rate correctly can be seen

by comparing these Z values with the alternative "Z10"        values presented in

column 6;    the   Zl0 values are calculated with a constant 10 percent discount
rate, the procedure used by Jorgenson and       his   collaborators. With a constant
discount    rate, the evolution of the Zl0 variable reflects only the increasingly

favorable statutory rules and therefore has actually increased during the st

decade while the true value has been declining.

             The composite relative cost of capital services (i.e., the c variable

defined in equation 5.5 deflated by the output. price) is presented in column 7

of Table 5. This measure of the relative cost of capital services falls gra-

dually from the 1950ts to a low point in the mid—1960's and then begins rising

again. By the end of the sample period (1977), the relative cost of capital

is back to its level of the 1950's. This reversal of the incentive to invest is

observed if the inflation induced changes in Z and R        are ignored; column 8   pre-

sents a false relative cost series that incorporates Zl0 (i.e., a constant 10
                                      —51—


percent discount rate to value depreciation) and that measures the cost of funds

by   the net nominal interest rate.

           The Cobb—Douglas technology assumed by Jorgenson and his collaborators

is a convenient place to begin testing the significance of the relative cost of

capital services. I have estimated equation 5.4 subject to the restriction that

the elasticity of substitution is one and compared it to the simpler accelerator

model in which the elasticity of substitution is zero. In both specifications,

the distributed lag weights were constrained to fit a third degree polynomial

(with four years of lags and a fifth year constrained to zero).

            By purely statistical criteria, the evidence clearly favors the

Cobb—Douglas price sensitivity model to the accelerator indel. With     the

Cobb—Douglas technology, the      is 0.980 and the sum of squared residuals is

112.3. By contrast, for the accelerator odel the        is only 0.961 and the sum

of squared residuals is 215.9. An approximate likelihood ratio test strongly

rejects the restriction to a zero substitution elasticity.66

            t4isspecifying the cost of capital series by failing to represent

correctly the effect of inflation also reduces the explanatory power of the

model. Following the Jorgenson procedure of evaluating depreciation allowances

with a fixed 10 percent interest rate and defining the cost of funds in terms of

the net nominal rate (i.e., using the incorrect c/p series presented in column

8 of Table 5) cause the      to fall to 0.970 (from 0.980) and raises the sum of

squared residuals to i61.1 (from 112.3).

            Although relaxing the Cobb—Douglas assumption and   estimating   the

elasticity of substitution could in principle indicate the sensitivity of

investment, the data are not informative enough to provide a precise value for
                                                                —52-.



this parameter.             With the correctly measured value of the user cost of capital,

the    maximum likelihood estimate of the substitution elasticity is 0.9 but the
reduction        in   the   sum   of squared residuals to 112.2 is triviai.67
                 Further    tests of the cost—sensitivity assumption can in principle be

achieved by allowing separate elasticities with respect to the different com-

ponents of the cost of capital services. In place of equation 5.3, the sore

general      specification is:


(5.ir) Kt
             *
                  =
                        t    121
                                  ,—a1   r
                                         Id
                                              +
                                                  RI
                                                       —a
                                                            2
                                                                            —a



                             Lv']        LTJ
Instead of trying to estimate all                      these        elasticities, three different forms of

5.7'   were tried. The first constrains 01 = 1.                              The resulting estimates   for
02 and           were 1.8 and 3.2, respectively, but the reduction in the sum of squared

residuals to 100.1 from 112.3 in the Cobb—Douglas case is not significant. The

second specification, which constrains al                               a3, implies estimates of 02 = 0.6
and 01 = 03           = 1 but the sum of squared residuals (io6.6)                       is again not sini—
ficantly lower          than in the Cobb—Douglas specification. Finally, the constraint

that 01 = 02           implies estimates of 01 = 02                     =   0.5 and 03   1.0; the sum   of

squared      residuals of 97.0 is again not sufficiently low to cause a rejection of

the    Cobb—Douglas assumption.
                 The Chow test for the stability of the coefficients easily sustains the

hypothesis of no change between the first and second halves of the sample, but

that    is   sore a reflection of the small                        sample than of any close agreement in

parameter values.

                 It should be clear from the remarks earlier in this paper than I

believe that the assumptions involved in the present sodel are far too restric—
                                         —53—


tive   arid implausible for the xdel to be regarded as "true" in any sense. It is
however of   some importance that, even within the highly constrained assumptions

of the present nidel, the data provide clear support for a responsiveness of

investment to changes in a correctly measured cost of capital services in

general and to the changes caused by inflation in particular. Although the data

are not rich enough to provide precise estimates of the responsiveness of

investment to the individual components of the cost of capital, it is worth

rioting   that   the evidence shows that a correct accounting of the impact of infla-

tion substantially improves the ability of the     analysis to explain the variation
in   investment over the past 25 years.

             On the assumption of a Cobb—Douglas technology, the fall in the rela-

tive cost of capital services between the mid—1950's and      the   mid—1960's was

enough to raise the desired ratio of equipment capital to output by nearly 12
percent.68 Since net equipment investment averaged only about 3 percent of the

equipment capital stock at the beginning of the period, the desired increase in

capital would require a rise of rrre than !0 percent in the ratio of equipment

investment to capital to achieve the desired capital output ratio within a

decade and a bigger rise to achieve the adjustment sooner. In fact, the

investment—capital ratio in 1966—69 was 0.065, more than double its average in

1956— 65.

             The subsequent rise in the value of c/p to an average of 0.235 for the

year's 19Th—Il reversed the previous change in the desired capital—output

 ratio. A Cobb—Douglas technology implies a reduction in the desired capital—

 output ratio of nearly 10 percent between the inid—1960's and the mid—19'lO's.

 Achieving this 10 percent change in the capital—output ratio required a much
                                    _514_



larger proportional fall in investment during   the transition   period. In fact,

the rate of growth of the net equipment capital stock fell sharply, from 0.065

in 1966—69 to 0.036 in 1916—19. This in turn implied a one—third fall in the

ratio of equipment investment to GNP, from 2.0 in the mid—60's to 1.3 percent in

the mid—TO's.

          The specific impact of inflation in this xdel operates through two

channels. First, inflation increases the cost of capital services by reducing

the present value of depreciation allowances (z), a reduction that reflects the

increasing nominal cost of funds. Second, inflation can increase the cost of

capital services directly by raising the real cost of funds (R).69 The combined

effect of both cf these changes can be seen by comparing the actual cost of

capital services (column 7 of Table 5) with the cost of capital services calcu—

lated with the real and nominal costs of funds held constant at their 1965

levels (column 9). Instead of rising between the inid—1960's and the mid—1910's,

the cost of capital falls sharply, reflecting the favorable changes in statutory

tax rules. A similar, although less dramatic conclusion appears even if the

effect of inflation in raising the real cost of funds is ignored. The figures

in column 10 calculate Z by using a nominal cost of funds constructed as the

actual real cost of funds plus the 1965 expected inflation rate of 1.8 percent.

Although the difference between columns 7 and 10 understates the adverse effect

 of inflation, even this measure shows that without the increase in inflation the

 incentive to investment would have become stronger rather than weaker in the

 decade after the niid—1960's.
                                         —55—



6. Concluding   Remarks

          I began this paper by emphasizing that theoretical nvdels of' macroeco-

nomic equilibrium should specify explicitly the role of distortionary taxes,

especially taxes on capital income. The failure to include such tax rules can

have dramatic and misleading effects on the qualitative as well as the quan-

titative properties of macroeconomic theories. The statistical evidence pre-

sented later in the paper bears out the likely importance of these fiscal

effects in studying the non—neutrality of expected inflation.

          In discussing the problem of statistical inference, I noted that the

complexity of economic problems, the inadequaceies of economic data, and the

weakness of the restrictions imposed by general economic theory together make it

impossible to apply in practice the textbook injunction to estimate a "true"

model within which all    parameter   values can be inferred and all hypothesis

tested. Learning in economics is a ire complex and inperfectly understood pro-

cess in which we develop judgements and convictions by combining econometric

estimates, theoretical insights and institutional knowledge. The use of several

alternative "false" ndels can strengthen our understanding and confidence

because the same biases are not likely to be present in quite different iodels.

         This view of the problem of statistical inference in econometrics

leads me to conclude that as practicing econometricians we should be both nore

humble and irore optimistic than is currently fashionable. We should have the

humility to recognize that each econometric study is just another piece of

information about a complex subject rather than the definitive estimate of some

true sodel. But 'we should also be rrore optimistic that the accumulating and
                                            —56—




sifting of this econometric information will permit specialists to make better
and rrore informed judgexnents.
              I   illustrated these theoretical and statistical ideas by estimating

alternative       ndels of investment behavior with a focus on understanding how the

interaction       between inflation and existing rules has influenced    investment

behavior. The results of each of these ndels show that the rising rate of

inflation has, because of the structure of existing U.S tax rules, substantially

discouraged investment in the past 15 years.

              A more general implication of these results is that inetary policy is

far from neutral with respect to economic activity, even in the long run when

the induced change in inflation is fully anticipated. Because of the nonindexed

fiscal structure, even a fully anticipated rate of inflation causes a misalloca-

tion of resources in general and a distortion of resources away from investment

in plant and equipment in particular.7° The traditional idea of "easy money to

encourage investment" that has guided U.S. policy for the past 20 years has

backfired and, by raising the       rate   of inflation, has actually caused a reduction

in investxnerlt.h1

              It would of course be useful to extend the current analysis in a

number of ways. I am currently examining how the interaction of inflation and

tax   rules   affects the demand for consumption in general and for housing capital

in particular. Further studies should          be   done on the effects of inflation and

tax rules on the demand for government debt, on financial markets, and on inter-

national capital flows.72 More information about investment behavior could be

developed by applying the three nodels of the current paper on a nore disaggre—

gated basis.
                                     —57—



          I began this paper by commenting that Irving Fisher's analysis of
inflation had ignored the effects of taxation. Even so, Fisher favored the

very tax reform that would eliminate the distorting effects of inflation on the

taxation of capital income. In a lecture published in the January 1931 issue of

Econoetrica entitled "Income in Theory and Income Taxation in Practice,"

Fisher advocated a progressive expenditure or consumption tax. Although his

reasons for preferring such a tax did not include its inflation neutrality my

remarks today give a further reason for thinking that Fisher was right.


         Harvard University
                 and
  National Bureau of Economic Research
                                           —58—


                                      References


Abel, A.: "Investment and the Value of Capital," Ph.D.     Thesis,   MIT,   1978.


Auerbach,   A.: "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Quarterly

     Journal of Economics, 93 (1979), 33—6.


Bradford, D.: "The Incidence and Allocative Effect of a Tax on Corporate

     Distributions," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 3b9,

     May 1919.


J3rechling, F.: Investment and Employment Decisions, Manchester, gland:

     Manchester University Press, 1975.


Clark, P. K.: "Investment in the 1970s: Theory, Performance, and

     Prediction," Brookin;s Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (1979), 73—113.


Coen, R.: "Effects of Tax Policy on Investment in Manufacturing," American

     Economic Review, (1968), 200—211.


Eisner, R.: Factors in Business Investment, Cambridge, Mass.:        National   Bureau

     of'   Economic Research, General Series No. 102, Ballinger, 1978.


Feldstein, M. S.: "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of Interest;

     A Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review, 66, (1976), 809—20.


______     "Fiscal   Policies, Inflation and Capital Formation," American Economic

     Review, September (1980a).


______     "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Stock Market," Journal of Moneta
     Economics, 6      (198Gb), 309—331.
                                           -.59—



         "Inflation and the Stock Market," American Economic Review, forthcoming,

     1980c.


______ "Tax Rules and the Mismanagement of Monetary Policy," American Economic
     Review, 70, (1980), 182—86. Proceedings       of the Ninety—Second Annual

     Meeting       of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, Georgia, December
     28—30, 1979, (198od).

Feldstein,    M.    S., and G. Chamberlain: "Multimarket Expectations and the Rate of'
     Interest,"      Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 5, (1973), 873—902.


Feldstein, M. S., and 0. Eckstein: "The Fundmental Determinants of the Interest

     Rate," Review of Economics and Statistics, 52, (1970), 363—75.


Feldstein, M. S., and J. S. flemniing: "Tax Policy and Corporate Saving and

     Investment Behavior in Britain," Review of Economic Studies, 38, (1971):

     1415—14314.




Feldstein, M. S., and J. Green: "Why Do Companies Pay Dividends?," National

     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 1413, December 1979.


Feldstein, 14. S., J. Green, and E. Sheshinski: "Inflation and Taxes in a Growing

     Economy with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal of Political Economy 86,

     (1978), S53—S70.


Feldstein, 14. S., J. Green, and E. Sheshinski: "Corporate Financial Policy and

     Taxation in a Growing Economy," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93, (1979),

     1411...32.
Feldstein, M. S., and J. Poterba: "State and Local Taxes and the Rate of Return

     on Non—Financial Corporate Capital," National Bureau of Economic Research

     Working Paper No. 508R, September 1980.


Feldstein, ti. S., and J. Poterba: "Inflation, the Business Cycle and Corporate

     Profitability," (1980b) (forthcoming).


Feldstein, 4. S., and M. Rothchild: "Towards an Economic Theory of Replacement

     Investment," Econometrica, 2, (19Th), 393-i423.


Feldsteiri, N. S., and J. Slernrod: "Personal Taxation, Portfolio Choice and

     the Effect of the Corporation Income Tax," Journal of Political Econonr,

     Forthcoming.


Feldstein, N. S., and L. H. Summers: "Is the Rate of Profit Falling," Brookings

     Papers on Economic Activity, 1, (1977), 211—28.


Feldstein, H. S., and L. H. Summers: "Inflation, rpx   Rules, and the Long—Term

     Interest Rate," Brookings !SOfl Economic Activity, 1, (1978), 61—109.

Feldstein, 11. S., and L. H. Summers: "Inflation and   the   Taxation of Capital

     Income in the Corporate Sector," National Tax   Journal,    32, (1979), 151470.


Fisher, I.: Appreciation and Interest, Publications for the American Economic

     Assocation, Vol. 11, No.   ,   1896.


______ The Theory of Interest (MacMillan), 1930.


______   "Income in Theory and Income Taxation in Practice," Econonetria, 5,

     ('937), 1—55.
Gordon, R. H., and D. W. Jorgenson: "The investment Tax Credit and Counter—

     Cyclical   Policy," in 0. Eckstein (ed.), Parameters and Policies in the

     U.S. Economy, Amsterdam, North—Holland, 1916, pp. 275—314.


Granger, C. W. J., and P. Newbold: "Spurious Regressions in Econometrics,"

     Journal of Econometrics, 2, (l97I).


Hall, R. E., and D. W. Jorgenson: "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,"

     American Economic Review, 57   (1967), 39l—ll.

Hall, R. E.: "Investment, Interest Rates, and the Effects of Stabilization

     Policies," Brookins Papers on Economic Activity, l,(1977).


Hartrnan, D. G.: "Taxation and the Effects of Inflation on the Real Capital

     Stock in an Open Economy," International Economic Review, 20, (1979), 17—

     125.


Helliwell, J., and G. Glorieux: "Forward—Looking Investment Behavior,"

     Review of Economic Studies, 37, (1970), 199_516.


Keynes, J. M.: The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,

     London, England: Macmillan & Co., LTD, 1936.


Holland, D. 14., and S. C. I'rers: "Trends in Corporate Profitability and Capital

     Costs," Committee for Economic Development, 1979, pp. 103—188.


Jorgenson, D. W.: "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," The American

     Economic Review, 53,   (1963), 217259.
                                          —62—


King,    H.: Public Policy arid the Corporation, London, England: Chapman and Hall, LTD),
        1977.

Learner, E.: Specification Searches, New York, New York:       Wiley, 1978.


Lucas,     R. E., Jr.: "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," In the Philips

        Curve and Labor Markets, edited by Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer. The

        Carnegie—Rochester Conferences on Public Policy, a Supplement Series to

        the J. Monetary Economics, I, Amsterdam, North Holland, 1976.


Miller, H.: "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance, (1977).


Nickell, S. J.: The Investment Decision of Firms, Canbridge Economic Handbooks,

        Cambridge University Press, James Nisbet and Company Limited, Weiwyn, 1978.


Poterba, J.: "Inflation, Income Taxes and Owner Occupied Housing," Forthcoming.


Rowley, J. C. R., and P. K. Trivedi: Econometrics of Investment, London,

        England: Wiley, 1975.


Sargent, T. J.: "Estimation of Dynamic      Labor Demand Schedules under
        Rational   Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, 86,   (1978), 1009—

        101414.




Stiglitz, J.: "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of

        Capital," Journal of Public Economics, 2, (1973), 1—314.


Summers,     L. H.: "Inflation, Taxation and Corporate   Investment," Forthcoming.


Tobin, J.: "Money and Economic Growth," Econonetrica, 33, (1965), 6ii—6814.
                                    —63—



von Furstenber, G. M.: "Corporate Investment: Does Market Valuation Matter in

    the Agreate?" Brookins Papers on Economic Activity, 2, (1971), 317_397.
                                      Footnotes



3. See, for example, Fisher (1896, 1930).


1.   Intramarginal investments may be financed by the equity resulting from the
extrepreneurs' original investment and from subsequent retained earnings. See
Stiglitz (1913) for such a nodel.

5.   Feldstein   (1976) examines this simple case as well as the nore general
situation   in which both   saving and noney demand are sensitive to the rate of
return.   If f' is the marginal product of capital and ir is the rate of infla-

tion, the nominal interest rate satisfies i=f' +


6.   If lenders are taxed at 100 0 percent, the net—of—tax nominal interest rate

rises by (i—0)/(i—t) times the increase in the rate of inflation. With 8           t


this   is one and the real net interest rate therefore remains unchanged.


7. Individual tax rates include not only the statutory personal tax rates but

the tax rates on savings channelled through pension funds, insurance and

other   financial intermediaries.
                                        —65—



8. See    Feldstein and Poterba (1980b) with respect to yields on real capital;

Feldstein and Summers (1978), Feldstein and Eckstein (1970) and Feldstein and

Chamberlain (1973) with respect to yields on debt; and Feldstein (1980b, 1980c)

with respect to equity yields.


9.    Data on net fixed nonresidential investment is presented in Table 5.3       of   the

National Income and Product Accounts. The full       tirae   series is presented in

Table 1 of the current paper.


10. See Table 1 of the current paper for the annual values. Data on the net

stock of fixed nonresidential capital is presented in the Survey of Current

Business, April.1976 and subsequent issues.


11. See Jorgenson (1963), Hall and Jorgenson (1967), Gordon and Jorgenson (1976)

and Hall (1977) among others.


12. See, e.g., the article by Clark (1979) and the book by Eisner (1979) for

recent examples of studies that    conclude   that price incentive effects are econo-

mically insignificant or, at most, are quite small.


13. Learner (1978) presents very insightful coiarnents about the problems of

inference and specification search as well as some specific techniques that

can be rigorously Justified in certain simple contexts.


1!.   For a simplified formal analogy, consider the problem of estimating the

elasticity   of demand for some product with respect to permanent income. Since
permanent income is not observed, some proxy must be used. Each potential
proxy is however likely   to   introduce a bias of its own. If the estimated
                                        —66—



elasticity is similar for several quite different proxies, there is a reasonable

presumption that each bias is relatively small.


15. No attempt is made here to survey the existing empirical research on invest-.

ment or to examine all   of   the arguments about specification. For recent

surveys, see Nickell (1978) and Rowley and Trivedi (1975).


16. This is quite separate from the reason for investing when q is less than

one that is implied by the analysis of Auerbach (1979), Bradford (1979) and King

(1977).


17. See Nickell (1918) for an extensive discussion of putty—clay specifications.


18. See Feldstein and Rothschild (197k) for a critique of the constant propor-

tional replacement hypothesis and an analysis of the potential effects on

replacement investment of changes in tax rates and    interest   rates.



19. Keynes (1936) emphasized that rising cost of inputs is a principal reason

for the declining marginal efficiency of investment in the short run. See

Brechling (1975) on the empirical importance of this.


20. See, e.g., Coen (1968) and Feldstein and Flemming (1971) for evidence

on this point.


21. See, among others, Auerbach (1978), Bradford (1979), Feldstein, Green and

Sheshinski (1979), King (1977), Miller (1971) and Stiglitz (1973).
                                          —67—


22. For an application of this to the empirical study of investment behavior,

see Summers (1980).


23. See the references cited in footnote 11.


2I. The Jorgenson procedure also estimates a further parameter that should

equal the capital coefficient in the Cobb—Douglas production function, i.e.,

the share of capital income in total output. Estimates of this parameter are

almost invariably far too low; although this indicates that the nodel is

"false", it doesn't necessarily imply that the estimated effects of tax

rules and   inflation   are misleading.


25. The rate of return on other types of investments might also xiatter. Since

the interaction of inflation and tax rules raised the potential return on owner—

occupied housing (Feldstein, 1980d; Poterba, 1980), the effect of RU may be

overestimated but this overstatement only reflects another way in which infla—

tional and tax rules interact to reduce nonresidential fixed investment.


26. Feldstein and Summers (1977) discuss the conceptual problems in nasuring

the capital income and rate of return. Feldstein and Poterba (1980) use the

new capital stock data provided by the Commerce Department and Federal Reserve

Bank to calculate the pretax rate of return shown in Table 1.


27. Feldstein and Summers (1977) showed that the apparent downtrend in the first

half of the 1970's was not statistically significant. For xrore recent support-

ing evidence, see Feldstein and Poterba (1980b).
                                     —68—



28.   This impact of inflation is discussed in Feldstein, Green and Sheshinski

(1978) and calculated in detail in Feldstein and Summers (1919).


29. This measure of the effective tax rate differs conceptually from the

unadjusted measure in a number of 'ways. It is an ex ante concept for new

investment rather than an ex pot measure on existing capital. No account is

taken of the important effect of inflation on the taxation of artificial

inventory profits or of the changing rates of state and local taxes. The tax

rates on shareholders and creditors are also measured much rre crudely.


30. This specification in terms of investment flows represents a dis-

equilibrium process rather than an equal stock adjustment. The special problems

of capital heterogeneity and putty—clay technology may make this direct dis-

equilibrium specification re appropriate, especially for explaining and pre-

dicting changes in investment over a period of ten to twenty years.


31. Note that since the equation refers to net investment, the past capital

stock is not included. I return to this issue below.


32. Extending the analysis to quarterly observations might nevertheless provide

more information about the time pattern of response and about the effect of

changes in capacity utilization. Of course, the combination of measurement

problems and the inherent autocorrelation of the data imply that using

quarterly observation would not increase the effective degrees of infor-

mation by anything like a factor of four.
                                           —69—



33. Since the standard error of the capacity utilization coefficient is

relatively large, the coefficient of 0.028 should be regarded as subject to

considerable error.


314. The sample is 2 years shorter because the information required to calculate

ETRA is not available before 19514 or after 1976.


35. Further evidence in favor of using the net investment series is present in

section 14 of this paper.


36.    When the concurrent ratio of the federal deficit to GNP is included, its

coefficient is —0.26 (with a standard error of 0.06) and the coefficient of RH

drops to 0.21 (s.e. =      0.10).   This may   be   evidence of crowding out or it may

merely reflect the tendency of imore investment to increase concurrent national

income and thereby reduce the government deficit.


37. This variable is the Holland and 'ieyers (1979) measure, defined as the ratio of

the aggregate market value of nonfinancial corporations to the net replacement cost

of plant, equipment and inventories. Essentially the same result is obtained

with their broader measure in which all other nonfinancial assets are

included.


38. The predicted inflation rate is based on a rolling series of ARIMA regressions;

see Feldstein and Summers (1978, pages 82487).


39. The     switch from   RN to ln RN causes a small decrease in the explanatory power

of    the equation.
                                                     —70—


14Q.    Even the two coefficients of the capacity utilization variable do not differ

in a statistically significant way; the difference between them of

0.0149 has a standard error of 0.035.


141. Columns 5 and 6 will be considered in section 4


142.    See Feldstein and Summers (1979), Table 14, column 9 for the series of

inflation induced tax increases.


143.    For   the capital stock figures, see Feldstein and Poterba (1980), Table A—i,

column 8.


1414.   I have borrowed Irving Fisher's phrase "the rate of return over cost" but not

his exact meaning0 The xodel in the current section is nevertheless very

close in spirit to Fisher's analysis.


145. See Abel (1978) for an explicit derivation of the optimum rule when there are

endogenous adjustment costs.


146. Unless the shift is a uniform                one,   the answer will depend on the initial

point that is selected. This is a typical index number type problem.


147. The 66.2 percent ratio is selected to produce a steady—state investment

mix corresponding to the average composition over the past twenty years. Note

that this specification ignores inventories and therefore the very substantial

extra tax .buraen caused by inflation with FIFO inventory accounting. While this

need not affect decisions to subsititute capital for labor, it does influence

the return on capital expansion to the extent that this involves greater inven-

tories.
                                        —71—



18.    The calculation of expected inflation series is described in Feldstein and

Summers (1918), ages 8—87.


19. To meet the need for a series of expected long—term inflation rates for other

purposes, Feldstein and Sumraers (1918) calculate a weighted average of these

future inflation rates where the weights are equivalent to discounting

at a fixed interest rate.


50. See Feldstein and Summers (1918, p 90) for a description of the cyclically—

adjusted return series used in the present calculation.


51.     The inverse of e is the product of Ci)   the   Standard and Poor's price—earnings

ratio    and (2) the ratio of "book profits" to "economics profits" with correc-
tion for inflationary affects on     reported depreciation, inventory profits, and
debt.

52. Inflation also raised the cost of funds because the cost of equity funds           as
raised    nre than the cost of debt funds fell.


53. This is roughly consistent with a regression equation that indicates that, for

the sample as a whole, each one percentage point increase in the long—term

expected inflation rate reduced the difference MPNR—COF        by about   1.25

percentage    points. Between 1966   and 1976, the long—term expected inflation

rate    (demand from the ARIMA forecasts)   rose 3.2   percentage points.

5I. Because MPNR does not     reflect cyclical variations in the rate of return, these

parameter    values are nost appropriately   compared to those of equation       3.3
rather than equation 3.1.
                                     —72—



55. A similar analysis with the varying profitability measure of return provi-

des even nre striking confirmation: the coefficient of MPNRVP is 0.253.(s.e. =

0.155) while the coefficient of COF is —0.202 (s.e. = O.031i).

56.   This 0.015 is the difference between the actual 1977 investment ratio of

0.020 and the predicted ratio of 0.035 conditional on nintaining the 1965

level of the return—over—cost.


57. This specification also ignores the adverse effect of inflation through the

taxation of artificial inventory profits. This will ntter to the extent that

inventories, ecjuipment and structures are rt of a combined investment—output

decision.


58. Output is xrasured by the gross domestic product of nonfinancial corporations

and p is the implicit price deflator for that output. The value of c is

defined below.


 59. I should again stress that these interferences are all conditional on very

strong and obviously "false" assumptions. For example, it seems very likely

that the assumption of a "putty—putty" technology causes an understatement

o *e true long—run elasticity of substitution if the true technology is putty—

clay.


60. To simplify notation, I use X to refer to the investment tax credit with the

Long—arnmendmerit adjustment when appropriate. Data on the investment tax

credit refer to actual practice and were supplied by Data Resources, Inc.
                                          —73—


61. The putty—putty technology allows all        decisions   to be xrropic and therefore

in principle makes the     short—term   interest rate and short—term inflation rate

the relevant variable (Hall, 1977). A more realistic description of finance and

technology makes a long—term interest rate and inflation the appropriate

variables. I have in fact used the Baa corporate bond rate and the long—term

inflation expectation derived from the "rolling" — ARIMA         estimates   presented in

Feldstein and Summers (1978).


62.   Equivalently,   book earnings are net of nominal interest rayments rather than

real interest ayments. In my calculation, the debt is the net financial

capital supplied by the creditors of the nonfinancial corporations and

inflation is measured by the change in the consumer price index.


63. Note that R + iT equals the COF variable of section 14•


6i. In the pure debt case, this would just be the net—of—tax nominal interest rate.


65. The calculation of Z reflects the introduction of accelerated depreciation and

the several reductions in the allowable depreciation life.


66. In both the Cobb—Douglas and accelerator specifications, the estimated value

of the depreciation rate (i.e., the coefficient of the lagged capital stock

variable) is approximately 0.18, a reasonable value for equipment capital

although   higher than   the value of 0.138 used in the cost of capital services

formula and   than the Department of Commerce depreciation rate.
67. The value of 0.9 is obtained by searching over a grid at intervals of' 0.1.

It is worth noting that a mismeasurement of the cost of capital series

distorts the estimate of the elasticity of substitution. Using the incorrect

c/p series of column 8 leads to an estimated elasticity of substitution of

0.6. The reduction in the sum of squared residuals to 157.14 (from 167.14 in

the Cobb—Douglas case) is however small and not statistically significant.


68. The value of' c/p in column 7 of Table 5 fell from an average of 0.238 in

19514—57 to 0.213 in 19614—67. The Cobb—Douglas technology implies (see

equation 5.3) that the optimal capital—output ratio is increased by a factor

of 238/215 =   1.117.

69. Inflation raises R to the extent that the required equity yield rises by re

than the real cost of debt capital falls.


70. This conclusion stands in sharp contrast to the early view of Hayek and

others that inflation encourages investment by raising profits or the

appearance of profits. That view not only ignored fiscal effects but also

was essentially a short—run theory.since wages and other costs, as well

as expectations, would naturally adjust to inflation.


71. On the     role of the fiscal structure in   the mismanagement of nnetary çxlicy,

see   Feldstein   (l980d).


72. Poterba t1980) and Summers (1980) discuss the theoretical impact of inflation

                                                                            of'
on the demand for housing capital. Hartman (1979) presents an analysis

the effect on international capital flows and Feldstein (1980a) treats the

 demand for government debt. Empirical applications are however still lacking.
