                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE RESERVATION WAGE OF UNEMPLOYED PERSONS
              IN ThE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY:
                  THEORY AND EMPIRICAL TESTS



                         Wolfgang Franz

                      Working Paper No. 578




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge MA 02138

                           November   1980




This work has been supported by a grant from the "Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft" which is gratefully acknowledged. I am
indebted to Zvi Griliches, Alan Blinder, Dan Hamermesh, Yoram
Ben—Porath, Wayne Gray (NBER), Jacob Mincer (New York), R.A.L.
Carter (London/Ontario), Hans Joachem Schalk (Miinster), Franz Egle
(Nurenberg), Gebhard Flaig, Theo Kempf, Hans Werner Sinn (Mannheim)
for helpful comments. None of them are responsible for any
remaining error. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Economics.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #578
                                                            October, 1980




The Reservation Wage of Unemployed Persons in the Federal Republic
             of Germany: Theory and Empirical Tests


                           ABSTRACT


     This study examines the determinants of the reservation wage of
unemployed persons in the Federal Republic of Germany in 1976. The
theoretical section presents the derivation of an optimal reservation
wage and shows the source of an ambiguity of some explanatory variables.
The data basis are unemployed persons leaving the unemployment register
within a given sample week. For a subset of them, we know their reserva-
tion wage and a set of personal characteristics. Other variables, such
as the wage offer distribution and demand side variables, are obtained
by employing other data. Methodological probems, such as as a sample
selection bias, are taken into account. As a result, individual charac-
teristics and the wage offer distribution are dominant causes of the
reservation wage, but demand side variables and the entitlement to
unemployment compensation play minor roles.




                                                 Wolfgang Franz
                                                 Deparmtent of Economics
                                                 University of Mannheim
                                                 6800 Mannheim 1
                                                 Federal Republic of Germany
Zusammenfassung
Der Beitrag untersucht Bestimmungsgrunde des sog. "Anspruchslohns"
Arbeitsioser in der Bundesrepubljk Deutschland im Jahre 1976.
Trotz einer Vielzahl ausgefejiter Arbeitsplatzsuchmodelle mui?
sich die Studje auf einige hauptsächljche Uberlegungen beschrinken..
well die durch die Theorie vorgegebenen Variablen datenmäl3ig
noch nicht zur VerfUgung stehen. Da nicht alle Arbeitsiose die
entsprechenden Einkommensangaben gemacht haben, muI geprUft werden,
ob und inwieweit die Schàitzergebnisse aufgrund dieser fehienden
Information verzerrt sind. Eine diesbezUgliche Korrektur wurde
vorgenoen, Als Ergebnjs zeigt sich eine Dominanz der individuellen
Merkmale und der Vertei].ungsfunktjon der Lohnangebote für den Er-
klärungswert des Anspruchslohns, wohingegen unterschiedliche kon-
junkturelle EinflUsse oder die Anspruchsberechtigung auf Arbeits-
losenge].d nur eine untergeordnete Rolle spielen.
                                           The place of economic theory is to be
                                           the servant of applied economics.

                                                           John R. Hicks (1938)


INTRODUCTION

        This paper deals with the reservation wage of unemployed persons to the

amount of which the duration of unemployment has often been attributed. An

unemployed person searching for a job classifies all job offers in two exclusive

classes: acceptable and unacceptable. The wage which separates these two

classes is called the reservation wage. Hence, a job offer lower than the

reservation wage is not accepted and vice versa.

        This study is an attempt to narrow the gap between theoretical and

empirical work on job search behaviour partly by examining the determinants of

the reservation wage specified by job search models. The basis of the empirical

reserach    is unemployed persons leaving the unemployment register within a
given    sample week. For a subset of these unemployed persons we know the wage

they want to receive, and a set of personal characteristics. Other variables

such as the wage offer distribution and demand side variables are obtained by

employing   other data. Some serious methodological problems must be taken into
account such as the   problem of non—randomly missing data, for example.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section I presents a very brief cxitline

of a theory concerning the determinants of the reservation wage. Since this

section does not intend to present a survey on job search models, no claim

is made that the conclusions reported there are an exhaustive picture. A short

description of the data and discussion of methodological problems is contained

in Section II. Enpirical results and their interpretation are reported in

Section III, and a conclusion including some policy implications is given finally.
                                             —2--



     One   general   caveat seems   necessary   which will not be repeated again. A

review of the literature on job search models sometimes gives the impression

that reluctant unemployed persons with too high reservation wages have replaced

the unemployed breadwinner of the family as the focus of concern about jobless-

ness. We therefore want to emphasize that           search   unemployment is only one part,

and perhaps a minor part, of unemployment. To see this, note that job search

theories usually assume that       there   is at least one job offer in a given time

period. But there may be a considerable amount of unemployed persons who do

not receive a job offer at all within a reasonable time period due to bad

demand conditions, for example. Since many wages are negotiated and fixed,

therefore, and employers for good economic reasons refuse to hire overqualified

workers, a substantial reduction in the reservation wage and/or a search for

a less qualified occupation may not help for those unemployed. To call them

voluntary unemployed seems more to explain the problem away rather than to

explain the facts.


I. THEORY

     In their simplest version, job search models              postulate that an indivi—

dual maximizes expected wealth if he or she accepts a wage offer (combined with

a job offer) which is not lower than his reservation wage. Let wR denote the

reservation wage and f(w) the known distribution of wage offers. The probability

of receiving a job offer q depends on personal characteristics and demand side

variables denoted by z and on the wage rate. w is a determinant of q for

several reasons. First, holding capital costs constant the higher the wage rate

the more likely the firm    will    switch to capital goods instead of using labor

and, hence, the smaller the probability to receive a job offer at all.

Second,        wage rate offered may be more associated with the job than with

the applicant. The higher the wage rate the longer the queue of applicants for
                                                 —3—


this job who will be offered the job due to higher abilities and who will

accept it. This again implies a decreasing chance for a given searcher to

get a job offer, i.e., 6q/6w <             0.   Thus the probability of receiving and

accepting a job offer p in any period is given by


       (1.1)    p(z,WR) =          q(z,w)f(w)dw


Although the individual's abilities are assumed to be invariant during the

search process, there is a distribution of wage offers since prospective em-

ployers do not value them equally. The individual contacts several employers

submitting different job offers. The distribution of job offers is the source

of uncertainty: although its parameters are known to the searcher, each offer

is a realization of a random variable.

       The present value of earnings from an expected accepted job offer is:


       (1.2)      E(wlw   > wR)        =        w•q (z,w) f (w)dwlp (z,wR)


where the right hand side is the conditional mean of w given that w >             R.
infinite time horizon is assumed, hence r is the constant discount rate. In

the   finite horizon case l/r is the present value at time 0 of one unit nominal
income received in period t:

       (1.3) r =          1
                              T   {[(1÷.)T—t+i -l]/i}
                     (1+ i)
where T is the finite time horizon and i is the discount rate.-

      The reservation wage is optimal if the present value of accepting the

reservation wage equals the present value of the gain from continuing search.

The present value of the reservation wage R is:-1

                      R            R
                    w             w(l+r)
      (14)
               t=0 (l+r)t
                                                  —4—


     The expected net worth from continuing search until receiving a wage

offer equal to or better than w' consists of the unemployment compensation u

and of the expected future wage (conditional on WR) provided that a job offer

with a wage equal to or better than                   is received and accepted.


     (1.5)    u +         p(z,wR)E(wlwwR)
                                                              (first period)
                    t=l          (l+r)t

                                                               R               R
              + [l_p(z,wR)] {u+                       p(z,w )E(wIww )}                   (second
                            r                                                                      period)
                                              t=2                  (l+r)


                                       U
              + [l_p(z,wR)]2                      +           p(z,wR)E(wIwwR)} (third period)
                                              2
                                      (l+r)           t=3              (l+r)




The terms containing u can be rearranged to (where p =                              p(z,wR)):

     (I.5a)   u[l + (l—r)        r+    (1—p)2
                                                              2
                                                                  +    •   •
                                                      (l+r)


              —       1     —   u(l+r)
                  u[EIl+r
                                 r+p


and after some manipulation we can write the terms containing E(wlw>w') as:


                                                                           1
     (I.5b)   p.E(ww>w1) [ E                      + (l—p)                            +      .1
                                t=l    (l+r)                      t=2 (l+r)


              = p.E(wIw>WR)      [1+ (l_P)(l+).r                   +           .1




              = p E(wIw>w') [              (lp)t
                                  t=O r(l+r)


              =             R 1+r
                    E(wIww       r(r+p)
                                            —5—


Hence the net worth (1.5) can be written as:


                u(l+r)             R                R       l+r
     (1.6)                                E (wlw>w )
                          R + p(z,w )                             R
              r+p(z,w )                                 r(r+p(z,w   ))

The optimal reservation wage must satisfy the relationship:


              wR(l+r)         u(l+r)      + p(z,wR)E(wlwwR)(l+r)
     (1.7)
                            r+p(z,w )          r[r+p(z,w    )}

or

               R r'u + p(z,wR) E (wlwwR)
     (I.7a)
                            r+p (z ,w')



     Equation (I.7a) already reveals some interesting properties of the

reservation wage. An increasing unemployment compensation implies a higher

reservation wage since the costs of search become lower. Increasing the mean

of the probability distribution of wage offers has the same effect, On the

other hand, a lower probability of receiving and accepting a job offer, due

to poor personal characteristics or bad demand conditions, tends to reduce the

reservation wage. Finally, the search process can be viewed as an investment

decision negatively related to the rate of discount.

     If search costs c (c=constant) are introduced,--' the expression (I.7a)

changes to:


     (1.8)    wR =
                     ru + p(z,wR).E(w           R
                                             ww )   — r'c
                               r+p (z


or


              wR —               R          R
                     u = — p (z,w ) [E(wlw>w ) — wR I — c,
                         1
     (I.8a)


which corresponds with the result stated In recent studies on job search.--"

Inserting the integral of equation (1.4) into equation (I.8a) and determining

the parameters and the form of the wage distribution gives a solution for
                                          —6—


w' (if it exists):


     (1.9)       wR = g[f(w),   r, c, u, z]


     An infinite time horizon, a known distribution of wages, and constant

costs of sampling imply a constant reservation wage over time ceteris paribus.

This may, however, be an oversimplification. Several hypotheses have been

offered to justify a changing reservation wage over time.

     (i) If a finite time horizon (the retirement age, for example)-7-"

             is introduced, a longer search duration may still lead to a

         higher job offer, but as a contrary effect the remaining time

             in the labor force becomes shorter. Hence, due to wealth

         considerations the reservation wage may decline with duration.-'

    (ii) If the individual is not or no longer entitled to unemployment

         compensation, he or she may reduce the reservation wage in

         order to become employed and thus be entitled to unemployment

         compensation later (agaln).2." Or, to put it differently, in an

         unemployment insurance system with a finite duration of unemploy-

         ment compensation payment an Increase in these benefits leads to

         a reduction in the proportion of long—term unemployed (or other

         non or no longer entitled unemployed such as youths, for example)

         and to an increase in the proportion of short—term unemployment.

         The result that the reservation wage increases (decreases) for

         increasing unemployment payments only for those unemployed who

         are entitled (not entitled) to it rests, however, on a positive

         probability that unemployed workers will be laid off later.

         As has been shown by K. Burdett (1979), in the case of a zero

         probability of lay off the reservation wage remains unaffected by
                                —7—


      a change in the unemployment insurance system for those not or

      no longer entitled to it since the expected pay off to accepting

      a job will not change. In the German system, an example for this

      type of job is employment in the public sector.

(iii) If the distribution of job offers in unknown, the reservation wage

      may be a function of the searcher's beliefs. It changes according

      to the revisions the individual makes in the light of his experi—

      ence.-' In the case of an overestimated mean of the wage distri-

      bution, there may be a decreasing reservation wage and vice versa.

(iv) As has been mentioned in (iii), a further complication is the

      possibility of being laid off. The job search theory's explanation

      may be called in question if the tenure of jobs is rather short.

      Given that possible brevity of tenure in some jobs, an unemployed

      may raise his total return from search by accepting less attractive

      jobs from the beginning.--1


 (v) Finally, another reason why optimal reservation wages may decline

      over time has been explored by introducing risk aversion into the

      model. Assume that the individual maximizes the expected utility

      of lifetime consumption (instead of the present value of income

      net of search costs, as assumed in most job search models).--"

      The utility function may indicate decreasing absolute risk

      aversion.--1 Since wealth decreases during the search process due

      to search costs and because the expected working life shortens, it

      follows that risk aversion increases and hence the reservation

      wage declines.--' Risk aversion can be influenced not only by

      wealth considerations, but also by personal characteristics such
                                              —8—


                as age or marital status, for example. A married searcher who

                is the breadwinner for his family may be more risk averse than a

                single one.


       Especially, the assumption of a known wage distribution is one of the

most heroic theoretical assumptions of job search models and the most crucial

step in the empirical test of these hypotheses. Even if we assume that a

known wage distribution is sufficiently characterized by its first and second

moment, problems arise the to an ambiguity of some effects. Although a higher

mean for the wage distribution increases the reservation wage and hence the

search duration,--1 this is not necessarily true with respect to an increase

of the variance of the wage distribution. As Figure 1 shows, a higher

variability in the wage offer distribution increases the probability of

receiving a job offer which is greater than the reservation wage only if

wR =    R
            ,   or,   to put it differently, if the reservation wage is higher than
       w2

the mean of the wage distribution)' In the case that the reservation wage

coincides with the mean of the wage distribution, the reservation wage remains

unaffected if the variance of the wage distributions changes. Hence, only a

comparison of the means of both wage distributions with the reservation wage

can determine the effect of a higher variance of the wage distribution theore-

tically to be expected.

       The data which will be examined more carefully in the next section

prohibit us from considering more than just the mean w and the standard

deviation a of wages in the profession to which the individual belongs.

Hence, equation (1.9) changes to:

                      R=
       (1.10)            g(w,   '   z,   u)
                                   —9—




f(w)




              /                                 N
          /
                                                    N

                  R                       R
              Wi                                          W
                                         W2




       FIGURE 1: Effects of a Higher Variability of the
                      Wage Offer Distribution
                                    —10—


with z again denoting personal characteristics and demand side variables and

u denoting whether or not the individual is entitled to unemployment compensa-

tion. There is no information contained in the data about the amount of the

unemployment compensation. The variables c and r have been dropped due to a

lack of data. Since variables and their definitions are dictated by the data

set, we are fully aware of the fact that we cannot present a neat and illuminat-

ing test of all implications of job search theory concerning the reservation wage.


II. DATA AND ECONOMETRIC PROBLEMS

     Before discussing the advantages and disadvantages of the data, a short

description may be in order.

     The sample contains all unemployed persons who left the unemployment

register in approximately the last week of September 1976. Since the unemploy-

ment register includes only unemployed registered at the labor office, the

sample may not be representative f or all unemployed. The personal characteris-

tics are reported for the most recent spell of unemployment and include among

others age, sex, profession, marital status, citizenship, health condition,

school education, vocational training, work experience, type of job contract

termination (quitting, laid off, etc.), number and result of job offers given

by the labor office, number and duration of all unemployment spells since 1973.

No explicit information is available on whether the individual is entitled to

unemployment compensation. We can, however, construct a proxy using the

information about the individual's previous work history. As has been noted,

the sample includes only unemployed leaving the unemployment register. Hence,

we are able to circumvent a major problem associated with data on persons

being unemployed at a given survey data. Such data are subject to a length—

bias since the probability to be in the survey is greater the longer the dura-

tion of unemployment.--7' Moreover, standard results of the theory of stochastic
                                      —11—


processes show that if we can assume that the unemployment spells are running

long enough, the structure of our sample is equivalent to the structure of all

unemployed persons starting their unemployment spell within a given time

period. Due   to   this advantage our data may outperform a data set on all un-

employed persons even if the latter would have been available to us.

     Nevertheless, the data used herein suffer from deficiencies. A major

disadvantage is that all information concerning the reservation wage is given

at the very beginning of the unemployment spell. Revisions, if any, are not

reported. Hence, we are not able to test whether the reservation wage is

influenced by the duration of the current spell of unemployment. However, the

dependence on the duration and number of previous spells may be analyzed.

     After eliminating some obviously incorrectly coded cases, about 6600

unemployed persons are contained in the sample. However, for only about

1100 persons is information about the desired income available. Some cases

also report different dimensions about income (hourly, weekly, monthly, yearly

wage rate). Since we do not know both the exact desired work time, we included

only those cases where monthly wage rates are available. After correcting for

some dubious cases, we finally obtain a sample size of 952 persons.-'

     Since not all unemployed report their desired wage rate the question must

be raised as to whether the missing answers are random or non—randomly missing

data. For example, people with high desired income (compared with their previous

income) may be less willing to answer this question since they fear that the

labor office may not consider them to be at its disposal and refuse to pay

unemployment compensation. It might be better to refuse to answer than to give

a wrong answer (that means a lower wage rate than desired), since if the labor

office offers a job combined with this incorrect wage rate a rejection may also

lead to a disentitlement to unemployment compensation payments.
                                         —12—


     The effect of non—randomly missing data on the estimated parameters can

be evaluated)! Let D be a dummy variable which equals one if the unemployed

person gives the information about the desired income and which is zero

otherwise, and let Z be a vector of explanatory variables of this choice to

answer or not to answer. An answer is given when Z and a random component

u1 together exceed some threshold value.-1


     (11.1)    D = 1   if Z ct + u1 > 0


               D=O if Zc+u1<O

Further, let V be a vector of the explanatory variables of the reservation wage:

                R =
     (11.2)              + u2


For notational convenience we drop the subscript i referring to the i—th

individual. We only observe         if D =   1.   Hence:


     (11.3)    E(wRIV, Z, and D = 1) =      V+    E(u2IV, Z, and D = 1)

                        21/
Integrating out V yields:—


     (11.4)   E(wRIV, Z, and D =     1) =   V+    12 a2/a1 E(u2IZ, and D = 1)


where a bivariate normal distribution for u1 and u2 is assumed with mean zero,

variances     and a, and correlation
                                          p12.
    As can be seen, as long as there is a correlation between the residuals of

the choice to answer —   function   and the reservation wage equation the least

squares coefficients of the subsample are not consistent estimators of          because:


     (11.5)   E(w'IV, Z, and D =    1)      V
                                            —13—


    As has been shown by J.J. Heckman (1976), this expression can be trans-

formed to:


        (11.6)      E(wRIV, Zct/a1, D =   1) =   V+   p12a2 M (Za/a1)


where

                                f (Za/a)
        (11.7) M (Zc/a1) =
                                F(Zo/a1)

is the inverse of the so called "Mills'—ratio" and f(S) and F(S) denote the

distribution function and the cumulative distribution function of

respectively. The derivative of M with respect to Zc/a1 is positive, hence

the greater Za/a1 the more important is the bias.

        A consistent estimate of            can be obtained by applying the probit

method using the dummy variable D as a function of the variables Z. We then

can evaluate M explicitly for each individual using the estimated Z/

Next, we estimate equation (11.6) by ordinary least squares. As has been

shown by J.J. Heckman (1976) this procedure will yield consistent (but not

fully efficient) estimates of .            Note, however, that the formula for standard
errors for least squares coefficients understate the true standard error and

overstate estimated significance leve1s.--"


III. EMPIRICAL RESULTS

        The estimation procedure is carried out in two steps.

        (i) We first check for omitted variable bias. Applying the probit

             method we estimate the probability of "having the information"

             and calculate the inverse of the Mills' ratio.


    (ii) We then estimate the regressions on the reservation wage according

                 to the considerations of the theoretical section.
                                       —14—


        To begin with, Table 1 presents the probit estimates-p' of "having the

data on Incomes" CD = 1) or not (D =    0).     The independent variables need some

comments. The variable "work experience" perhaps should capture better Inf or—

mation on the wage offer distribution if the individual has worked before.

A similar effect is attributed to the variable "position before becoming

unemployed"; compared to white—collar workers, a blue—collar worker may not

undertake much search efforts. Besides this, blue—collar workers include

temporary workers with no clear idea of their reservation wage and those tempo-

rary workers who take whatever job they can get. Twice the log likelihood

(negatively) gives 176.568 —    indicating    that the null hypothesis of insigni-

ficance of all parameters can be rejected.' Since the probit model is based

on the cumulative normal probability function, the question may be raised as to

whether the results are an artifact of the distribution. As has been shown by

D.R. Cox, for example, the numerical difference between a probit and a logit

model-' is very small over the entire range of both distribution functions

with the only exception at their extremes. We want to point out, however,

that other possibilities such as angular transformations are not considered in

this paper.

        In the next step, the Mills' ratio is evaluated for each Individual using

the parameter estimates of the probit method. This procedure ensures that

we will obtain consistent estimates of the parameters if the inverse of it is

added as an independent variable to the regression equation on the reservation

wage.

        As has already been pointed out in the theoretical section, independent

variables and their definitions are dictated by the data set. In addition, some

efforts have been made to enrich the list of variables by constructing

variables such as entitlement to unemployment compensation, for example, and
                                 —15—




Table 1: Probit Estimates of' the Probability whether an Informatjo
          about Incomes is given (Drn1) or not (D=0).

                       Z1:                                      Z3:
Explanatory      Work Experience    Position before         Citizenship
Variables        (1 = yes, 0        Becoming unem—          (1   German,
                 otherwise)         ployed (1   wor-        0 = otherwise)
                                    ker, 0 = other-
                                    wise)



Estimated
Parameters      0.959               —0.351                  0.155
(t—values        (9.5)              (9.0)                   (2.7)
in brackets)

                             .

Log Likeli-
hood Function   -30142.885          Constant       —1.735
                                                   (15.7)

Number of
observations    6572                                                .




Probability that the information•              1
on income is given is:
                                                     e2/'2 dv
                                    —16—


by including variables from other statistics such as demand side variables

and wage offer distributions.-" Any variable that was in the data set and

was thought to reflect the individual's search strategy is included in the

regression. Not all observed variables, however, can be derived directly and

explicitly from search theory, but serve merely as proxies for unobserved

variables such as discount rates and the degree of risk aversion. The difficulty

is due to the identification problems which cloud the issues. For illustration,

consider age as one of the explanatory variables.-' The theoretical upshot

of this variable is ambiguous since it may reflect a shorter remaining working

life, a lower discount rate, or a greater variance in the offer distribution

(not adequately taken into account by the construction of this distribution).

     Column 1 of Table 2 lists the coefficients of regression on the log of

the reservation wage and Table 3 presents a list of symbols and definitions

of variables. The logarithm of     has been chosen since test for normality-'

did reveal that the null hypothesis of non—normality could be rejected at a

higher significance level for in    .   The value of the log likelihood function

and the standard error of the regression are reported at the bottom of each

column. "t"—values are in brackets but recall that they understate the true

standard error in the case of sample selection bias. Column 2 reports the

beta coefficients in order to compare the magnitude of the influence of each
        29/
variable.—

     The higher the mean of the wage offer distribution the individual is facing,

the higher the reservation wage. This theoretical argument is confirmed by

the estimates, the elasticity of the reservation wage with respect to the mean

of the wage offer distribution is 0.27. The effect of the standard deviation of

the wage offer is theoretically ambiguous, depending on whether or not the

reservation wage is higher than the mean of the wage offer distribution. Since
                                     —17—
Table 2: Regrc:;sion Results


Independent                            Beta
  Variables                 in w       Coefficients wR                in wH
                                       for (1)
_________________   —       (i)                             (3)       (11)
                                                                                  ciiii
in [ in (3)]         1      0.270      0.176              0.353       0.883      0.295
                            (5.6)                          (7.3)      (95.2)     (6.0)
in aW [aWin (3)] 2         -0.057     -0.0142         -0.102                     0.o51'
                            (13)                       (1.2)                     (1.3)
ABILITIES            3      0.150      0.221        225.535           0.1140     O.l91
                            (7.8)                     (6.7)           (6.6)     (10.8)
ENTITLEMENT          14     0.031      0.0143         116.825         0.057      0.032
                            (1.7)                         (1.5)       (2.8)      (1.7)
AGE                  5      0.013      o.116.14       1.9.363         0.013      0.0111
                           (10.5)                         (9.1)       (9.5)     (10.7)
SEX                  6      0.236      0.353        371.801           0.183      0.198
                           (12.7)                    (11.6)           (9.0)     (11.1)
MARITAL              7      0.316      0.508        11142.216         0.3014     0.319
                            (6.6)                         (5.2)       (5.6)      (6.5)
HEALTH               8      0.086      0.101        152.981           0.093      0.083
                            (11.0)                        (14.0)      (3.9)      (3.8)
UR                   9     -0.023 —0.038            —23.696                     -o.oi11
                            (1.6)                         (0.9)                  (0.9)
INTERACTION 1       10     -0.001    -0.1511         -1.7117         -0.001     -0.001
                            (6.3)                     .
                                                          (5.8)       (11.0)     (6.11)

INTERACTION 2       11     -0.008    —0.14911       —10.565          —0.009     -0.008
                            (5.11)                        (11.1)      (5.0)      (5.14)

                    12      0.351     0.212        1509.1110          0.268
                            (6.1)                         (6.2)       (2.0)
CONSTANT            13      14.798                 —14118.312                    14.122'
                           (15.11)                        (3.1)                 (13.9)


                            0.1456                        0.14111
                                                                           .
                                                                                 0.1135

                          -53.622        -        -7058.590         -59.593    —314.83
hood Function
SSE         .               0.230                   5110.897         0.259       0.235

                            952                           952        952         952
                                   —18—
Table_3:   List   of Symbols


ABILITIES          =    1    if minimum   requirements for school educa—

                        tion, vocational training, and work experience
                        according to the occupation are fulfilled,
                        o otherwise
AGE                     age
ENTITLEMENT             1 if entitled for unemployment compensation,
                                                        -

                       •o otherwise
HEALTH                  1 if no restrictions concerning health con-
                        dition, o if there are restrictions
INTERACTION 1 =         bivariate     interaction term between AGE and

                        UP
INTERACTION 2          bivariate interaction term between AGE and
                       • MARITAL

M                      Nillsratio
MARITAL                 1 if married, o otherwise
SEX                     1 if male, o otherwise
SSE               =     standard error of the regression
UR                     aggregate unemployment rate at the beginning
                       of the recent spell of unemployment
UP                     number of previous spells of unemployment
                       mean and standard deviation of the wage offer
                       distribution the individual is facing (di—

                       vided by boo)
                       reservation wage
                                      —19--



both means are approximately equal,-1 there should be no important effect of

   on w'. This is confirmed by the low significance level and the low value of

the beta coefficient of the w
                            a variable. Note, however, that no claim is made

that the wage offer distribution used in this study gives a realistic picture

since only a distinction with respect to profession is made. As a consequence,

the influence of many independent variables is partly due to omitted hetero-

geneity of the wage offer distribution. Moreover, long—term unemployed may

not have the choice over the entire distribution but only over the lower left

area of the distribution due to missing work experience, for example. Both

higher abilities and the entitlement to unemployment compensation unambiguously

increase the reservation wage on theoretical grounds. The empirical results

support this hypothesis, but the importance of the entitlement is rather low.

Therefore, this study gives no basis for an empirical justification of sub-

stantially higher reservation wages of insured, unemployed people. Note, however,

that only the fact--" of whether the individual is or is not entitled could be

included and not the amount of the unemployment compensation. Sex seems to be

an important variable (with regard to the beta—coefficient) indicating an

unequal (reservation) wage structure to the disadvantage of female unemployed

persons.32/
         —

     Although   an interaction term between SEX and ABILITIES was insignificant

at the 5% level, the suspicion may be raised that the higher reservation wage

of male unemployed persons is due to a higher proportion of better educated and

trained men with more work experience than women entering the labor force

after a period of non—market activities.

     Restricitions with respect to health conditions have a negative impact on

the reservation wage too. More surprisingly, demand conditions —   represented by
the overall unemployment rate — seem to have a rather low influence on the
                                      —20—



amount of the reservation wage. Although there is some variability in the

unemployment rate due to different durations of unemployment the significance

of the coefficient of thisvariable is rather low. Perhaps one reason for this

result is that regional unemployment rates are a much better indicator of the

demand conditions the individual is facing. But the data set does not give any

information about the residence of the unemployed person.

     The impacts of age and marital status on the reservation wage are related

due to the interaction term. The effect of age depends on the marital status

and the number of previous spells of unemployment. More precisely, if no

previous spells of unemployment occur, the effect of age on the reservation

wage is always positive, but lower for married unemployed persons. To state

it theoretically, although a higher age results in a lower remaining working

life, this negative effect on the reservation wage is offset by the higher

reservation wage due to the expectation that the employer will value a longer

work experience. In the case the individual is married, however, this age

effect is lowered because the search costs are higher. The opportunity costs

are greater for a married searcher due to higher net incomes not earned while

unemployed which may outweigh higher unemployment compensation for married

unemployed.   Besides this a married unemployed may be more risk averse than a
single one if he is the breadwinner of the family. As has been shown in the
theoretical section, risk aversion leads to a lower reservation wage. Conse-
quently,   the effect of the marital status on the reservation wage is negative,

but only if the individual is older than     38 years. If   the individual is

younger,   a married, unemployed person has a higher reservation wage than a
single   one. The reason for this may be that the spouse is working and that

the higher unemployment compensation for married unemployed     outweighs the
effect   of risk aversion mentioned above. During this age the difference

between net incomes is smaller due to lower gross incomes and the progressive
                                       —21—


tax system, but there may be a greater relative difference in gross incomes

between young married and non—married persons-p' since the employer often

takes into account the number of dependents when offering a wage to a younger

married applicant. Since the searcher knows or expects this behaviour he

raises his reservation wage. Besides this, the effect of more risk aversion

for married persons does not play an important role for young couples if both

are working and/or supported by their parents.

        One major disadvantage of the data set is that it does not allow us to

test the hypothesis of a declining reservation wage while unemployed. The

only possibility is to take into account the amount of previous spells of

unemployment. We want to stress, however, that this variable is a rather

crude proxy only. Although the variable UP significantly enters the regression

equation as an interaction term with ACE, a main effect of UP has not been

significant at even low standards. Excluding the main effect violates the

hierarchical    structure of the model" and implies a so—called "synergistic"
model.--'    The interpretation is that if the   age variable is low, the number
of   previous spells of unemployment does not have an important effect on the

reservation wage. Virtually no teenager entering working life has previous

spells of unemployment. As the regression results and the beta coefficient

indicate    the magnitude of the impact of the UP variable (in connection with the
AGE variable) is not very impressive. Thus, there is no strong evidence that
previous spells of unemployment play more than a lower—order role. Although
this result cannot be transferred to the impact of the duration of the current
spell   of unemployment without several caveats, the suspicion may be raised that

the reservation wage will not be influenced very much by the individual unemploy—
                  36/
ment experience.—

      More tecimical isssues of the estimates are discussed next. In    order to
make sure that the results are not an artifact of the logarithmic specification
                                           —22—



of   w', w, and     column   (3)   of Table 2 presents an estimation using non—

logarithmic values of these variables and where all other variables retain

their prior meaning. As can be seen, the signs of the variables do not change

and beta coefficients (not reported again) do not indicate a change in the

importance of a variable. The significance level of the UR variable, however,

is reduced substantially. In order to check for normality of the dependent

variables ln       and R, a test whether this assumption can be rejected is in

order. Such a test can be performed by testing the normality of the error

terms.    The chosen test is the SRAPIRO—WILK test-a' since it is specifically

designed for a Gaussian null hypothesis and therefore its power characteristics

indicate that it usually will outperform other tests.-' The calculated

Shapiro—Wilk statistic is 0.9978 and 0.9732 for the logarithmic and the non—

logarithmic   version. The critical values above which the hypothesis of non—
normality can     be rejected are 0.991 and 0.985    at 1% and 10% respectively.
Hence, the null hypothesis of non—normality can be rejected for the logarithmic

value but not for the non—logarithmic value at conventional significance levels.

Although the intercept     is significant at a rather high level one might be
tempted   to analyze to   what extent it incorporates effects attributed to the

other concomitant variables of the equation. As it is well         known from the
                                                                          R
                     39/ the intercept is the general mean of ln w plus the
analysis of covariance—

mean of the continuous variables multiplied by their regression coefficients.
                                                                                    R
To put It differently, the intercept can be interpreted as the mean of ln w

if the continuous concomitant variables are measured as deviations from their

means. In non—logarithmic values, the Intercept ( 121) is 8 p.c. of the

geometric mean of wR (7.350          ln 1555). As column 4 shows,--' the major effect

of estimating a homogeneous regression is the increase of the regression

coefficient of ln w and M' and the insignificance of ln 0w and UR. Since

job search theory usually provides no basis for whether or not an intercept
                                              —23—


 should be included, it is reassuring that this does not substantially affect

 the magnitude of the coefficients of other economic variables with the exception

 of that of in w. Hence, we may conclude that the constant term contributes a
                                             —
major share of the influence of in w and N on in w
                                                     -l          R

      In order to test for a sample selection bias more generally, column (5)

presents the regression equation of column (1) without the M1 term. Although

there is no substantial change in the value of the parameters, some coefficients

are subject to a sample selection bias. This bias results in an overestimation

of the influence of abilities, but underestimates the effect of sex. Twice the

difference in the log—likelihoods strongly exceeds the critical X2(l) =             3.84.
Hence, we can reject the hypothesis of no sample selection bias. The source

of this bias can be detected by evaluating the correlation between the residuals

of the in       equation and those of the probit specification,
                                                                        p12.
     As has been mentioned in the methodological section, the coefficient of the

N1 term equals                     The variance        is downward biased, howver, but
                  p12 02
it can consistently be estimated

                               N             'N
                  -.2

                   2
                        =   -N.E       ...


                                  u1 — b2 E N.1 (Z. —
                                          .   i.     i       i
                                                           NT1)
                              1=1         i=l


where b is the regression coefficient of M1. From this procedure we obtain

estimates p12     0.788 and a2 =      0.455.      Compared with the rather minor change

in the parameter values between column (1) and column (5), a correlation

coefficient p = 0.621 between the residuals seems to be a little too high.

Note, however, that            is subject to a standard error (which has not been

derived explicitly yet). In fact, other studies show-' that this approach

may slightly overshoot the adjustment for selectivity bias compared with joint

maximum—likelihood estimates of p12, a2, and the regression coefficients.---'
                                    —24—



IV. CONCLUSION AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS

     This study represents a start on empirical work on the reservation wage

of unemployed persons in Germany. The advantage of this analysis is that it

allows us to estimate the reservation wage as long as some basic individual

characteristics are available.

     With respect to policy implications two major issues should be pointed out.

First, there is a positive effect of the entitlement to unemployment compensa-

tion on the reservation wage and, hence, on the duration of unemployment. But

this influence is rather small. Therefore, this study does not provide a basis

for proposals to change the unemployment insurance system. Second, higher

abilities lead to a higher reservation wage. This result may outweigh the

effect that higher abilities raise the probability that the individual receives a

job offer. As a consequence, the duration of unemployment may be longer for

those individuals with a better education and/or vocational training. A policy

which improves the educational level of unemployed is of course recommendable

since it reduces the risk to become unemployed but the policy maker should

keep in mind that this measure is not necessarily an employment policy in

the sense that it reduces the duration of unemployment directly.

     Many variables of search models are difficult to observe and the theory

itself contains rather sophisticated behavioral relationships. In order to

come into contact with empirical phenomena, it has been necessary to withdraw

from the burden of high—powered theory. Hence, a further piece of research

needed in job search models is to provide a more sound empirical basis than

is available to us. For example, panel data on unemployed persons of short

subsequent time periods would allow us to more explicitly test the hypothesis

of a decreasing reservation wage while unemployed. Questions about the wage

offer distribution would give some insights as to whether or not the indivi-

dual has sufficient information about it.
                                  —25—


     Obviously, much more work needs to be done. The goal to be capable of

answering some more questions about labor market behaviour is worthy of

further efforts. It might then be the appropriate time to decide to what

extent job search models describe reality or are fine arts of economic

theory.
                                        —26—



                                      FOOTNOTES


 1/ For recent surveys, see H. Knig (1979), S. Lippman and J. McCall (1976),
     and K.W. Rothschild (1979), for example.

 2/ See S. Nickell (1979), P. 1251.

 3/ See N. Kiefer and G. Neumann (l979a), p. 91.

 4/ Although the following results are standard in job search models we present
     the derivation at some length since their explanation is sometimes rather
     cursory. For an exception, see J. Addison and W. Siebert (1979), p. 197.

 5/ For a discussion of search costs and the duration of unemployment see
     W. Mellow (1978) who uses the residuals from a hedonic wage regression as
     a measure of search costs. For a distinction of how much time and money is
     devoted to job search, see J.M. Barron and W. Mellow (1979).

 6/ For examples, see N. Kiefer and G. Neumann (1979) and S. Nickell (1979).

 7/ For retirement considerations see R.H. Gordon and A.S. Blinder (1980).

 8/ See R. Gronau (1971). For the effect of initial wealth endowment, see
     J.P. Danforth (1979).

 9/ See D. Mortensen (1977), W. Franz (1979). In an empirical study for Sweden,
     A. Bj3rklund (1978) obtains a negative sign of the unemployment insurance
     variable in a logit approach of survival rates of unemployed.

10/ See M. Rothschild (1974) for a derivation of this result and M.G. Kohn and
     S. Shavell (1974) for a discussion of the effects of different beliefs about
     the wage offer distribution.

11/ See K.B. Clark and L.H. Summers (1979) on this point also. For effects of
     introducing the probability of being recalled by the employer in the case of
     a temporary lay off, see J.M. Barron and W. Mellow (1979).

12/ We note parenthetically that the difference between maximizing either the
     expected utility of the present value of income (net of search costs) or the
     expected utility of lifetime consumption is of some importance. If the direct
     utility function, for example, is non—linear in consumption, the conditions
     which allow income to be included as the sole argument in a direct utility
     function do not necessarily hold. For a discussion of why these conditions
     are violated see M. Spence and R. Zeckhauser (1972) and J.P. Danforth (1977).

13/ This can be achieved by defining r —U" (x)/U'(x) as a measure of absolute
    risk aversion when the utility function is U(x). If r is a falling function
    of wealth, the searcher's risk aversion increases as wealth declines. See
    J.R. Hall, S.A. Lippman and J.J. McCall (1979), and D.C. Nachman (1975).
                                         —27—


14/ See also K.P. Classen (1979).

15/ See equation (I.7a). See also N.M. Kiefer and G.R. Neumann (1979a) for a
      discussion.

16/ For a formal derivation of this result see H. Knig (1979), M. Rothschild (1974),
     and M.G. Kohn and S. Shavell (1974), for example.

17/ See S.W. Salant (1977).

18/ We do not report numerous difficulties with the data. Due to a strange coding
     each individual had to checked for plausibility.

19/ Since the following considerations are standard results we only present the
     main results. For an extensive treatment see, for example, J.J. Heckman (1976)
     and Z. Griliches, B.H. Hall, and J.A. Hausman (1978).

20/ This threshold can be assumed to be zero without any loss of generality.

21/ See Z. Griliches, B.H. Hall and J.A. Hausman (1978, p. 144).

22/ See J.J. Heckman (1979), pp. 158—160.

23/ Since probit analysis is standard in modern econometric textbooks, the reader
     is referred to H. Theil (1971), pp. 630—631, and R.S. Pindyck and D.L. Rubinfeld
     (1976), pp. 245—247.

24/ Given a 0.0005 p.c. significance limit, the critical value above which the null
     hypothesis can be rejected is 17.730 for 3 degrees of freedom.

25/ D.R. Cox (1970), pp. 27—28.

26/ A description of the wage offer distribution is contained in an appendix
     available on request. To summarize shortly, the mean and variance of wages
     are taken from a 1% census in 1976. The data basis is monthly net income
     distinguishing several professions.

27/ See K.P. Classen (1979), p. 201 for this point.

28/ See also p. 22.

29/ Beta coefficients are defined as the estimated parameter value of each inde-
     pendent variable multiplied by the ratio of the standard error of this variable
     and the standard error of the dependent variable. For a discussion,
     see D.J. Algner (1971), pp. 72—80, for example.


30/
                      R       —.
      The mean of ln w and ln w is 7.349 and 7.403, respectively.

31/ Which is an estimate itself.

32/ For a study of determinants of the reservation wage of mature women see
     S.H. Sandell (1980).
                                          —28--



33/ In the public sector, for instance, there is a difference in incomes between
     married and not married employees regardless of their age.

34/ The requirement of a hierarchical structure is important in the context of
     loglinear models. See S.E. Fienberg (1977), p. 39.

35/ For an example see Y.M.M. Bishop, S.E. Fienberg, and P.W. Holland (1975),
     p. 112.

36/ Empirical work by H. Saterdag (1975) which is based on interviews, shows that
     unemployed people were somewhat unwilling to accept a lower income in order
     to receive a new job, although their willingness increased a little with a
     longer duration of unemployment.

37/ For a description including tables see S.S. Shapiro and M.B. Wilk (1965).
     The observations have been grouped into 50 groups.

38/ For a discussion of this point, see E.F. Fama and R. Roll (1971).

39/ See H. Scheff (1959), pp. 194—195 for a proof. For a basic introduction to
     variance and covariance analysis, see H.J. Schalk (1975).

40/ R2 has been dropped since its interpretation becomes difficult in a homogeneous
     regression. In this. case the ratio of the sum of squares of the regression to
     the total sum of squares can exceed the 0,1—interval. For more details, see
     D. Aigner (1971), pp. 85—90.

41/      is the variance of the residuals of the in wR equation.

42/ See J.J. Heckman (1979), p. 157 (the above formula is corrected for print
      errors).

43/ See Z. Griliches, B. Hall and J.A. Hausman (1978), p. 147.

44/ Which are much more elaborate but do not result in a large gain of efficiency.
                                   —29—


                                 REFERENCES


Addison, J.T. and W.S. Siebert (1979), The   Market for Labor: An Analytical
          Treatment, Santa Monica.

Aigner, D.J. (1971), Basic Econometrics, Englewood Cliffs.

Barnes, W.F. (1975), Job Search Models, The Duration of Unemployment, and
          The Asking Wage: Some Empirical Evidence, The Journal of Human
          Resources, 10, pp. 230—240.

Barron, J.M. and 0.W. Gilley (1979), The Effect of Unemployment Insurance on
          the Search Process, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 32,
          pp. 363—366.

Barron, J.M. and W. Mellow (1979), Search Effort in the Labor Market, Journal
          of Human Resources, 9, pp. 389—404.

Bishop, Y.M.M., S.E. Fienberg and P.W. Holland (1975), Discrete Multivarlate
          Analysis: Theory and Practice, Cambridge.

Bjrk1und, A. (1978), On the Duration of Unemployment in Sweden, 1965—1976,
          Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 80, pp. 421—439.

Burdett, K. (1979), Unemployment Insurance Payments As A Search Subsidy:
          A Theoretical Analysis, Economic Inquiry, 17, pp. 333—343.

Burdett, K. and D.T. Mortensen (1979), Search, Layoffs, and Labor Market
          Equilibrium, The Center for Mathematical Studies in Economics
          and Management Science, Northwestern University, Discussion Paper
          No. 380, Evanston, Ill.

Chapin, G. (1971), Unemployment Insurance, Job Search, and the Demand for
          Leisure, Western Economic Journal, pp. 102—107.

Clark, K.B. and L.H. Summers (1979), Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment:
          A Reconsideration, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1979,
          pp. 13—60.

Classen, K.P. (1979), Unemployment insurance and job search, in: S.A. Lippmann
          and J.J. McCall (eds.), Studies in the Economics of Search, Amsterdam,
          pp. 191—219.

Crosslin, R.L. and D.W. Stevens (1977), The Asking Wage — Duration of Unemploy-
          ment Relation Revisited, Southern Economic Journal 43, pp. 1298—1302.

Cox, D.R. (1970), The Analysis of Binary Data, London.

Danforth, J.P. (1979), On the role of consumption and decreasing absolute risk
          aversion in the theory of job search, in: S.A. Lippmann and
          J.J. McCall (eds.), Studies in the Economics of Search, Amsterdam,
          pp. 109—131.
                                   -
                                         —30—



Danforth, J.P. (1977), Wealth and the Value of Generalized Lotteries,
          Journal of Economic Theory, 15, pp. 54—71.

Fama, E.F. and R. Roll (1971), Parameter Est:iinates for Syimnetric Stable
          Distributions, Journal of the American Statistical Association,
          66, pp. 331—338.

Feinberg, R.M. (1978), On the Empirical Importance of the Job Search Theory,
          Southern Economic Journal, 16, pp. 508—521.

Feinberg, R.M. (1977), Risk Aversion, Risk, and the Duration of Unemployment,
          Review of Economics and Statistics, 59, pp. 264—271.

Fienberg, S.E. (1977), The Analysis of Cross—Classified Categorical Data,
          Cambridge, Mass.

Franz, W. (1979), The Duration of Youth Unemployment in West Germany: Some
          Theoretical Considerations, National Bureau of Economic Research,
          Working Paper No. 397, Cambridge, Mass.

Gordon, R.H. and A.S. Blinder (1980), Market Wages, Reservation Wages, and
          Retirement, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
             No. 513 (July, 1980), Cambridge, Mass.
Griliches,    Z.,   B.H. Hall and J.A. Hausman   (1978),   Missing data and self—selection
             in   large panels, Annales de l'insee, 30—31, pp. 137—176.

Gronau, R. (1971), Information and Frictional Unemployment, American Economic
          Review, 61, pp. 290—301.

Hall, J.R., S.A. Lippman and J.J. McCall (1979), Expected utility maximizing
          job search, in: S.A. Lippman and J.J. McCall (eds.), Studies in
          the Economics of Search, Amsterdam, pp. 133—155.

Hall, R.E. (1978), Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent Income
          Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence, Journal of Political Economy, 86,
          pp. 971—987.

Heckman, J.J. (1979), Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,
          Econometrica, 47, pp. 153—161.

Heckman, J.J. (1976), The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,
          Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple
          Estimator for Such Models, Annals of Economics and Social Measurement,
          5, pp. 475—492.

Hicks, J.R. (1938), Value and Capital. An Inquiry into some Fundamental
          Principles of Economic Theory, Oxford.

Kiefer, N.M. and G.R. Neumann (1979a), An Empirical Job—Search Model, with a
          Test of the Constant Reservation—Wage Hypothesis, Journal of
          Political Economy, 87, pp. 89—107.
                                       —31--



Kiefer,    N.M. and G.R. Neumann (1976), Estimation of wage offer distributions
             and reservation wages, in: S.A. Llppman and J.J. McCall (eds.),
             Studies in the Economics of Search, Amsterdam, pp. 171—189.

Kohn, M.G. and S. Shavell (1974), The Theory of Search, Journal of Economic
          Theory, 9, pp. 93—123.

Kdnig, H. (1979), Job—Search—Theorien, in: G. Bombach, B. Gahien and A.E. Ott
          (eds.), Neuere Entwicklungen in der Beschftigungstheorie und—politik,
            TVibingen, pp. 63—121.

Lippman, S.A. and J.J. McCall (eds.)(l979), Studies in the Economics of Search,
             Amst erdam.

Lippman, S.A. and J.J. McCall (1976), The Economics of Job Search, Economic
          Inquiry, 14, pp. 155—189 and pp. 347—398.

Maddala, G.S. (1978), Selectivity problems in longitudinal data, Annales de
          l'insee, 30—31, pp. 423—450.

Malinvaud, E. (1966), Statistical Methods of Econometrics, Amsterdam.

Mellow, W. (1978), Search Costs and the Duration of Unemployment, Economic
          Inquiry, 16, pp. 423—430.

Mortensen, D.T. (1977), Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Decisions,
          Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 30, pp. 505—517.

Nachman, D.C. (1975), Risk Aversion, Impatience, and Optimal Timing Decisions,
          Journal of Economic Theory, 11, pp. 196—246.

Nickell,   S. (1979), Estimating the Probability of Leaving Unemployment,
            Econometrica, 47, pp. 1249—1266.

Pindyck, R.S. and D.L. Rubinfeld (1976), Econometric Models and Economic
          Forecasts, New York.
Rothschild, K.W. (1979),    Unvolikommene Information und Arbeitsmarkt,Wist—
            Wirtschaftwissenschaftliches   Studium, 8 (November 1979), pp. 518—523.

Rothschild, M. (1974), Searching for the Lowest Price When the Distribution
          of Prices is Unknown, Journal of Political Economy, 82, pp. 689—711.

Salant, S.W. (1977), Search Theory and Duration Data: A Theory of Sorts,
          Quarterly Journal of Economics 91, pp. 39—57.

Sandell, S.H. (1980), Job Search by Unemployed Women: Determinants of the
          Asking Wage, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 33, pp. 368—378.

Saterdag, H. (1975), Situationsmerkmale von Arbeitsiosen Anfang 1975 und
          Voraussetzungen fur die Aufnahme einer neuen Beschftigung,
          Mitteilungen aus der Arbeitsmarkt—und Berufsforschun, 8, pp. 136—148.
                                    —32—


Schalk, H.J. (1975), Varianz— und Kovarianzanalyse, in: Methoden der
          empirischen Regionalforschung, Part 2, Verffent1ichungen der
          Akademie fur Raumforschung und Landesplanung, Vol. 105, Hannover,
          pp. 87—119.

Scheff, H. (1959), The Analysis of Variance, New York.

Shapiro, S.S. and M.B. Wilk (1965), An analysis of variance test for normality
          (complete samples), Biometrica, 52, pp. 591—611.

Spence, M. and R. Zeckhauser (1972), The Effect of the Timing of Consumption
          Decisions and the Resolution of Lotteries on the Choice of Lotteries,
          Econometrica, 40, pp. 401—405.

Theil, H. (1971), Principles of Econometrics, Amsterdam.

Yatchew, A. and Z. Griliches (1979), Specification Error in Probit and Logit
          Models, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Harvard University,
          Discussion Paper Number 717 (July 1979), Cambridge, Mass.
