                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE ROLE OF ECONOMIC POLICY
             AFTER THE NEW CLASSICAL MACROECONOMICS


                        Willem H. Buiter


                      Working Paper No. 580




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          November 1980




This paper will appear in D. Currie and D. A. Peel, eds.,
Contemporary Economic Analysis, Vol. IV, Croom—Heim forthcoming.
The initial version of this paper was written while I was a con—
sultant with the Financial Studies Division of the Research
Department of the International Monetary Fund. The opinions
expressed are my own. I would like to thank Mohsin Khan, Don
Mathieson, George Von Furstenberg, Sean Holly, C. R. Birchenhall,
and Patrick Minford for useful comments. The research reported
here is part of the NBER's research program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #580
                                                             November, 1980




               The Role of Economic Policy After the New
                      Classical Macroeconomics


                               ABSTRACT



     The paper considers the implications of the rational expectations

New Classical Macroeconomics revolution for the t'rules versus discretion't

debate. The following issues are covered: 1) The ineffectiveness of

anticipated stabilization policy, 2) Non—clausal models and rational

expectations, 3) Optimal control in non—causal models —     the inconsistency
of optimal plans. I established the robustness of the proposition that

contingent (closed—loop or feedback) rules dominate fixed (open—loop)

rules. The optimal contingent rule in non—causal models —      the innovation
or disturbance—contingent feedback rule —   is   quite different from the

state—contingent feedback rule derived by dynamic stochastic programming.




                                                  Willem H. Buiter
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  University of Bristol
                                                  40 Berkeley Square
                                                  Bristol BS8 1HY
                                                  ENGLAND

                                                  0272—24161, ext. 67
                            —1—

                                                             1




Sumriry

   The paper considers the implications of the rational
expectations — New Classical Macroeconomics revolution
for the "rules versus discretion" debate. The following
issues are covered 1) The ineffectiveness of anticipated
stabilization policy, 2) Non—causal models and rational
expectations, 3) optimal control in non—causal models —
the inconsistency of optimal plans. I establish the robus
ness of the proposition that contingent (closed—loop or
feedback) rules dominate fixed (open—loop) rules. The
optimal contingent rule in non—causal models — the inno-
vation or disturbance—contingent feedback rule — is quite
different from the state—contingent feedback rule derived
by dynamic stochastic programming.1
1. Introduction

   The stagflation of the past 15 years appears to have
undermined conventional neo—Keynesian economics in the
same way the Great Depression undermined neoclassical
economics in the 1930's. The economic collapse of the
thirties destroyed the faith of many in the self—regulat-
ing properties of the "unaided" decentralized market econ-
omy and motivated a major increase in the role of govern-
ment in economic affairs. The worsening economic muddle
of the late sixties and the seventies has seriously under-
mined neo—Keynesian optimism about the ability of govern-
ment to select attractive combinations of output, employ-
ment, inflation and external balance through the judicious
use of fiscal, monetary, financial and exchange rate polic
"Fine tuning," the sensitive response of monetary and
fiscal instruments to even minor disturbances in econ-
omic activity, has acquired an especially bad name.

   The skepticism about the ability of govermuents to use
stabilization policy wisely has been matched by an increas
                         —2

                                       Willern H. Biteri


ingly vocal criticism of structural policy. By structura
policies I mean policies that alter the level and compos-
ition of full employment output and employment, both in
the short run — for a given capital stock and state of
technology — and in the long run, when the size and corn—
position of the capital stock and the state of technology
are endogenous. Stabilization policies are policies that
influence (and, one hopes, minimize) deviations of output
and employment from their full employment ("natural" or
"equilibrium") levels. The view advanced by Bacon and
Eltis (1978) that the nonmarket sector has encroached
unduly on the market sector represents a criticism of
past and present structural policies. Policies aimed at
altering the relative size of the public and private
sectors or at changing a nation's consumption—investment
mix are structural policies, as are policies designed to
favor the primary, secondary or tertiary sectors. The
Laffer curve is the conceptual foundation of structural
tax policy proposals. Policies that influence the "nat-
ural" rate of unemployment (e.g. minimum wage laws) are
structural policies.

   If stabilization policies were defined to include only
those policies that affect the fluctuations of output and
employment around their "natural" levels without having
any short—run or long—run effects on these "natural"
levels themselves, the stabilization policy set would be
the empty set. In virtually every macroeconomic or macro-
econometric model that is not strictly for classroom use
only, the distinction between the two kind of policies i
quite arbitrary. Certainly, every real—world economic
policy action has both stabilization and structural con-
sequences. This is, of course, quite consistent with ill
informed policymakers considering only either the stabili
zation, or the structural consequences of their actions
and ignoring half the implications of their policies. Soie
of the most serious dilemmas in economic policymaking occ r
when a policy that is desirable for its short—run stabili-
zation effects has undesirable long—run structural impli-
cations or vice versa. Cutting government spending to
reduce demand pressures in an overheated economy may lead
to painful changes in the composition of output away from
the provision of public consumption goods or from invest-
ment in social overhead capital. A desire to reduce the
(relative) size of the public sector may result in a slum
when the cut in publicjflgJS not immediaijtc
                             —3—
fl'Tfflo1e   of Economic Pojjcu..   After   the New Classical Maii
 economics

 by an equivalent expansion of private domestic or externa:
 demand.

    The practical impossibility of indentifying a pure stab •        1—
 ization policy that does not have any structural implica-
 tions is of some importance when the policy conclusions of
 the New Classical Macroeconomics School are discussed be-
 low. A plausible interpretation of some of the writings o
 this school is that (at least) two pure stabilization
 policies exist. The first is monetary policy — the con-
 trol of the nominal stock of high—powered money. The
 second is deficit financing — the substitution of borrow-
 ing (and sometimes also money financing) for lump—sum tax
 financing of a given level and composition of real exhaus-
 tive public spending. This view is incorrect: both these
 policies have structural consequences.

   I consider the retreat from neo—Keynesian policy opt-
imism both understandable and appropriate. In the light
of the accumulated empirical evidence of the last 15 years
some critical revaluation of the conventional wisdom of
the fifties and the early sixties is clearly required.
What is harder to understand is how, for so many, this
retreat from the neo—Keynesian mainstream and from policy
optimism has taken the form of a return to the neoclassica
dogmas and modes of analysis that received such a batterin
in the thirties. The most convincing explanations for thi
curious phenomenon are the gradual passing of the generatj ns
whose consciousness was shaped during the Great Depression
and the failure to teach economic history at all seriously
in many contemporary graduate economics programs.

   The revival of pre—thirties macroeconomics which is now
widely referred to as the New Classical Macroeconomics is
associated historically with Milton Friedman (1968) but
has achieved its recent prominence as a result of the
rork of Edmund Phelps (1970), Robert Lucas (1972a, b, 1975,
1976), Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace (1975, 1976), Robert
arro (1974, 1976, 1979), Edward Prescott (1975, 1977),
inn Kydland and Edward Prescott (1977), Bennett McCallum
(1977, 1978), Robert Hall (1970, 1979), and a host of
pthers. The major improvement of the modern variant over
the original, as.represented, e.g., in the works of Hayek
(1932, 1939), Knight (1941), Douglas (1932, 1935), Hawtrey
(1926), Haberler (1932) and Fisher (1933), reflects the
ponsiderable progress made since the thirlc n           t-hp tjc1
                     —4—

                                     WI.LLern   H. fluil-t'r 11

nical aspects of economic analysis. We know now how to
formally analyze simple, preferably linear, stochastic
processes. A not entirely facetious characterization of
the New Classical Macroeconomics is to regard it as a
formalization of certain aspects of the old classical
macroeconomics with white noise added. The new version
compares unfavorably with the old one, however, in its
unsophisticated treatment of the money supply process and
of financial markets in general. The old classical macro
economics was also more flexible in recognizing the poss-
ibility of departures from ideal competitive behavior in
goods, factor and financial markets during cyclical up-
swings or downturns, although no formal characterization
of such departures was ever provided.2

   The New Classical Macroeconomics relies heavily on
the application of the efficient markets hypothesis to
all markets, real and financial. This means that prices
in all markets are competitive, market—clearing prices
that "fully reflect" all available, information. They
adjust instantaneously to current and anticipated future
disturbances so as to balance notional demand and supply
in each market. All agents are price takers. Households
notional demands and supplies are derived from expected
utility maximization subject only to the contraint of
the household endowment valued at market prices that are
viewed as parametric by each individual agent. The not-
ional demands and supplies of firms are derived from
market value maximization subject only to the constraint
of the production possibility set, with all planned sales
and purchases valued at prices that are viewed as para-
metric by each individual firm. Households and firms
(and the government?) act as if, at the prevailing set
of market prices, they can buy or sell any amount of any
good or service. An industrious and costless auctioneer
instantaneously and continuously sets prices in all mar-
kets at levels that make these notional demands and
supplies mutually consistent.3

   Compelling empirical evidence to support this extreme
view of the way in which markets operate is seldom offere
This is not surprising, as it bears very little relation
to the modus operandi of many labor, goods and financial
markets in contemporary developed capitalist or mixed
economies, as described in the labor economics, industria
organization and financial literature. Instead of carefu
                           —5—

Lmc                            After   the New Classical MacQ
 economics
 studiesof market organization, a priori arguments are
advanced that purport to identify privately rational
behavior and the useful concept of equilibrium with Wal—
rasian, competitive, market—clearing equilibrium. This
"equilibrium approach" is then contrasted favorably with
 selected ad hoc neo—Keynesian approaches (Barro (1979),
Lucas   and Sargent (1978)).

    The characterization of the New Classical Macroeconomic
 as equilibrium economics does not suffice to generate the
 New Classical invariance or policy neutrality propositions
 It is also insufficiently precise because of the univers-
ality of the concept of equilibrium. Equilibrium refers
 to a state in which optimizing agents have no incentive to
alter their behavior because, conditional on their expect-
ations, their current plans are mutually consistent and
can be executed. An expectations equilibrium is a slightl
stronger concept, because it also requires that agents
formulate plans or strategies on the basis of optimal
inferences and forecasts of current and future exogenous
and endogenous variables, that are consistent with the
stochastic processes actually generating these variables.
Until the constraints subject to which agents optimize,
including their information sets, are specified, the
assumption of equilibrium and optimizing behavior is essen
tially vacuous, because it does not impose refutable rest-
rictions on observable behavior. The most general version
of the Walrasian competitive equilibrium model represents
only a very small move towards potential falsifiability:
the equilibrium values of all real variables should be
homogeneous of degree zero in all current and anticipated
future money prices and nominal endowments, and Wairas'
Law should be satisfied.

   One can have optimizing, privately rational behavior
and equilibrium without this equilibrium being competitive
Monopolistic competition, oligopoly and monopoly are
familiar market forms. More generally, game theory, and
especially its dynamic extension, differential games, offe s
a wide variety of equilibrium concepts, many of which are
more appropriate as approximations to actual market con-
figurations than the Wairasian competitive equilibrium
(Intriligator (1971), Kydlarid, (1975), Bacharach (1976)).
Even if a competitive equilibrium concept is preferred for
certain markets, this competitive equilibrium need not be
an efficient, Wairasian, market—c1earir]gepui1jhriI1m.
                       —6—

                                               Th


Stiglitz et.al. have developed theories of nonmarket—
clearing, quantity—constrained competitive equilibria for
markets with costly, imperfect and asymmetric information
(Stiglitz (1977, 1979), Grossman (1976), Grossman and
Stiglitz (1976), Akerlof (1970), Riley (1979), Wilson
(1977, 1979), Salop (1978, 1979) . For a somewhat diff-
erent approach see Negishi (1960), Hahn (1979) and the
recent survey by Drazen (1980)). Inefficient markets,
e.g., those characterized by a partial (or no) immediate
response of prices to innovations in cost or demand,
create opportunities for known monetary and deficit fin-
ancing rules to have real effects (e.g. Buiter (1980b)).
Noncompetitive game—theoretic equilibria and competitive
but inefficient non—Wairasian equilibria will be the
cornerstones of a "New Keynesian Macroeconomics." The
Walrasian, efficient competitive market—clearing equil-
ibrium remains a useful special case that may character-
ize a limited number of commodity markets and financial
markets.

   This paper analyses the implications of the New Class-
ical Macroeconomics for the conduct of economic policy.
The focus of the analysis is on what used to be called
"rules versus discretion" but should be called fixed
rules (rules without feedback or open—loop rules) versus
flexible rules, i.e. rules with feedback, contingent rule
or closed—loop rules. With open—loop policies the values
of the actual time paths of the policy variables are spec
ified at the beginning of a planning period and are
functions only of the information available at the begin-
ning of the planning period. These paths are not future
information—dependent    they are to be followed by the
policymaker without regard to future events or to any
new information that may accrue as time passes. Milton
Friedman's advocacy of a fixed growth rate for some mone-
tary aggregate is an example of a very simple kind of
open—loop rule. Closed-400p, contingent or feedback
policies specify the values of the policy variables in
petiod t as known functions of the information that will
be available when a value will actually have to be ass-
igned to the policy instruments, but may not yet be avail
able in earlier periods. Thus future policy instruments
are known functions of observations yet to be made. Ther
is no serious disagreement that policy should be deter-
mined by rules. Views differ as regards tne desirability
of open—loop rules vis—a—vis closed—loop rules.
                         —7—

[m&cLe of Economic PoLicL After the New Classical Macro
 economics
    The application of stochastic dynamic programming to
 dynamic models in state—space form or 'causal' models leacs
 to optimal contingent (feedback) rules that in models
 with uncertainty dominate any open—loop rule. In view of
 this, how can anyone argue that open—loop rules should be
 adopted? The common—sense reason for the superiority of
 contingent rules over fixed rules — that one can never do
 worse by permitting a flexible (but known) response to
 new information — seems robust.

    There are three distinct foundations for the view that
 open—loop policies are superior to closed—loop rules. The
 first argument does not contest the proposition that mone-
 tary, fiscal and financial policies, anticipated and
 unanticipated, have important real effects, short run and,
 or long run. However, these effects come with lags that
 are often long and are always variable and uncertain. In
 such an environment, even a well—informed and well—intent
 ioried policy maker is likely to have a difficult time
 determining the optimal feedback rule. Real—world govern-
 ments are frequently neither well—informed nor well—intent
 ioned. It is therefore preferable to constrain the polic3
 authorities' options by committing them to simple fixed
 rules such as a constant growth rate for the money supply
 or a balanced budget — if  necessary by constitutional.
 amendment. This general position appears to be the one
 adopted by Milton Friedman. It reflects a very practical
 concern about the wisdom of leaving powerful instruments
 with uncertain effects in the hands of persons or agencies
 with limited ability and sometimes dubious motives. Al-
  though I consider it to be the most powerful of the three
 arguments in favor of fixed rules, I shall not discuss it
 any further, as it ante—dates the New Classical Macroecon—
 omi Cs.

     The second argument is that economic policy — mainly
  stabilization policy and often only monetary policy — is
  irrelevant for the behavior of the real economy to the
  extent that it is anticipated. Known, deterministic
  policy rules, open—loop or feedback, have no effect on the
  joint probability density functions of real economic var-
  iables. Applications of this view to monetary policy can
  be found in Sargent and Wallace (1975) apd Barro (1976J,wh
  also applied it to deficit financing: the substitution of bond
  financing (and money financing?) for (lump—sum) tax fin-
  ancing of a real spending program has no real consequences
   1b (1934)).
                         —8

                                         Willem   H. Buiter]

McCallum (1977) argued that it held for all forms of
stabilization policy. This second argument does not ques
tion the wisdom of attempts at stabilization policy, it
questions the very possibility of stabilization policy.
Since any known policy rule will have no real effects, th
only contribution of the government to economic stabili-
zation consists in not introducing additional uncertainty
into the economy by having an unknown, stochastic policy
rule. In principle any known feedback rule is as neutral
as any known open—loop rule. In practice, however, instr
ment uncertainty is likely to be minimized by the select-
ion of the simplest possible fixed rule. Some aspects
of this second argument, that only unanticipated (stabil-
ization) policy has real effects are analyzed in Section
III alter a brief discussion of rational expectations in
Section II.

   The third argument takes aim at the application of
traditional optimal control techniques based on dynamic
programming to the derivation of optimal economic policie
in models with optimizing agents endowed with rational
expectations of the future.

   Kydland and Prescott (1977) have shown that feedback
rules derived by dynamic programming, which they call
"consistent" policies, are sub—optimal in models with
optimizing agents endowed with rational expectations of
the future because such consistent policies fail to allow
for the effect of anticipated future instrument values on
current (and past) states. The optimal policy in such
'non—causal' models, they argue, is an open—loop rule.

   To lay the groundwork for an analysis of this propos-
ition, Section IV considers causal and non—causal solu-
tions of dynamic systems and other non—uniqueness prob-
lems arising in models with rational expectations of
future endogenous variables. Section IV then analyses
the derivation of optimal policies iii non—causal systems.

   The conclusion reached by Kydland and Prescott that
the consistent policy is suboptimal is confirmed. How-
ever, it is also shown that, in models with uncertainty,
there always exists a feedback policy (called an "inno-
vation—contingent" feedback policy) that dominates the
optimal open—loop policy. Only in models without uncert-
ainty is the optimal open—loop policy trulyoptimal.
                         —9—
              fl)j( pr1(      After   the New Classical
    i2Pic                                                 —
     I conclude that, with the exception of the demonstrat-
 ion of the inapplicability of traditional
                                            dynamic program
 ming methods in non—causal models, the open—loop versus
 closed—loop debate stands where Milton Friedman left it.
 Further progress has to wait for the development of sub—
 stantive economic models out of an emerging New Keynesian
 Macroeconomics.

 II Rational Expectations

    In the development of the New Classical
                                            Macroeconomics,
 rational expectations modelling has played an important
 part. It is however possible and in my opinion desirable
 to distinguish clearly between the insights gained from
 the rational expectations revolution per se and the cont-
 ribution of the rest of the New Classical package. The
other building blocks of the New Classical Macroeconomics
— identical
             public and private sector opportunity sets or
"Modigliani—Miller" of the public sector vis—a—vis the
private sector, identical public and private information
sets and efficient markets (see Buiter
                                        (1979a,b, (1980a,b)
Buiter and Tobin (1979), Tobin and Buiter (1980)) — can
be jettisoned without sacrificing the crucial contributior
of the rational expectations revolution. This is the
"principle of policy — dependent structural parameters"
and its corrollary that in any model, New Classical or
Old Keynesian, there is no scope for governments to use
unanticipated policy in a systematic manner.

    The expression "rational expectations" represents a
minor abuse of language. Standard
                                    practice in economics
commands that the label rational expectations be reserved
for forecasts generated by a rational, i.e., expected
utility maximizing decision process in which the uncertain
costs of acquiring, processing and interpreting additional
information are balanced against the uncertain anticipated
benefits from further refinement of the forecast. As used
by the New Classical Macroeconomists, rational
                                                expectation
shortcut the actual process of information gathering and
forecasting and focus   on the long—run equilibrium out-
come of a "Bayesian" sequential prediction
                                            process, when
forecasting has become a fairly simple and mechanical
procedure: the subjective probability distribution of
future economic variables held at time t coincides with
the actual, objective conditional distribution based on th
information assumed to be availabip at timp  t Tn mry
                      - 10   -


                                        Wi11.m F; RritI


applications only the first moments of these distribution
are assumed to be relevant. In Muth's original contribu-
tion, e.g., (Muth (1961)), it was hypothesized that the
mean expectation of firms with respect to some phenomenon
e.g., the future price of a commodity, was equal to the
prediction that would be make by the relevant, correct
and universally agreed upon economic theory. Future var-
iables anticipated at time t are "true mathematical expec —
ations of the future variables conditional on all variabi s
in the model which are known to the public at time t"
(Shiller (1978), p. 3). Analytical tractability often
compels the use of linear models in which case rational
expectations become least squares forecasts.

   The specialization of rational expectations to best
linear unbiased predictors conditional on an information
set that includes the true, objective structure of the
model is a powerful simplification that greatly facili-
tates practical applications. It also begs a number of
crucial questions. The issue of how economic agents
acquire their knowledge of the true structure of the
economy which is used in making their rational forecasts
is not addressed. The appeal of rational expectations
lies in the fact that any forecasting scheme that is not
rational in the sense of Nuth will be consistently wrong:
it will result in systematic, predictable forecast errors
Sensible economic agents will detect unexploited arbit-
rage opportunities which will force the abandonment of
the forecasting scheme and the adoption of a new one.
Economic theory has very little to say about the learn-
ing process by which unsatisfactory forecasting schemes
are revised. Ultimate convergence of the revision pro-
cess to a rational expectations mechanism is neither self
evident nor inevitable (De Canio (1979)). Unless the fore
casting mechanism has converged to the rational expect-
ations scheme apçi economic agents know the true structure
of the model, the crucial error—orthogonality property
does not hold.5 Analytical tractability is a necessary
but not a sufficient condition for a model to be economic
ally interesting. Since rational expectations is such a
crucial assumption,6 it would be most useful to have some
direct tests of its validity. Unfortunately this behavio
al hypothesis is seldom tested in isolation. Most app-
lied econometric work incorporating the rational expect-
ations hypothesis only permits the testing of composite
hypothces: natural rRtP of nnemplOPflt pllLc rHnnl
                             — 11 —


I The   Role of Economic Polic.Afte the New Classical ).?aro-]
 economics

 expectations, term structure of interest rates plus ration
 al expectations, the market model of asset pricing plus
 rational expectations, international interest parity plus
 rational expectations, etc. Survey data, such as the
 Livingston price index, while subject to all the problems
 associated with measuring unobservables through questionn-
 aires, provide direct test of such rational expectations
 implications as the error orthogonality property (see
 Brown and Maital (1979)). They have not been exploited to
 their full extent.

   It is a commonplace that the behavior of private agents
depends in many ways on estimates of imperfectly observed
past and present variables and on expectations of future
variables. If changes in public sector behavior alter
these estimates and expectations, models that ignore
links from (anticipated) government behavior via private
expectations to private behavior are misspecified. Such
mIsspecification may lead to poor conditional forecasts and
to erroneous conclusions being drawn form policy evaluatio
using simulation methods.

   The rational expectations approach offers a simple sol-
ution to the problem of the link between private sector
behavior, private sector expectations and government be—
havior: the private sector is assumed to know the true
structure of the model, including the parameters that
describe government behavior. The lesson of the rational
expectations view for macroeconomic and macroeconometric
modeling is the requirement to solve simultaneously for
the currently anticipated future value of an endogenous
variable and its future value calculated from the model
that incorporates these anticipations of the future. Once
this is done the models include the response of the privat
sector to current and anticipated future government action
and fully respect the "principle of policy—dependent struc
tural parameters." Policy simulations that are immune to
the     "Lucas Critique" can then be carried out.
III Real Effects of Anticipated and Unanticipated Money
   In this Section of the Paper I discuss briefly some of
the foundations and implications of the view that only
unanticipated stabilization policy can have real effects.
This proposition has been advanced seriously for only two
kinds of policies: changes in the nominal supply of (out—
                                 — 12 —


                                                   WI11Em       H. Bur

side) money balances and substitution of government borro'
                            keeping constant the size and
ing for lump—sum taxation,
composition of the government's real spending programme.
                                   has been dealt with at
The second one, "debt neutrality"
length in a number of recent papers (Barro (1974), (1978a),
Buiter (1977, 1979a,b,c) Buiter and Tobin (1979), Tobin
                                          that the conditiols
and Buiter (1980)). These demonstrated
for complete debt neutrality to  hold are  so extreme that
 they are certain to be violated in any real—world economy.
Empirical attempts to quantify the degree of debt—neut-
rality have so far been completely inconclusive. In what
follows attention is confined to the issue of the short—
run and long—run neutrality of anticipated and unantici-
pated money.


   Most channels through which changes in the nominal
                            affect real variables such as
money stock can potentially
output and employment are represented in the
                                             "portmanteaU'
             equatiOn (1) which is a generalization of of
reduced form
an equation used in empirical work by Barro (1977a, 1978b
 and    Attfield, Demery and Duck (1979a,b).

                 Ti                                        T1
                                           t-i t1J
                                 .

 gt =Axt +            E   b.. (m
                          17   t—2.
                                   •E(i1 .11                    1 t—i

                 T2S2                                             (1)
             +                  E (rn+1IIt.)
              i =0 j=0

                 R1T3      S3
             +          E
              k=li=-T4 j=0
                                 eJk   [E(m÷I/I_J)E(mt+1/It_j_k)J

                                                     +Lz
                                                           I:



 For concreteness let y denote the logarithm of real out-
 put. x is a vector o regressors, possibly including
 lagged values of      as well as those policy variables
 (public spending, tax rates) that are generally recog-
                                     anticipated or unan
 nized to have real effects whether
 ticipated. These effects may   of course  differ with the
                                   anticipated and the de-
 extent to which the policies are
 gree to which they are perceived as transitory   or perman-
                                           logarithm of the
 ent.     is the  first difference of  the
                                      — 13   —




LT1e      Role o.t   Economic Policy After the New Classical lacriT
 economics

 nominal money supply. For our purposes it is not essefltja
 whether the levels or the rates of change of the money
 supply should be on the r.h. of (1).      is an i.i.d
 random disturbance term.

    Four kinds of channels through which
                                         money affects real
 variables can be distinguished

 a) The inflation tax channel or Tobin
                                        effect. Anticipate
 future money growth, to the extent that it is associated
 with anticipated future inflation, will move desired port-
 folio composition away from assets that are poor hedges
 against inflation. E.g. in many money and growth models
money and capital are the only two stores of value. With
no
                      interest rate attached to outside
money balances, an increase in the anticipated future rate.of
inflation will reduce the demand for money, stimulate cap—
ital formation and thus overtime boost productive
capacity and actual output. Whenever output is a function
of some anticipated real rate of return variable, either
in the short run (via the supply of labour) or in the long
run (via the capital stock), anticipated future money will
have real effects unless money is super—neutral. This
effect is captured by

T2 S2
E
=0 j=0
            d.   .   E(m
                       t+1.11t—j.)      . It     has not been considered


in   the empirical work on           anticipated    and unanticipated
floney.


 ) The multi—period non—contingent nominal contract
channel or Fischer_Phelps_Taylor
                                 effect. One of the key
issumptions required for anticipated monetary (and other)
 olicy to have no real effects is that the
                                            private sector
 an respond to new information by
 Ontrols (labor supply,
                                  changing  all of its
                        consumption, portfolio allocation,
;aies, etc.) at least as fast as the public sector can
titer any of its controls. If the public sector can change
Lt least one of its instruments (e.g., the
                                            money supply)
:ontinuously, while the private sector is locked into
                                                       pre—
Tetermined nominal contracts for finite periods, determin—
[stic money supply rules will
                              have real effects (Fischer
 1977), Phelps and Taylor (1977),Taylor (1980) and
uiter and Jewitt           (1980)).   E.g.,
                                 — 14 —


                                                  WLUem H.   RuHIl

models  incorporating overlapping multi—period nominal
wage contracts exhibit very "Keynesian" behavior. In
                                of the labor force is
any given period, the majority
covered by pre—existing nominal wage contracts. Each
contract can in principle incorporate all relevant infor-
mation on the behavior of the general price level and
average wages over the life of the contract, that was
available at the date the contract was entered into. It
is not contingent on any new information that may become
available over the life of the contract. As new infor-
mation becomes available in period t, it is reflected
only in the contracts that are up for renegotiation that
period. The majority of the labor force is still covered
by unexpired pre—existing contracts. Management responds
to "innovations" in demand by altering output and employ-
ment at these precontracted wages. If the money supply
can respond to demand innovations before each and every
 labàr contract is up for renewal, output stabilizing
monetary feedback rules exist. The information sets of
 the monetary authorities and the private sector may be
                                                    — in
 identical, but the difference in opportunity sets
 this case in the speed of response to demand innovations
 creates scope for beneficial or detrimental monetary feed
 back rules. The microfoundatiOns of such multiperiod
 nominal wage contracts are still quite unsatisfactory
  (Barro (1977b, 1979)). In the U.S economy, at any rate,
  they are a fact of life and it seems unwise to deny their
  existence unless they can be fitted into an a prioristic
         paradigm of how the economy ought to work.



      The Fischer—Phelps—TaYlor effect is represented by

 T1   S1
            b.    (in     .
                                   t—i.11
                              — E(rn        •)J with S >
                                        t—i—J        1
                                                           0. In   the
             17         t—i
1=0   j=0
 empirical work of Barro et.al. referred to earlier, only
 current period (or one period ahead) forecast errors were
 included i.e. it was implicitly assumed that b.    0 for
                                                  of
 j > 0. This precludes a search for the presenc
 Fischer—Phelps—Taylor effects. These require that curren
 outputbe influenced by forecast errors from forecasts of
 money growth at a given date(t—i) made at one or more
 dates before t-i; i.e., at dates t—i—j with 0    j
                            — 15 —



Lm.oie of Economic        PolT After the New Classical Macro
 eCOfl 01172 CS


 where S1 represents the longest forecast horizon
 If monetary policy in period t—i can be determined on
 the basis of information more recent than I      ,                it can
 influenc at least one monetary forecast error and thus
 real output.
 c) The expectation revision channel or Turnovsky—Weiss
 effect. This effect is most easily demonstrated using
 the macro model of equations (2) and (3) which is a
 simplified version of a model of Turnovsky (1980).


                                     —         ÷
zn_ P =             c21E'(P+11I)         Pt)                        (2)


     =
          [P - E(P/Ii)J        ÷                                    (3)



Equation (2) is a monetary equilibrium condition equating
the real money supply to a Cagan—type demand for real
money balances which is a function of real income and th
expected future inflation rate. Equation (3) is a Sargeni—
Wallace (1975) supply function that makes output an incre s—
ing function of the gap between current price and last
period's anticipation of the current price level.
includes current and past observations on         and
and the ccrrect model of the economy as specified in        P
(2) and (3). Assuming stability we can solve for the
price forecast error as in (4).


P - E(P II )               1
 t     t t—1
                   =               [in -     E(m II
                                                t   t—1)J
                       1+CX14•C2


              ÷

                  (1i + a2)
                                         1
              (m+i+./Ii)] — _____________(a1uy              + um

                                             + a2
                                       — 16    —




                                                                           Willem       if. Buitex- I



Thus the current price forecast error is a function of
the revision in the forecasts for all current and future
money stocks between period t and t—1. Consider a mone-
tary feedback rule that makes the current money supply a
function of (in principle) all current and past disturb-
ances.


                          y               in

mt
       i=0
               1 lti + 11i,2 u_J

substituting this into (4) yields


                              =
Pt -      E(P/Ii)                 1            ÷ a2
                                                                            +
                                                                                 p0,2 u)(6)
                                      +1a1

      +              a                                    i                      y               m
                     2
                                                              [1.1÷j u +
              (l+a1 +

                     1
                                         (a u Ut      ÷   ut      )

              1+ct1 +a
This shows that the government can completely eliminate
the price forecast error P — E(P II 1),either by res-
ponding only currently (u.f                                       1:2
                                                                            0,       :i ? 0, 1.10,1=
     and
              02         1)

or by responding currently and in the future or even by
responding only in one or more future periods,to current
disturbances. All that is required is that the       and


          be chosen in such a way that

                a
U         +      2                a       1                   —            = 0
 0,1                          •                                       a1                      (7a)

                                  12
and
                                    — 17 —


LheRo1eOEcpfl1c_J?.oL-c After                    the New Classical Mcr
 economics                     ______



         +
             cx                         i            —1 =    0             (7b)
 u0,2                   1.Q (2 )
             (1+a2)


 E.g., if the government cannot respond currently to curr-
 ent disturbances (say, because unlike the private sector
 it receives this information with a one period lai.e.

         =             = 0 and chooses to respond only with a one
             p0,2
 period lag, i.e.
                                   =
                                             2
                                                 =   o   i   1   ,   the   price

 forecast error is eliminated by choosing
 and

         = cx1 (1+a2)                                                      (8a)
 P11

              1 +ct
                        2                                                  (8b)

                  a2


 Therefore, even if the government has information that is
 inferior to that available to the private sector, in the
 sense that it receives information on current and past
 realizations of random disturbances later than the
 private sector, it can eliminate the effects of current
 disturbances on the price forecast error from last period'
 forecast of the current price level (and therefore on
 the deviation of output from its ex—post "natural" level
  u). It does this by committing itself to respond in a knbwn

 way to these current disturbances during some future per—
  iod when the relevant information has become known to it.

    This equivalence of current or instantaneous policy
 response and future or lagged policy response only holds
 when the current state of the system     in our example)
 is a function of anticipations of future states

  I) in our example). Consider e.g. the case when p. 1=
          = 0
                  fo ali• except p11aqcJ412. Cn.1j3..i_
                          — 18 —


                                                Willem H. BuitF]


 in response to         and         have no effect on   P — E(P/
         because
 It_i)                 and u1 belong to        'tj•   Anticipated
 future   changes in          in response to     and u', however,

 will effect the anticipated future price level
                                                        E(P+i/I)
 and thereby P and        —
                              E(P/Ii).
    Turnovsky has pointed out (Turnovsky (1980) ) that the
 ability of lagged monetary feedback policy to affect real
 output will disappear if E(P/1r ) in (2) is replaced by
E(P1/ii). Unless the expations in (2) and (3) are
conditioned at different dates, new information accruing
to private agents between periods t—1 and t cannot be
reflected in the price level established in period t:
both portfolio allocation decisions and money wage aecis—
ions for period t are predetermined from period t—1. Pól cy
that depends for its effectiveness on the aquisition of
new information by the private sector, on consequent expectation
revision and on the immediate reflection of these new
expectations in current prices will become powerless.
Buiter and Eaton (1980) note that policy rules that oper—
ate through current (and/or past) expectations of future
policy actions are time—inconsistent, an issue addressed
in greater detail in Section 5.

   If there are more independent targets than instruments
or if the private secor does not have complete contempora-
neous information on all disturbances, itwill not be
possible to achieve perfect stabilization, as we did in
the simple example.7 Nevertheless, the qualitative pro-
position that monetary policy effectiveness can be achiev d
via the effect of anticipated future policy remains valid
(See Turnovsky (1980) and Weiss (1980)). This is one way
in which rational expectations have increased the scope
for stabilization policy beyond what is possible under
ad—hoc expectations. The Turnovsky—Weiss effect is
represented in (1) by

R1 T3      S3
                   e..k IE(rnL÷./I.)_E(rn÷./I.k)]
k=1 i=-T4 j0
                         — 19 —


fThTholeof   Economic Policy After the New Classical MacrJ
 economics
 It was not incorporated in any of the empirical work on
 anticipated and unanticipated money.

 d) Other channels. The only term left in (1) is     c.m
                                                      .2t—i
                                                 .i=O
representing past and present actual monetary growth. This
can affect real output for a variety of reasons. The thre
major ones are money illusion, absence of debt neutrality
in the presence of nominal interest—bearing public debt
and ad—hoc sticky money wages or prices. The last cate-
gory does not include those multi—period, non—contingent
nominal contract models like Fischer (1977), Phelps and
Taylor (1977), Taylor (1980) and Buiter and Jewitt (1980)
that incorporate rational expectations and have all real
variables homogeneous of degree zero in anticipated money,
nominal wages and prices. These were discussed under the
Fischer—Phelps—Taylor effect. The necessity of debt neut-
rality for neutrality of anticipated money is argued in
Buiter (1979a,b; I98Ob) and Tobin and Buiter (1980).

   It is important in empirical work on equations such as
(1) to incorporate the assumption of homogeneity of degree
zero of all real variables in all actual and anticipated
money prices and nominal quantitities. As a special case
of this if there is debt neutrality, anticipated money
should be neutral in the long run. The "Keynesian" pro-
position that anticipated money can have real effects in
the short run is not to be confused with the strawman of
long run money illusion (Gordon 1979).

IV Causal and Non-Causal Solutions to Rational Expectatiom
Models and Other Non-Uniqueness Problems

   Traditional optimal control techniques for dynamic mod-
els are presented most thoug1dyin Chow (1975). In order
to be applicable to problems encountered in modern macro-
economic analysis, the traditional approach must be ex-
tended in two directions. The first extension is to allow
 for many independent controllers or "players" with distinci
 and possibly conflicting objectives. Each player is aware
 of and responds to the current and anticipated future act-
 ions of the other players. Thus, instead of modeling a
1single controller playing a game against "nature," we
need the approach of multiplayer dynamic game theory or
differential games. This issue is considered in a longer
rsion of this paper (Buiter (1980a)).
                       - 20   -


                                              Willern     H. uftl

   The second extension is to develop optimization tech-
niques for noncausal models. Both single—player and
many—player solution techniques need to be developed.
The distinction between causal or backward—looking and
noncausal or forward—looking models is a familiar one in
the control engineering literature. In a causal system
the state of the system at time T, y, is completely
determined once a past state yj' I =         1,2,   ...   is    given
together with the entire sequence of values of the forcin
variables or inputs, v, between T—i+1 and T, i.e.,

(vTi÷1 V+2, •..,              VT) .   If   the system is stable

the influence of the initial state will ultimately vanish
and the current state will be a function only of all
past and present inputs. Inputs are the exogenous var-
iables, the instruments and the random disturbances.
Causal system are solved forward in time from a given
initial condition. Noncausal systems are systems for
which it is not sufficient for determining g to know an

initial condition y., I > 0, and the values of the

forcing variables or inputs between T —      i
                                        and T(inclusive
In addition, knowledge of (expected) future inputs v.
j = 1,2, ..., is required. Noncausal models have been
argued to arise frequently in the context of rational
expectations models, although some rational expectations
models——those incorporating only current or past expect-
ations of the present or the past——have generally been
solved as causal models.
   It is probably better to talk of causal and noncausal
solutions to dynamic models than of causal and noncausal
models. Every dynamic model, with or without rational
expectations,has a causal (or "backward—looking") and a
noncausal (or "forward—looking") solution. This is most
easily demonstrated with the linear difference equation
model of equation (9)

                                                               (9)
    Aytl

   is a vector of state variables and x       a vector of
                              — 21 —


                                         the New Classical MaF6

exogenous variables or policy instruments. The matrix A
is assumed to be invertible. The causal or backward-
looking solution   b of (9) is
                  yt

         Ak            +       AN                        (lOa)
   k=O
              Cxtlk                  vt-N

The non—causal or forward looking solution            of (9) is


             A_k   CXt1+k +   urn A                      (lob)
       k=l

   Indeed, as Blanchard (1978) has pointed out, any lin-
ear combination of the backward and the forward solutions
with weights that sum to unity, such as m in (l, is also
                                               yt
a solution to (9)

   =   ay +   (1—a)                                      (11)

The mathematics are quite silent on which one of the
continuum of solutions given in (11) to pick. Economic
theory must narrow down the possible range. If      is an
asset price determined in an efficient market the noncausa
solution (lOb) may be the natural one. In terms of
equation (9),xnomentary equilibrium is represented by an
equation relating the asset price, y, to its (actual and

expected) future value              and an exogenous variable or

policy instrument x. Such a noncausal solution was pro-

posed by Sargent and Wallace (1973) for a money—and—growth
model. If the price were determined in an inefficient
market and is viewed as predetermined at any given instant
the causal solution is the appropriate one.

   It is sometimes argued that the choice between the
causal and the non—causal solutiors should be based on the
principle that unstable solutions are inadniissable. Note
that if the model in (9) has a stable backward—lookingsol
ution for a constant path of the forcing variabl€s (x=x),
                       — 22 —



                                          Willeni H. Bulterj


its forward—looking solution will be unstable and vice
versa. If the characteristic roots of A are A., i1,..,n

the characteristic roots of A1 are given by p. =

There is of course nothing uniquely interesting about
constant paths for the forcing variables. While they
permit us to analyse the stability of the homogeneous
equation system, the behaviour of the complete system
cannot be determined until the actual trajectories for
the forcing variables have been specified. Assume e.g.
that all characteristic roots of A are unstable and that
C is square and of full rank. Let     satisfy x
c1(A'_A)y. Equation (9) then evolves according to

   =   A1   y.   The causal solution is now stable and

the non—causal solution is unstable.

   If a random disturbance term u were added to equation

(9), the causal solution would involve current and lagged
disturbances and the non—causal solution actual, realized
values of future random disturbances. While the mathe—
maticsarewilling, economic sense does not accept the
proposition that actual future realizations of random
variables (as opposed to current and past estimates of
future random variables or distribution functions of
future random variables) can influence the current state.
Non—causal models that arise in economic applications wil
have known future deterministic exogenous variables and
estimates of future random variables as determinants of
the current state vector.

   Some further non—uniqueness problems that arise in
stochastic models with rational expectations of future
endogenous variables can be illustrated with the simple
Cagan—type hyperinflation model of equation (12)

   —
       p __O[E(pt±i/It)l +             a > 0      (12)



   is an i.i.d. random disturbance term. 1' the inform-

ation set conditioning expectations formed in period t,
                                                  — 23 —


IThe Role of Economic                         Policy   After the New Classical Macro-j
economics


includes             the market fundamentals (m,p the structure of

the model, including the correct values of a and therefore
u) as well as past values of III,p and u. It may also

include current and past observations on an extraneous,
"sunspot" variable    which is an i.i.d. random disturbanc

The non—causal or forward—looking solution of (12) is


         =     1                        1                                 —   —
                         in        +           E (——)' E(m       ÷./I )              u   (13
              1+a                      1-fa   1=1 1-fa                        1-fa


                                   +
                                                        M(f/)
The current price level is a function of the current money
stock and the current "fundamental" disturbance     all

anticipated future money supplies and a transversality
condition for

urn (a               ) ME(pf Ii) = fl.                    Even if we assume that


         a         < 1                 does not necessarily vanish. In fact any

             that satisfies (14) can be substituted into (13)



               a
         =
                          E(fl+i/I)                                                      (14

Consider e.g. the case in which fl is an infinite distribu

 ted lag on the fundamental disturbance u and the extraneo- S

disturbance



                                      1 t—i.1
fl
         =               [a.u t—.i + b.E                                                 (15)
     t                        .1
              1=0
                                          — 24 —


                                                                          Willem H. Buiterj


Let the a. and b.
                1
                  satisfy
                  1


a.                    a.
                          i+1
                                            i O                                                  (iGa)
         1-fa

b.   =   —--
                      b.1                   i        0                                           (1Gb)


The general non—causal solution to (12) is therefore given
by

          1                      1                                                     1
                      m +                                                                       u
                                            (ct )E(m./I)
         1±ct                   1-4-a i=1       1-1-ct                             1-4-a


                                                                                                    (17)
where             is defined by (14) in general and, givenour

assumptions about                         by (15) and (lGa,b). Note again

that we cannot say anything about the stability of (17)
until we have specified the stochastic process governing
in.
 t
Using the same kind of reasoning, the causal or backward—
looking solution of (12) can be found to be


p=——
b
 t a
              1
                      -
                                () in
                                1+a
                                 a
                                   i
                                                t—1—i
                                                                 +—E()
                                                                  1
                                                                  a   -
                                                                       i  1-1-a

                                                                           a
                                                                                           u
                                                                                               t—1—i       t


                                                                                                    (18)
   again satisfies (14), while a specific example of a
process satisfying (14) and consistent with our assumption
about    is given in (15) and (lGa,b). Note that even if

           > 1, as will be the case if a > 0, it makes no sense

to describe (18) as unstable until the stochastic process
governing in has been specified. For constant      (18)

 is unstable if a > 0 ,                     but          with e.g.


                                          .              -   .                     .
int = (1+2a
        —) p                      this-
                                          instability would be eliminated.
           1+a                                                                 -
                         — 25 —


rmmole of Economic PoHAfter the New Classical .iaçjJ
 economics

    With the non—causal solution, an equal proportional
 increase in period t in the current and anticipated
 future money supplies raises the price level immediately a d
 by the same proportion. By contrast, the causal solution
 shows that a fully anticipated increase in the money suppi
 in period t will have no effect at all on the price level
 in period t; it will only affect the price level in period
 t+1 and beyond. Unanticipated current money, m —

 Ii),   could be included in fl and could therefore have

 an immediate effect on the price level. As it can enter
    with a coefficient of either sign, the direction of

 the effect is arbitrary. Both (17), a "New Classical"
 equation and (18), an "Old Keynesian" equation are consis-
 tent with financial equilibrium and rational expectations.
 The policy implications of the two solutions differ greati'
 By direct computation it can also be shown that linear
 combinations,with weights that sum to unity,of the causal
 and non—causal solutions are also solutions to (12).

     Thus with rational expectations models that include
 current (or past) anticipations of future endogenous
 variables there are two kinds of non—uniqueness problems.
 As in all dynamic models, there is the problem of choosing
 between the causal solution, the non—causal solution and
 mixtures of the two. Additional information from outside
 the formal model is in general required to make this
 choice. The choice of the non—causal solution appears, on
 a priori economic grounds, to be appropriate for variables
 such as asset prices determined in efficient markets. In
 such models current asset prices are a function of expectec
 future asset prices, and current prices can respond instan—
 taneously to changes in information. For prices determined
 in inefficient markets the choice of the causal solution
 gould seem to be appropriate. To rule out a solution be—
  :ause it is explosive for a constant path of the forcing
  'ariables is incorrect. First, there exist, in general,
  ion—constant paths of the forcing variables that will stab—
 .lize a system whose homogeneous solution is unstable.
  econd, at any rate for causal systems, there is no good
  conomic rtasi to rule out unstable solutions unless they
   ead in         time to violations of physical or behavioura
  onstraints. There is no divine guarantee that economic
                         — 26 —



                                          Wullem   HiLtj
 systems   are stable.

    In addition, having resolved this non—uniqueness prob—
 lern, there is the problem of what to do about   in eithe:

solution. Unless one imposes the condition that

"irrelevant" lagged fundamental disturbances and current
and lagged extraneous random disturbances can enter the
sOlutions (17) or (18). Price level variance minimizing
solutions are characterized by      0. For the       process Jin

(15) this is achieved e.g. by setting a0 =    = 0.    Wheth r
                                           b0
decentralized markets can achieve the collectively ration 1
decision of ignoring extraneous information and irrelevan
lagged fundamental disturbances is an issue that has not
yet been resolved. There may be a role for a central
policy maker in imposing the minimum variance solution.

V Optimal Feedback Rules in Non-Causal Models: The
"Innovation Contingent" Policy

    In a well—known paper Kydland and Prescott have argued
 that optimal control in rational expectations models is
impossible (Kydland and Prescott (1977)). In more recent
statements, this argument has been weakened to the prop-
osition that the search for optimal policies should be
limited to a comparison of alternative fixed operating
rules in order to select the one with the most attractive
operating characteristics. The most plausible interpre—
tation of their view is that in non—causal rational expec-
tations models optimal policies are of the open—loop type
rather than of the closed-loop or feedback type. As
stated before, an open—loop policy is a non—state—depend-
ent policy announced at some initial date which specifies
the values of the policy instruments for all future time
as a function of the information set at the initial date.
Closed—loop or feedback policies make the values of the
instruments at the current moment and in the future a possi)ly
time—varying but known (as of the initial date) function
of the current (respectively the future) states of the
economy. These future states will be random variables in
a stochastic world.

  Kydland and Prescott's proposition is quite distinct
                                     —27—

The Role of Econornic PolicyAfter the Ne%r Classical Macru-I
economics

from the New Classical proposition that only unanticipated
(monetary) policy can have real effects. It applies with
full force only if the anticipated future values of the
policy instruments as well as innovations in the policy
instruments affect the joint probability density functions
of real variables. Traditional optimal control techniques
such as stochastic dynamic programming do not allow for
the impact of future policy measures on the current state
through the changes in current behavior induced by antici-
pation of these future policy measures. Such "time—consis
tent" policies may be suboptimal. A time—consistent polic
or plan is a sequence of rules, one for each period, which
specifies policy actions contingent on the state of the
world in that period. Each such rule has the property of
being optimal given the subsequent elements of the sequenc
(Prescott (1977)).    In dynamic games with optimizing
agents in which the current state depends on anticipated
future states, the optimal plan in subsequent periods may
not be the continuation of the first—neriod ottimal elan
over the remainder of the planning period: the optimal plar
in a non—causal model may not be time—consistent.
   In this section a linear—quadratic version of a simple
two—period example due to Kydland and Prescott (1977) is
analyzed that brings out the issues clearly. A deterininis
tic model is considered first, followed by a stochastic
version of the model.

A Certainty Model

   The dynamic model is given in equations (19a,b,c), the
objective function to be minimized in (20).

                  + yx   +6                         ct,y5   #0           (19a)


y=yO                                                                     (19b)



x3x30                                                                    (19c)


W =           —          +           -          +
      k1(y1       a1)2       k2(y2       a2)2        k3 (x1 — a3)2
                                                                     >0 (20)
   The model is non—causal because the current state de-
pends on a future instrument value. An initial condition
                           — 28 —



                                            WLLLwn_H_auLbri


for y and a terminal condition for x3 are needed to make

this a well—defined problem.

   The optimal policy can be derived by minimizing (20)
with respect to    and x2 subject to the constraints
(19a,b,c). This optimal solution is open—loop and time—
iriconsistent,that is, it does not take advantage of the
"time structure" of the model by deriving, in each period
the optimal policy choice for that period as a function
of the state at the beginning of that period, taking into
account that the same optimizing approach will be adopted
in all subsequent periods.

The optimal policy is:

                +               +           ÷
                 y)—a]k1k                        a3(a ÷ y)2k2k3

        y4k1k2 +2k1k + (c + y)2k2k3                         (21a)
                                           (c6
    =   y3211k2+6         [a1—ya3]k1k3 +             [a2-cc(a3]k2J

        y4k1k2 +2k1k3 +
                            (ct +
                                                            (2lb)
   The time—consistent solution, in the sense of Kydland
and Prescott, is the solution derived by traditional dyn-
amic programming methods that attempt to exploit the time
structure of the model. Starting from period 2, the value
function for the last period   is minimized with respect

to x2, taking as given the values of         and x1. I.e., the

dependence of    on x2, modeled in equation (19a), is
ignored. The "optimum" value of x2, x2 is then substitut-

ed into   to yield . The optimization problem for period
1 consists in selecting the value of  that minimizes W,

given that     =    .    Thus the time—consistent policy for

period 2 is derived by choosing x2 to minimize

treating y1 as predetermined. This yields:
                                       — 29 —


LTh.e Role of Economic Policy After the New Classical lyIairr
 econorniCs
 -'                       —1
 x2        [a2—cty1jy                                                           (22a)

 Note that is implies                  =
                                           a2.
 The time—consistent policy for period 1 is derived by
 choosing    to minimize

 k1(y1-a1)2 + k3(x1—a3)2, given that                             is given by (22a).
 This yields:

          ((ct +            -               +
                     y)a1       a2)y2k1          (a6      +
                                                              y)2a3k3          (22b)
                            +          +
                                k(a6
             =                                  —1
 Using
                 [a2-ayx1]       [ct +     yj        ,   equation   (22a) can be

 rewritten as:


                                                          +
           (a2-aa1)y3k1+ (a2-aya3)(cz                                          (22a')
                          k1y +   k(aS + y)
Comparing (21a) with (22b) and (21b) with (22a') we note
that in a model without uncertainty the "time—consistent"
policy is suboptimal and the optimal policy is time—incon-
sistent. This conclusion needs to be qualified in a major
way when uncertainty is introduced.

A Stochastic Model

   The stochastic version of the optimization problem give
in equations(19a,b,c) and (20) is given below:

minimize W =         mm
                            E[k1(y1—a1)2 + k2(y2—a2)2 +
                                                                        k3(x1—a3)2/11
subject to:                                                                -




      = '—i      +          + SE(x÷i/I)          + Ut                          (23)
      =     =0
yo
                        - 30   -



                                             Willem H. Buiterl


Without loss of generality we assume that          the inform-

ation set at the beginning of period t, does not contain
   or u. When non—stochastic open—loop solutions are

considered, E(x+i/I) =   't+i       The optimal open—loop

policy under uncertainty is the same as the optimal
(open—loop) policy under certainty, given in (2la) and
(21b). However, an open—loop policy cannot be truly opt-
imal in a stochastic model. If a    0,    is a function

of      (in our model    is a function of y1). When the

optimal open—loop policy for periods 1 and 2 is chosen at
the beginning of period 1,y is unknown because itdepend

on the realization of the as yet unobserved disturbance
u1. After t=1,     will be known. Any truly optimal poli'

rule for x2 would enable it to respond to u1. Convention 1

feedback policies that make        a function of       enable

the policy instruments to respond to new information as i
accrues. This advantage of feedback control in the pres-
ence of random disturbances has to be balanced against
 o, disadvantage, highlighted in the certainty model:
feedback control that makes    a function of      does no

allow fully for the effect of future instrument values on
the current state, both directly and indirectly through
the effect of future instrument values on the optimal
choice of current instrument values. Whether optimal oper
loop control dominates or is dominated by feedback contro:
can now only be determined on a case—by—case basis.

   Note, however, that a more sophisticated kind of feed--
back control will nt be subject to the Kydland—Prescott
criticism. Optimal feedback control must permit a res-
ponse of    to "news"; in our model this news consists of

u,1the random disturbance in the previous period. tl

is a function of E(xt/I ).         To treat it as predetermine
                                  — 31 —


I        P.-1 f         c,rnrnir P1-1ic4j After the New Classical Macrol


    in   the derivation of the "time—consistent" solution for
         is suboptimal in almost all cases. u1 is not a fun-

    ction of           or E(xIIti) but does convey useful informa-

    tion for the optimal choice of x. A truly optimal polic

    incorporates the dependence of              on      and allows a

    flexible response of future instrument values to future
    random disturbances. It can therefore be conveniently
    expressed      as in
                     "innovation" or "disturbance"—contingent
    policy.   In a model with certainty the "innovation res-
    ponse"  component of the optimal policy rule vanishes and
    the optimal rule is open—loop. Traditional time—consis-
    tent state—contingent feedback policies derived by dyn-
    amic programming may or may not be superior to the opt-
    imal open—loop policy, depending on the parameters of the
    model under consideration. There always exists an inno-
    vation—contingent feedback rule that is superior to the
    optimal open—loop policy. These points are illustrated
    with some simple examples.

    The Time—Consistent or 'State—Dependent" Feedback Policy

       The time—consistent policy for period 2 is derived
    by choosing x2 to minimize E(k2(y2—a2)2/I2), treating

         as given. From the vantage point of period 2 we have

         =         +         ÷   The solution for x2 is:
             cty
                      —1
                                                                (24a)
    x2       fa2—cy1Jy


    Note that this choice        of x2 implies that E(y2—a2/12)    =    0.
    The time—consistent solution for             is found by choosing

                                                        +
    x1 to minimize E(k1(y1-a1)2 +          k2(y2-a2)2
    given    that        is set according to (24a). This implies that

                         0
    E(y2—a2/11)
         The solution for         is:
                              — 32 —


                                                               em   H. Btjiter


                              2                    2
    =   ((c ÷y)a1—a2)1 k1 +            (cz&     +y) a3k3                (24b)
1
                     kf( +k3(ct& ÷y)

Comparing (24a) and (24b) with (22a) and (22b) we note
that the time—consistent solution is the same with and
without uncertainty, provided the solution is expressed
in feedback form. Under certainty, however, the time—
consistent solution is suboptimal and the (time—inconsis-
tent) optimal open—loop solution is the truly optimal
solution. With uncertainty the expected lossunder the
optimal open—loop policy may            either
                                    be smaller or larger
than the expected loss under the time—consistent policy.
This is because the optimal open—loop policy is not truly
optimal because it cannot respond to future random dist-
urbances. The optimal open—loop policy may be dominated
not only by the time—consistent policy but also by simple
ad—hoc (linear) feedback rules that permit future instru—
ment values to respond to new information. The ranking o
the various policies depends on all the parameters of the
model under consideration and can only be established on
a case—bycase basis.

   To compare the expected loss under the optimal open—
loop policy and the time—consistent policy we must eval-
uate

    E[k1(y1—a1)
                        +
                            k(y2-a2)2
                                            +
                                                k3(x1—a3)2   i] under the
two regimes. Thus, for the open—loop policy we evaluate

                                        +                                         )2
            E[k1(yx1*x2*+u1_al)                 k2(a1x1*+(a y)X2*      u1+u2—a

            +
                k3(x1*—a3)/111                                            (25a)

while for the time—consistent policy we evaluate


        =
            E[k1(y1+E(2/11)
                                  +
                                       u1—a1)2
                                                    +
                                                        k2(a1E(2/I1)
            +                     +                                       (25b)
                u12+u2a2)2            k(x1-a3)2/I1J

[ote that
                                        — 33 —


Lme Role           of Economic PolicW After the New Classical Macro-i
     nonücs



                     fa2-y1J (a÷y)1
                                                                                    (26a)
 E(2/I1)
                  —1 -'                           -
             a2y     cLx1ay E(2/I1)                   (rr1u1
                                   1    —1
                                                                                    (26b)
             [a2_ay1](ci.y) —cy                 u1.
 To simplify the calculations, it is assumed that a1 = a2

 =   0.As regards the random disturbances it is assumed tha
                                                 = G. Sub
 E(u1) = E(u2) = E(u1u2) = 0 and E(u12) = E(u22)

 stituting (21a) and (21b) into (25a) and (25b), (26a)
 and (26b) into (25b) we obtain:



                                ar2(c+y)k2k3                          +
                                                                                2
         =   E[k 1
     U                                                                    u1)
                     y4k1k2 + k1k +(a6+y)

                                —a3 y
         +
             k2(                                                           + ctu1 + u2)
                            +           ÷
                   y4k1k2                       (ct&fy)2k2k3


                                —a yk1k
         +
             k3(4                                                         )2    /11
                            +2k1k + (a6+y)2k2k
                       2
                  a3y (c5+1)k2k                               2
 W
             E[k1(                                    + u1)
                    y k1k2+(ct5+y) 2k2k3
                                            4
                                             k1k2
             + k(u)2        +k (                        2         )2/I]
                                 'r4k1k2+(a+Y) k2k3

 Therefore,
                            2(+y)k2k3 -
     U U k1
              =
                      I k1k2+52k1k3+(a+y)2k2k3
                             — 34 —



                                                Willern H. Buiter




 a312(ct+y)k2k3
                                                              (27)
(4          2
  k1k2+(c+y) k2k3
 'y'




       +k(
         2
                a36y k1k3
                                        )
                                            2
                                                +c2
                                                  2
                                                      2
                                                          u
             y4k1k2+62k1k3+(c+y)k2k3



                a 3 y4k1k2              2    a y4k1k 2
                                       )(3
             I k1k2+Sk1k3+(c+y) k2k3         y k1k2+(c+y) k2k3



       Except for the term k2 ct2a2 equation (27) also meas-

ures the difference between the loss under the optimal
(open—loop) policy under certainty, w* and the loss under

the time—consistent policy in the case without uncertaint
W .
 C
        Therefore,

W-W  =W-W  +k   22                                            (28)
u  u  c  C    2   u

In     the absence of uncertainty we know that w* — w <
                                                C    C
                                                                0.
With uncertainty however, it is quite possible that the
minimum expected loss under the time—consistent policy
is less than that under the optimal open—loop policy. A
sufficiently large value of C2 will ensure this, if

and a are not equal to zero.

An Innovation-Contingent Feedback Policy

   It is easily established that the optimal open—loop
policy given by x1* and     in (2la) and (21b) is dominat d
by an innovation—contingent feedback policy. Substitutin
the constraint given by (23) into the objective function
                                  — 35   —




I The Role of Economic Policy After the New Classical l1acro-l
 economics

 yields:

 W =
          E[k1(yx1+E(x2/I1)+u1-a1)2+k2(ctyx1-fa&(x2/I1)4yx+au1
                                                              +u2—a2)2
                              2
             +
                 k3(x1—a3) IIJ                                        (2
 Now the difference between              and E(x2/11) can only be a

 linear function of the new information that has accrued
 between the beginning of period 1 when the expectation
 E(x2/11) was formed and the beginning of period 2 when x2

 is set (before           and     are observed). This new inform—

 ation consists only of u1. We can therefore write:


 x2 =     E(x/I)    +
                        Gu1                                           (30


 Here G is a linear function, to be chosen by the policy
 maker. Substituting (30) into (29) yields


 W E[k1(yx1+&(x2/11) +                       +
                                  u1-a1)2
           k2(ayx1+(o5+y)E(x2/I1) +(a-1-yG)      u1—u2--a2) 2+k3(x1—a3)2/i j

     now minimize (31) with respect to x1, E(x2/11) and G. (31

'his   yields optimal values x*, E(x2/11)** and G** given by

      =
                                                                      (32 )

                                                                      (32   )


     =    -ay1                                                        (32 )
he  optimal innovation—contingent feedback policy is there—
 ore given by:
                             — 36 —


                                       Willem H. BuiLer I

     =                                                 (33a)


x* =     x - ay                                        (33b)


The optimal innovation—contingent feedback policy has
the optimal open—loop policy (x*,x2*) as its open—loop

component, that is, the component anticipated as of t=l.
The optimal value of the feedback coefficient G is the on
that exactly neutralizes the effect of u1    .1O The
policy (x1**,x2**) dominates the optimal open—loop polic

x1*, x2*, as can be seen by comparing w in (25a) with
                                                   -


w below:'1
 U



     =
         E[k1(1x1*+x2*+u1_ai + k2(a1x1*+()x2* +
         + k3(x —                                      (34)
                    d3)   III]

W*_W**=ka2cY2
 u  u   2  u
              >0                                       (35)

The (x1**, x2) policy is not "time—consistent" in the

sense of Kydland and Prescott because it cannot be derive
by the backward recursive optimization techniques of stoc —
astic dynamic programming. It is therefore subject to
all the well—known problems of inducing the policy—maker
to adopt and stick with an optimal, time—inconsistent policy.
This paper has nothing to say on how to adopt and enforce
a time—inconsistent policy rule or "constitution". It
does make clear that such a constitution should be a
flexible, closed—loop constitution rather than a fixed,
open—loop constitution. This is because (x1**, x2**) can

only be specified as a feedback rule or contingent rule
and because it dominates the time—inconsistent optimal
open—loop rule except in the special case of no uncert—
ainty, when the two policies coincide. It is easily
checked that the innovation—contingent rule also dominate
the time—consistent policy; from (35)
                              — 37   —




LThe Role ot Economic Policy After the New Classical Macrul
 econon-d cs



  u
      =
          u
               - k2 22u   u

 Conclusion

     There has been a "rational expectations revolution" in
 macroeconomics. The subject will never be the same again
 The "principle of policy—dependent structural parameters"
 brings out the need to model simultaneously the expect—
 ation formation process and the stochastic processes
 governing the behavior of the variables whose values are
 being predicted or inferred — stochastic processes that
 may themselves be functions of the expectation formation
 process. There is an urgent need to relax the extreme
 informational requirements of most current macroeconomic
 rational expectations models and to reformulate the
 rational expectations hypothesis in terms of a more gener 1
 optimal Bayesian prediction and inference theory. Such
 developments are within reach and will in no way diminish
 the importance of the contribution of Lucas.

     The rational expectations revolution has also forced
  a fundamental rethinking of the dynamic programming
  approach to optimization in dynamic economic models. In
  causal models, differential game theory provides the app—
• ropriate analytical tool for modeling the interdependence
 of rational private sector and public sector agents. (See
 Buiter (1980a)). In noncausal models, Kydland and Prescot s
 dernontrion of the suboptimality of "consistent" plans
 derived from traditional dynamic programming approaches
 alters, but does not eliminate the scope for beneficial
 feedback policy. In models with uncertainty, the optimal
 open—loop policy need not dominate the "consistent" policy
 or other, ad—hoc feedback policies that make the values of
 the current policy instruments some known (linear) functio
 of the information set at the time that the policy instru—
 ent value must be set. The optimal open—loop policy is
•dominated by the optimal linear innovation—contingent feed
 back rule that sets the current values of the policy instr
 ments equal to their optimal open—loop values plus a linea
 function of the "news". There is no presumption that a
 suboptimal, restricted open—loop policy such as a constant
 growth rate for the stock of money will generate desirable
 outcomes in macroeconomic models that incorporate a variet
 of internal and external disturbances.
                            — 38 —


                                            Willem   H. B?1itIA


 Acceptance of the importance of tha contribution of the
ational expectations hypothesis should, however, be kept
uite separate from one's view on the value of the remain—
er of the New Classical Macroeconomics package. That
ernainder — the general application of the efficient mar—
ets hypothesis to goods and factor markets, the monetary
eutrality and super—neutrality postulates, the debt neut
ality theorem and the other assumptions underlying what I
ave called the "public sector—private sector Modigliani
[iller theorem" (Buiter (1979a,b) — does not constitute a
romising approach to the analysis and control of real—
orid economic systems. The theoretical case against debt
eutrality and against monetary superneutrality is over—
helming. A strong case also can be made for short—run re
ffects of deterministic money supply rules. The microecol
mic foundations of inefficient markets are in the process
 f being developed. Non—cooperative game theory, bargain—
ng theory and the theory of production and exchange under
 symmetric, imperfect and costly information are the start—
ng point for the New Keynesian Macroeconomics.

                          REFERENCES

kerlof, C. (1970) "The Market for 'Lemons': Qualitative
    Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism," Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 84, August, pp. 488—500

oki, Masanao, and Matthew Canzoneri (1979)"Reduced Forms
    of ational Expectations Models," Quarterly Journal
    of EconomiCS, 93, February, pp. 59-71

ttfield, C.LF., Demery, D. and Duck, N.W. "Unanticipated
    Monetary Growth, Output and the Price Level: U.K.
    1946—77" University of Bristol Mimeo, July l979a

               "A Quarterly Model of IJnanticipted Monetar
    Growth and Output in the U.K. l963—7" University of
    Bristol Mirneo, September, 1979b

acharach, Michael, (1976) Economics    and the Theory of Game
    Macmillan,   London

acon, Walter, and Eltis, Robert (1978) Britain's Economic
    Problem: Too Few producers. 2nd. ed. Macmillan

arro, Robert J. (1974) "Are Government BondsNet Wealth?"
    Jo urna
    pp 1095—117
                         — 39 —


I Th Role f nrmi- Pr7Jry After     the New Classical NcthI-
 economics
 Barro, Robert J. (1976) "Rational Expectations and the
      Role of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Econ-
      omics, 2, January, pp. 1095—1117

      (1977a)"Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment
      in the United States," American Economic Review,
      March, pp. 101—115

      "Long—Term Contracting, Sticky Prices and Monetary
      Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, 3, July
      1977b, pp 305—316

      The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving.
      Evidence from the U.S. Time Series, A.E.I. Washingto
      D.C. 1978a

      (1978b) "Unanticipated Money, Output and the Price
      Level in the United States," Journal of Political
      Economy, August, pp. 549—580

      (1979) "Second Thoughts on Keynesian Economics,"
      American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings,
      69, May, pp. 54—9

 Blanchard, Olivier (1979) "Backward and Forward Solutions
      for Economies with Rational Expectations," American
      Economic Review, 69, Papers and Proceedings, May,
      pp. 114—118

 Brown, Bryan W. and Shlomo Maital, (1979) "What Do Econ-
      omists Know? An Empirical Study of Experts' Expect-
      ations," Woodrow Wilson Working Paper, Princeton
      University

 Buiter, Willem H "Crowding Out and the Effectiveness of
      Fiscal Policy," Journal of Public Economics, 7,
      June 1977, pp 309—328

                 (l979a) Temporary and Long-run Equilibri m,
     Garland Publishing Inc., New York, 1979

     (1979b) "The Roles of Monetary, Financial and Fiscal
     Policy under Rational Expectations," NBER Working
     Paper No. 412, November

     (l979c) "Government Finance in an Overlapping Gener
     ations Model with Gifts and Bequests" in George M.
                     - 40   -



                                       Willem H. Buitel


    von Furstenberg ed. Social Security vs. Private
    Saving, Ballinger 1980

    (1980a) "The Role of Economic Policy after the New
    Classical Macroeconomics," Bristol University
    Discussion Paper No. 78/80. January 1980

    (198Db) "The Macroeconofaics of Dr. Pangloss; A
                                                        "
    Critical Survey of the New Classical Macroeconomics
    Economic Journal, 90, March, pp. 34-50

Buiter Willem H. and James Tobin, (1979) "Debt Neutralit
     A Brief Review of Doctrine and Evidence" in George
     M. von Furstenberg, ed. Social Security vs. Private
     Saving, Ballinger 1980

Buiter Willem H and Jonathan Eaton "Policy Decentrali-
     zation and Exchange Rate Management in Interdepend-
     ent Economies," University of Bristol Discussion
     Paper, August 1980

Buiter, Willem H and Ian D. Jewitt "Staggered Wage Sett-
     ing Without Money Illusion: Variations on a Theme
     of Taylor," University of Bristol Discussion Paper
     August 1980

De Canio, Stephen, (1979) "Rational Expectations and
     Learning from Experience" Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, February, pp. 45—57

Chow, Gregory, (1975) Analysis and Control of Dynamic
     Economic Systems, John Wiley and sons, New York

Douglas, Paul, (1932) "Money, Credit and the Depression.
     The World Toirrrow, 15 March, pp. 78-80

               (1935) Controlling Depressions New York:
     W.W. Norton and Co.

Drazen, Allan, (1980) "Recent Developments in Macroecon-
     omic Disequilibrium Theory," Econornetrica, 48,
     March, pp. 283—306

Fischer, Stanley, (1979) "Long—term Contracts, Rational
     Expectations and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"
                           — 41   —



The Role of Economic Polic After the New Classical Ma
economics


     Journal of Political Economy, February. pp. 191—205

Fisher, I. (1933) "Debt Deflation Theory of Great Depress
     iOnS," Econornetrica, 1, October, pp. 337—357

Flood, Robert P and Peter M Garber (1980) "Market
     Fundamentals vs. Price Level Bubbles: The First
     Tests," forthcoming in the Journal of Political
     Economy, 1980

Friedman B. (1979) "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme
     Information Assumptions of 'Rational Expectations'
     Macromodels." Journal of Monetary Economics, 5 Jan-
     uary, pp. 23—41

Friedman, Milton, (1968) "The Role of Monetary Policy,"
     American Economic Review, 58, March, pp 1-17

Gordon,   Robert J, "New
                       Evidence that Fully Anticipated
     Monetary Changes Influence Real Output After All,"
     NBER Working Paper No. 361, June 1979

Grossman, Sanford, (1976) "On the Efficiency of Competitiv
     Stock Markets Where Traders Have Diverse Information,
     Journal of Finance, 31, May, pp 573—85

Grossman, S. and J. Stiglitz, (1976) "Information and
     Competitive Price Systems," American Economic Review
     May, pp. 246—253

Haberler, G. (1932) "Money and the Business Cycle" in
     Gold and Monetary Stabilization, Q. Wright ed.
     pp. 43—74. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

             (1956) "Monetary and Real Factors Affecting
     Economic Stability: A Critique of Certain Tendencies
     in Modern Economic Theory." in Banca Nazionale Del
     Lavoro. Quarterly Review, Vol IX, September. Reprin
     ed in Readings in Business Cycles, R.A. Gordon and
     L.R. Klein eds. Richard D. Irwin Inc. Homewood
     Illinois, 1965, pp. 130—149

Hahn, Frank H. (1977), "Exercises in Conjectural Equilibri
     Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 79, pp. 210—226
                      — 42 —


                                           Willem H. Buiterj


Hall, Robert E. (1970) "WIly   S the   Unemployment Rate so
     High at Full Employment?" Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, 3, pp. 369—402

                (1979) "A Theory of the Natural Unemploy-
     ment Rate and the Duration of Employment," Journal
     of Monetary EconomicS, 4, April. pp. 153—170

Hawtrey, Ralf G. (1926) "The Trade Cycle," De Economist,
     1926, reprinted in Readings in Business Cycles, C.
     Haberler, ed. The Blakiston Co. 1944, Philadelphia
     pp. 330—349

Hayek, Friedrich A. (1932) Monetary Theory and the Trade
     Cycle: Harcourt, Brace and Co. New York

                    (1939) "Price Expectations, Monetary
     Disturbances and MalinvestmentS." First published i
     NationalokOflOflUSk Tidsskrift, vol 73, no, 3, 1935.
     Reprinted in Readings in Business CyclesG. Haberler
     ed. The Blakiston Co. 1944, Philadelphia, pp. 350—
     365

Intriligator, Michael D. (1971) Mathematical Optimizatio
     and Economic Theory, Prentice Hall, Inc. Englewood
     Cliffs, N.J.

Knight, Frank, (1941) "The Business Cycle, Interest and
     Money; A Methodological Approach," Review of
     Economic Statistics, 23, May, pp. 53—67

Kydland, F.E. (1975) "Noncooperative and Dominant Player
     Solutions in Discrete Dynamic Games," international
     Economic Review, 16, June, pp, 321-335

      and Prescott, E.C. (1971) "Rules Rather than Dis-
      cretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans"
      Journal of political Economy, 85, June, pp. 473—491

 Lucas, Robert E. (1972a) "Expectations and the Neutrality
      of Money," Journal of Economic Theory, 4, April,
                          -
      pp. 103—124

                  (1972b) "Econometric Testing of the Nat-
      ural Rate Hypothesis," in 0. Eckstein ed. The Econ—
                                — 43 —


I Th   Role o rrr,nr,mjr Pci1   i-y   After the New Classical


       ometrics of Price Determination, a conference spon-
       sored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Res-
       erve System and the Social Science Research Council

       (1975) "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle,"
       Journal of Political Economy, 83, December, pp. 1113
       44

       (1976) "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,"
       in The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Karl
       Brunner and Allen H. Melzer, eds.. Amsterdam,
       North Holland

       and Sargent, T.J. (1978) "After Keynesian Macro-
       economics," in After the Phillips Curve: Persistent
       of High Inflation and High Unemployment, Federal
       Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, pp. 49—72

 McCallum, Bennett T. (1977) "Price Level Stickiness and
      the Feasibility of Monetary Stabilization Policy wit
      Rational Expectations." Journal of Political Econor ,
      85, June, pp, 627—634

                       (1978) "Price Level Adjustments and
       the Rationaj. Expectations Approach to Macroeconomic
       Stabilization Policy," Journal of Money, Credit an
       Banking, 10, November, pp. 418—436

 Muth, J. (1961) "Rational Expectations and the Theory of
      Price Movements," Econometrica, 29, July, pp. 315—
       335

 Negishi, T. (1960) "Monopolistic Competition and General
      Equilibrium," Review of Economic Studies, 28, pp
      196—201

 Phelps, Edward S. et.al. (1970) Microeconomic Foundation
      of Employment and Inflation Theory, W.W. Norton, NeT
      York

       and John B. Taylor, (1977) "Stabilizing Powers of
       Monetary Policy under Rational Expectations,"
       Journal of Political Economy, 85, February, pp.
       163—190

Prescott, Edward, (1975) "Efficiency of the Natural Rate,
                        — 44 —


                                       Wfl 7pm   P Th,fl-,ri

    Journal of Political Economy, 83, December, pp. 1229
    36

    (1977) "Should Control Theory be used for Economic
    Stabilization?" in Optizm3l Policies, Control Theory
    and Technology Exports, eds. K. Brunner and A.H.
    Meltzer, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on
    Public Policy, Vol. 7

Riley, J. (1979) "Noncooperative Equilibrium and Market
     Signalling" American Economic Review, 69, Papers
     and Proceedings, May, pp. 303—307

Salop, S. (1978) "Parables of Information Transmission,"
     in A. Mitchell, ed. The Effect of Inforlm3tion on
     Consumer and Market Behavior. Chicago

         (1979) "A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemploy
    ment." American Economic Review, 69, March, pp. 117
     125

Sargent, Thomas, and Neil Wallace, (1973) "The Stability "
     of Models of Money and Growth with Perfect Foresight
     EconometrW,4l, November, pp. 1043—48
                                   (1975) "Rational Expec
     ations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument and the
     Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political
     Economy, 83, April, pp. 241—254

     (1976) "Rational Expectations and the Theory of
     Economic Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics,
     2, April, pp. 1—44

Shiller, Robert J. (1978) "Rational Expectations and the
     Dynamic Structure of Macroeconomic Models: A
     Critical Review," Journal of Monetary Economics, 4
     January, pp. 1—44

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (1977) "Monopoly, Non—linear Pricing
     and Imperfect Information: The Insurance Market."
     Review of Economic Studies, 44, October, pp. 407—430

                    (1979) "Equilibrium in Product Market
     with Imperfect Information," American Economic
     Review, Papers and Proceedings. 69. March. pp. 39—3 .5
                           — 45 —


I Thin P1 r,f   Ffnmi   Policy   After the New Classical   r-rr
 economics

 Taylor, John, (1977) "Conditions for Unique Solutions in
      Stochastic Macoeconomic Models with Rational
      Expectations" Econometrica, 45, September, pp. 1377
      85

 Taylor, John B. (1980) "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered
      Contracts," Journal of Political Economy, 88,
      February 1980, PP. 1—23

 Tobin, James and Willem Buiter, (1980) "Fiscal and Mone-
      tary Policies, Capital Formation and Economic Activ-
      ity," in George von Furstenberg ed. The Government
      and Capital Formation, Ballinger

 Turnovsky, Stephen J. (1980) "The Choice of Monetary
      Instruments under Alternative Forms of Price Expect-
      ations," Manchester School, March 1980, pp. 39—62

 Weiss, Laurence (1980) "The Role for Active Monetary Poli y
      in a Rational Expectations Model," Journal of
      PoliticalEconomy, 88 April, pp. 221—233

 Wilson, Charles A. (1977) "A Model of Insurance Markets
      with Incomplete Information," Journal of Economic
      Theory, 16, December, pp. 167—207

                    (1979) "Equilibrium and Adverse Select-
      ion," American Economic Review, Papers and Proceeditgs,
      March, PP. 313—317




                           FOOTNOTES

 1.   This paper was written while I was a consultant with
      the Financial Studies Division of the Research Depar -
      ment of the International. Monetary Fund. -The opinioi s
      expressed are my own. I would like to thank Mohsin
      Khan and Don Mathieson for discussions on causal and
      noncausal solutions to dynamic models, and George voi
      Furstenberg for comments on an earlier draft. Sean
      Holly pointed out an error in an earlier version of
      the paper. An anonymous referee made extensive eoimn-
                       — 46 —


                      ________________ - Willem
                                                  H. BuiteA



     ents.

2.   An excellent early survey of the role of monetary an
     real factors in the trade cycle is Haberler (1956).
     'While emphasizing the importance of the money supply
     process and of financial factors in general, he also
     considers price and wage regidity to be necessary
     elements in the transmission mechanism. His emphasi
     on "large fixed monetary contracts" (p.l39, p. 140)
     is also surprisingly "modern'

3.   Price stickiness is consistent with only unanticipat d
     policy having an effect on real output or employment
     as long as production and employment depend only on
     price surprises and not on the actual price. McCall
     urn (1977, 1978) has sticky prices but equates the
     quantity produced to the notional supply of output
     which is a function of the price surprise only. One
     can even have a "disequilibrium" determination of
     production by assuming that actual output is the
     "mm" of the effective demand for and the effective
     supply of output. As long as both effective demand
     and effective supply are functions of price surprise
     only, ineffectiveness of anticipated policy follows.

4.   An early characterization of a "rational expectation
     equilibrium"cafl be found in Hayek (1939). "The
     main difficulty of the traditional approach is its
     complete abstraction from time. A concept of
     equilibrium which essentially was applicable only to
     an economic system conceived as timeless could not
     be of great value .... It has become clear that,
     instead of completely disregarding the time element,
     we must make very definite assumptions about the
     attitude of persons towards the future. The assurnp-
     tions of this kind which are implied in the concept
     of equilibrium are essentially that everybody fore-
     sees the future correctly and that this foresight
     includes not only the changes in the objective data
     but also the behavior of all the other people with
     whom lie expect. to perform economic transactions"
      (Italics added).
5.   This is the property that predictions of future var-
     iables differ from the actual future outcomes only b
     errors which are independent of the variables used t
      cnratE the   nrpdrtionc. FripcIrnn (17), p. 7L
                          — 47 —


L2he Role   of Economic Pn1ii'y After the New Classical i;:1.
 economics                                                 —


 6.   Crucial in the sense that major qualitative propert-
      ies of the model depend on it.

 7.   Note that instead of minimizing deviations of output
      from the ex—post natural level    we could instead
      have minimized deviations of output from the ex—ante
      natural level, 0.

 8.   See also Taylor (1977), Aoki and Canzoneri (1979),
      Flood and Garber (1980).

 9.   Note that it is assumed that     and u are not ele-
      ments of i. x has to be chosen before         and u
      are observed. This assumption can easily be relaxed
      to include partial or complete contemporaneous
      observations on    and u.

 10. Having derived the optimal policy, x2** and x1**
      we can,using (23),express the optimal value of x2 as
      a function of y1. While it is always possible to
      reformulate any innovation—contingent policy as a
      state—contingent one (and vice—versa), the innovatio:
      contingent description of the optimal policy rule is
      preferable because it emphasises the nature of its
      derivation and the way in which it differs from the
      time—consistent policy.

 11. In a private communication, Mr. C. R. Birchenhall of
      Manchester University has shown that the linear inn-
      ovation contingent policy not only dominates the
      open—loop po].icy but also is the global optimal
      policy for this linear—quadratic model.
