                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             MODELLING ALTERNATIVE SOLUTIONS TO THE
           LONG—RUN SOCIAL SECURITY FUNDING PROBLEM

                       Michael J. Boskin

                          Marcy Avrin

                         Kenneth Cone

                     Working Paper No. 583




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         November 1980




We would like to thank John Shaven and Denny Dennis for valuable
advice. The National Science Foundation provided partial support
for this research under NSF Grant No. SOC78—07139. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Social
Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #583
                                                                   November, 1980



                 Modelling Alternative Solutions to the Long—Run
                         Social Security Funding Problem

                                    ABSTRACT


     This paper develops a Social Security simulation model. Combining data from
the 1975 Social Security Exact Match File, which merges individual records from the
1975 Current Population Survey with OASI earnings and benefit records, with a model
of income growth, retirement and labor force participation patterns, life expectancy,
age—earnings profiles, etc., we present estimates of a variety of types of information
concerning the long—run financial status of the OASI system.
     Estimates are developed for current legislation and a variety of possible
reforms of the aggregate real present value of benefits, taxes and deficit; and
expected benefits, taxes and net transfers for different population groups by age
and income.
     Among the more important findings of the first in a series of analyses using
the simulation model are the following:
     1. Under OASI alone, the long—run deficit amounts to $632 billion in 1977
         dollars. This is roughly the size of the regular privately held national
         debt. This occurs primarily because of the impending large increase in
         the ratio of retirees to workers early in the next century and in spite
         of already legislated impending large payroll tax increases.
     2. The long—run deficit is quite sensitive to assumptions concerning pro-
         ductivity growth and the length of the retirement period. For example,
         a one year increase in the latter (perhaps due to a gain in life
         expectancy) increases the real present value of the deficit by about
         $250 billion.
     3. Current retirees and older workers will be receiving a large multiple
         of taxes paid plus interest. Younger workers ultimately will not even
         break even. The overall pattern of benefits, taxes and transfers will
         depend heavily upon the time pattern of responses to the deficit and
         the form the response takes.
     4. Several types of options exist for eliminating the deficit and even for
         freeing up resources for other purposes. Delaying retirement by three
         years on average relative to current patterns will eliminate the deficit
         (mainly reducing total benefits paid); and separating the transfer and
         annuity components of the system also offers potentially large deficit
         reductions (but implies part of the sum will be used to finance an
         expanded transfer payment system from general revenues).

Michael J. Boskin                                   Marcy Avrin and Kenneth Cone
National Bureau of Economics                        National Bureau of Economic Research
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard                        204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
Stanford, California 94305                          Stanford, California 94305
(415) 326—7160                                      (415) 326—7160

Departient   of Economics
Stanford. Universtiy        :
Stanford, California 94305
(415) 497—3978
              MODELLING ALTERNATIVE SOLUTIONS TO THE LONG-RUN
                      SOCIAL SECURITY FUNDING PROBLEM

                                    by

                             Michael J. Boskin
                                Marcy Avrin
                                Kenneth Cone


1.     Introduction

       Since its enactment, the Social Security System has enjoyed unique

popularity among public income support programs. In the past several years,

however, rising payroll taxes, a huge long-term deficit and concerns over

its effects on the economy have led an increasing number of observers to

conclude that Social Security is in urgent need of reform.

       This system serves two major goals: to replace income lost at retire-

ment, and to provide minimum income support for the aged. The former, the

insurance goal, is based on earned entitlements; the welfare, or transfer,

goal aims at social adequacy of support. Each goal enjoys wide public

support as well as important policy justifications. For example, imper-

fections in the private annuities market and imperfect foresight regarding

future incomes, inflation, life expectancy, etc., may lead many citizens

to "undersave" for retirement, forcing them as general charges on the

public via welfare or other programs in the absence of Social Security.

       Over   the last four decades, the Social Security System has helped
mitigate these problems in an   important way.   It   has   provided substantial


       The research reported here is part of the NBER's research in social
insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        -2-




income security to the elderly; it has kept many elderly persons out of

extreme poverty; and it has transferred billions of dollars annually from

the younger, wealthier generation of workers to the older, poor generation

of retirees. These are significant achievements indeed. However, the System,

which was designed decades ago, has not kept up fully with rapidly changing

economic, social, and demographic conditions. It is having several substan-

tial and probably      unintended adverse effects on the overall economy; and it
faces a long-term funding crisis of immense proportions.

        Social Security is thought of in several alternative ways: as an

actuarially fair pension fund; as a separable system of taxes and transfer

payments; and as a pure consumption loan intergenerational transfer program

where each Qeneration transfers a fraction of its labor income to the retired

generation      with the expectation that the succeeding generation will treat it
similarly. In truth, the existing Old Age Survivors Insurance (OASI)      System

is none of the above, but has components of each (as well as additional corn-

p1 exi ties).

        The     current System differs from the private pension fund analogue in
several respects. First, it is unfunded in that current payouts are financed
by contemporaneous 'contributions" or taxes. This had the advantage of allow-

ing retirement benefits to be initiated immediately making the initial recipients

'windfall' beneficiaries. That is, they received retirement income supple-

ments with little or no previous contributions. Income was similarly trans-

ferred from the initial working population to the initial retirement generation.

This intergenerational transfer has continued as the system has matured, although

the net transfer (the expected value of a participant's receipts less pay-

ments) has diminished. One drawback of this system is that while people
                                      -3-


accumulate future claims against the system, no corresponding wealth accumu-

lation occurs for the system as a whole. Thus, while the working population

is being forced to "save," no funds are made available for capital formation

in the economy. At any point in time, the system is "bankrupt" in that it

has   massive future retirement obligations and only a relatively trivial
amount of assets. A government can operate such a system because of its

powers to tax future income in order to finance its obligations.

         There are other major differences between Social Security and the

private annuity or pension fund analogue. The benefits are distinctly

tilted in favor of the low income worker, the worker. with a short work

history, and the retiree with a spouse with an uncovered work history

and those with little retirement income. That is, relative to a system where

each participant earned a common rate of return on his or her contributions, the

current Social Security System involves a set of taxes and transfers. This redis-

tribution within a generation, in contrast to the intergeneration transfer

mentioned above, is accomplished by such mechanisms as a progressive benefit

formula, a minimum benefit, a uniform dependent's benefit, and an earnings test.



2.      The   Major Problems Confronting Social Security
        Three major sets of problems plague Social Security today. The first
is the issue of equity--both inter— and intra-generational. A large propor-

tion of benefits received by retired workers is really an iiitergenerational

transfer. Also, different groups in a given generation of the population

are treated differently by the Social Security System. Lower income workers

receive a higher fraction of their previous earnings in benefits than do

high-income   workers; married couples usually receive half again as much
                                     -4-


as single persons with the same earnings history for the primary earner;

those with short-covered earnings histories are favored, etc.

         .4 second set of problems plaguing the Social Security System is the

potentially adverse effects that it may have on private incentives to work,

save, hire workers, etc.

         Probably the most overwhelming problem confronting Social Security

as a pay-as-you-go system is the long-term funding crisis. Even after the

1977 Social Security Amendments, a long-term deficit in the OASI System of

well over $600 billion (in 1977 dollars) remains. This is the amount by

which the   present value of legislated   benefits exceeds the present value

of   legislated taxes. To put this in perspective, this amount is about the
size of the privately—held regular national debt. The major cause of this
projected deficit is the drastic change in the age structure of the popula-
tion.    Once the post-World War II baby boom retires (around 2010) the ratio

of retirees to workers will increase enormously. The best estimate is that

the ratio of retirees to workers will increase by over 60 percent--from

slightly less than one to three to about one to two. Given the pay—as-

you-go nature of the System, this implies either a huge increase in taxes to

maintain   the ratio of benefits to before-tax wages or a significant decline in
the ratio. Neither prospect is appealing, but there is no avoiding the choice.
         In addition to the rapidly changing age structure of the population,
the trend to earlier retirement combined with increased life expectancy    has

increased   the average length of retirement considerably. In   1948 one-half

of   all males over the age of 65 were in the labor force; today that figure

is only one in five. The average life expectancy of the elderly has increased

over two. years since 1960. Thus, the length of the average retirement period
                                       -5-




has increased by about one-third over the last three decades. This has

greatly strained the financial resources of the elderly; to achieve any

given level of annual consumption, a retiree now needs substantially

greater savings, intrafamily transfers, or public support.

         What does all this imply for the long-run financial outlook for

Social Security? Even the massive tax increases of the 1977 Amendments

will prove insufficient to finance the program through the first half of

the next century. If the current law is maintained until 2025, payroll

tax rates would have to increase by more than 8 percentage points to

meet benefit payments.1 This would imply combined employer and employee

tax rates of about 23 percent of payroll! Given the huge outcry against

the large (but much smaller) increases legislated in 1977, it     is clear
that the time has come to reexamine the future course of Social Security.
The alternative is continued unpopular tax increases which add to costs
and prices, reduce net wage rates, redirect the system further from an

earned   entitlements or annuity basis and continually erode public support
of the   Social Security System.

         While   several short-run "quick fixes" have been proposed, such as
bringing   into the system those, such as government employees, not currently

included, or eliminating the ceiling on taxable earnings, these cannot pro-

duce a reduction in the long-term deficit unless they are accomplished in

a manner which is actuarily disadvantageous to the groups concerned.2 For

example, bringing government employees under Social Security would increase

current tax revenues, but add to future obligations. This could only reduce

the   deficit if government employees were given a "bad" deal. But we could
then expect them to resist such a proposal en masse.
                                    -6—




3.      The Transfer and Annuity Components of Social Security

        In order to appreciate the relation between the annuity and the

intergenerational transfer components of Social Security, let us begin

by examining the most extreme case: the first cohort of retirees under

the U.S. Social Security System. Consider an individual who was age 62

in 1937 and retired in 1940 at age 65.

        For a worker making average earnings and investing the sum of

employer and employee contributions at interest rates then prevailing,

the accumulated retirement principal in 1940 would have been only $68.36,

yielding an annuity of $6.59 per year. Clearly, benefits far in excess

of contributions would be required if any substantial benefits were to

be paid.

        The actual average annual benefit paid in 1940 to a male age 65

was $270.60. Since an annuity would have yielded only $6.59, $264.01

of the benefits were a pure transfer, or welfare payment.3 Since the

benefits may and, in fact, did change over the retirement period, it

is more convenient to compare capitalized savings and benefits over

the expected time span than to compare annuity payments and annual

benefits. For the individual in question, the present value of life-

time benefits was $2,962.09, of which $2,893.73 was a transfer. Thus,

this individual paid for only 2.3% of the benefits received. This per-

centage has been increasing for individuals over time. Those retiring

at age 65 in 1970 paid for approximately 32 percent cf the benefits

received.

        Different individuals receive vastly different dealsu in the sense-

of   the ratio of benefits received to taxes paid plus interest. This occurs
                                      —7—




for   a number of reasons including the progressive benefit formula,    the mini-
mum    benefit, the spouse's benefit, the different periods of coverage, etc.



4.       Separating the Transfer and Insurance Components

         Many problems in the Social Security System relate to the conflict

between its twin goals of earned benefits and income adequacy. Most critics

of the program propose reforming it in the direction of one goal or the

other.    Separating the transfer and annuity goals would have different
effects on individuals depending on their age, income,      industry, etc.

         The three sets of problems plaguing Social Security--the long-term

funding deficit, the apparent inequities, and the adverse incentives--

have   generated much interest in a set of reforms. One of these is the
separation of the transfer and annuity goals of the program. In principle,
it may be desirable to separate the financing of these different goals of
the system.
         Separating the transfer and annuity functions of the Social Security
System and funding them, respectively, out of general revenues and earmarked
payroll taxes has been recommended for a number    of reasons.

          First, the current system is so complex as to obscure the relation

between   contributions and benefits and impede a rationalization by firms
and employees of total retirement support, private pension plus Social
Security.
          Second, as we shall demonstrate presently, many groups in the popula-

tion are getting a "bad's deal from Social Security compared to an actuarily

fair system. Separating the transfer and annuity goals would provide the

same    rate of return for all workers under Social Security's annuity program.
                                             -8-


The inequities which undermine support of the System, would be eliminated

in this part of the program.

         Third, transfers to the elderly poor (beyond SSI) could be financed

from general revenues. Many object to financing an income guarantee for

the aged poor from a tax which bears so heavily on the working poor. The

current income tax exemptions, deductions, and low-income allowance, which

together exempt the first several thousand dollars of earnings from tax,

indicate the general belief that those at the very bottom of the income

scale should not have to help finance general income support programs.

         The same argument applies to any intergenerational transfers pro-

viding earnings—related benefits beyond those provided by pure insurance

and the minimum income guarantee. Many object to a system in which current

unskilled workers surrender income (beyond their own insurance) to subsidize

retired professionals beyond actuarially fair returns.

         In separating the insurance from the transfer goals, general revenue

financing would also require the transfer goals to compete openly with other

government priorities, including tax cuts. General revenue financing would

permit policymakers and the public openly to determine the value of transfers

to   the elderly in    relation to other social priorities and to promote cost-

effective   measures for     doing   so.    It   will   permit differential needs assess-
ment to deal with different circumstances (marital status, etc.) in the
context of a transfer program, where many precedents for doing so already

exist.
                                     -9-




5.       Towards a Solution

        As we begin to grapple with the immense problems of the Social

Security System, from the apparent inequities and inefficiencies, to the

long-term deficit, serious consideration should be given to two major

reforms: separating the dual functions of Social Security and to financ-

ing them separately; and to raising average retirement ages. Separating

the transfer component of the system and funding it out of general revenues

would encourage more cost effective transfers and enable us to strengthen

the earned entitlements functions which, in turn, would eliminate many

inequities   and help restore public confidence in the financial integrity
of the system. Raising retirement ages would relieve much of the financial
pressure on Social Security and make much sense in view of other labor force
and demographic changes.

         In this paper, we have analyzed a series of long—run policy alterna-

tives   along these lines and have calculated the projected costs and benefits
of each for workers of different ages. The age cohorts, cohorts 1 through 5,
are ages 25-34, 35-44, 45-54,   55-64 and 65+, respectively. Cohort X is
less than 25 years. We have also calculated the implications of these
alternatives with regard to the Social Security surplus or deficit to the

year 2050. Basically, for each alternative, we ask the following: for

each age cohort, what is the ratio of the present value of benefits it

can expect to receive at age 65 to the accumulated value of lifetime

contributions to Social Security? What is the result in terms of the

present value of the deficit of the Social Security System retirement

through 2050?
                                   -l 0-




       We have investigated these questions in terms of the following

alternative plans:

       1. The "Base Case" analyzes the Social Security System as it
                           4
           stands today.

       2. The "Trans" alternative reduces benefits to eliminate transfers

           for cohorts 2-5.

       3. The "Trans 80" alternative eliminates transfers and adjusts

           taxes in 1980 to close the future deficit as of 1980. (Taxes

           were actually lowered by 1.5% of income.)

       4. The "Tax 80" alternative raises taxes        1.7% of income in

           1980 to close the future deficit as of that year.

       5. The "Tax 2030" alternative raises taxes by 3.9% of income in

           2030 to close the future deficit as of that year.

       6. The "Ret" alternative increases retirement ages so as to add

           an average of three years to working lives.

       Thus, these alternatives allow us to determine the effects of decreas-

ing benefits by elminating transfers, increasing taxes and increasing the

retirement age.

       In order to understand the basis of these calculations, it is important

to consider the data on which they are based, the method of analysis used and

the assumptions upon which they rely.


Data

       The data used in the calculations are the 1975 Social Security Exact

Match File that merges individual records from the 1975 Current Population

Survey with OASI earnings and benefit records. With these data, the pattern
                                        —11—



of actual OAI benefits, as well as lifetime contributions into the system

by all individuals can be found. These data permit redistribution across

cohorts to be separated from the annuity aspects and enable us to estimate

values for individual households. Since the data used include only a sample

of 5000 individuals in each cohort, sample weights and population statistics

are used to generalize the sample results to the entire population. The

weights are present on the file.

        The data actually used in the analysis from the Social Security

Longitudinal earnings tape include the sum of covered earnings from 1937-

1950, covered earnings from 1951   to   1975,   estimated quarters of coverage
from   1937-1950 and actual quarters of coverage from 1951—1975.
        From the 1975 CPS the following data were used: region, farm
residence, age, sex, race, marital status, class of worker, occupation,
industry, weeks worked in 1972 as a civilian, industry of longest civilian

job in 1972, years of school completed, and wage and salary amount.


Method of Analysis

        For cohorts 1-5 we determine the relationship between the summation

of aggregate contributions and the expected aggregate benefits of all indi-

viduals currently in the Social Security System, assuming in all cases but

"Ret" that the retirement age is 65 for husbands and singles and that wives

retire with their husbands.5 For an individual, the value of total contri-

butions into the System at the point of retirement is the summation of

actual and expected OM taxes paid both by himself and by his employer

compounded by a real rate of interest (3% in the base case). These cal-

culations use actual and forecasted income, historical and forecasted maxi-

mum taxable income limits and historical and forecasted tax rates.
                                      -12-



         The expected value of OAI benefits over the worker's remaining life

is calculated considering the probability of survival and the wage index

from Social Security Bulletin, Annual Statistical Supplement, 1975.6 Wives

receive benefits based on their own or their husbands benefits, whichever

is larger. The entire analysis is converted to 1977 dollars.7

         In order to determine the expected contributions for individuals who

have not yet reached the age of 65, we applied the contribution rates specified

in the 1977 Amendmends to the Social Security Act to known earnings and pre-

dicted   future earnings for each individual. Earnings were predicted separately
for males and females using an estimating equation based on positive 1972
earnings of all individuals in the sample. The predictions, determined
from   the estimated coefficients of the independent variables in the equation
and the characteristics of the individuals, were indexed over time using 7%
for inflationary earnings increases and the assumption of a   1.5%   per year
earnings increase due to productivity for the "Base Case."8 Female income
is adjusted for labor force participation.9

         More formally, we "age" our survey data so that we know both the past

work history and the projected future work history and retirement benefits

for the sample population. Having done this we calculate the present value

of   each household's total contribution at retirement. These are calculated
as



                                  =
                              C

where    R is a given retirement age, and r is the interest rate "credited"

to a Social Security "account" under our pension plan analogue. In fact,
                                           -13—




all projected contributions and benefits are calculated so that they are

the anticipated dollar amount times the probability of the individual sur-

viving to that time.

           We   calculate the expected retirement benefits at age of retire-
ment as:



                              B   =
                                      Re(t
where N is 100, beyond which the survival probability is taken to be zero.

           Given that survival probabilities are already embedded in     Bt and
C; an actuarially fair system would be one where C =
                                                               B.   We define the

expected present value of any transfer received by the participant as:

T =    R
           -
                C.
          The same type of analysis is performed for cohort X, which involves

making several assumptions regarding the future.°

          After performing the analysis of taxes and benefits by cohort for

various    scenarios, we sum the results in order to determine the budget
surplus    or deficit that results from each scenario.



6.      An Overall Comparison of Alternative Social Security Situations

          Let us begin by examining some general measures of the overall situa-

tion for the OASI system under under alternative scenarios.         In particular,

we consider aggregate taxes, benefits, and deficit under alternative Social

Security situations and, correspondingly, the total transfers and transfers

as   a percentage of income for       alternative Social Security situations. The

situations      to be discussed include the base case, i.e. current law, including
                                    -14-


currently   legislated but not yet implemented tax increases; the base case

with a slightly lower rate of productivity growth; two situations in which

the transfer component is eliminated and dealt with separately under general

revenues: Trans 80 and Trans; and Ret which increases the retirement age by

three   years. Table 1 presents estimates of the aggregate taxes, benefits,
and resulting present value of the long—term deficit under these alternative
scenarios. Recall that we are making very conservative assumptions with
respect to the projected long-term deficit in considering the base case
in order to try to maintain comparability, roughly speaking, with the

assumptions made by the trustees of the Social Security System.

         The base case is estimated assuming an annual rate of productivity

growth of l.5' per year, an annual inflation rate of 7% per year, and the

total taxes and benefit are discounted at a real rate of 3% with all figures

being presented in 1977 dollars. Thus for the base case, we note the total

taxes amount to approximately $3.3 trillion   whereas total benefits amount
to about $4 trillion. Again, recall that these figures are adjusted for
inflation and discounted to 1977. With these assumptions, the estimated

long-term   deficit amounts to $632 billion. Recall that this does not include
the hospital and disability insurance   programs, in   which case taxes, benefits and
the deficit would all be substantially larger. This enormous deficit occurs
primarily because of the changing age structure of the population noted above.

When the baby boom generation starts to retire, we face the awkward prospect

of an extremely large and rapid increase in the ratio of retirees to workers

in our society. Even if the actuarial assumptions of the Social Security

trustees are accurate--and we believe they are optimistic--we will have to

raise Social Security taxes or lower Social Security benefits, or raise
                                      —15-



                                    Table 1
                                                                          a
        Aggregate Taxes, Benefits and Deficit under Alternative Reforms


                Case                 Total Taxes    Total Benefits    Deficit
Base                                   3336.9           3968.8            632.0

Base with productivity = 1.0%          2839.6           3570.5            731.0

Trans '80                              2798.6           2656.5        —142.1

Trans                                  3336.9           2656.5        -680.3
Ret                                    3500.9           3345.6        -155.3



         aAll figures in billions of discounted 1977 dollars.
                                         -16-




other tax revenues, or some combination of these options, by an enormous

amount in the years ahead. This combination would have to amount to $632

billion today: if we waited for the baby boom generation to retire the

tax increase necessary will be between $24 and $3 trillion in the year 2030.

       The estimated taxes, benefits and deficit for the base case are very

sensitive to the assumptions incorporated in making projections over the

long term. Because of the importance of compounding even small differences

in growth rates, even so small a difference as one-half of 1% in the rate

of productivity growth increases the long term deficit--holding other assump-

tions constant--by almost $100 billion in present value terms. Table 1

demonstrates that when the productivity growth assumption is lowered from

14' to 1% per annum, the base case results in a decreased tax revenue,

again in present value discounted dollars of almost $500 billion to $2.8

trillion, and a reduction in total benefits by about $400 billion from

slightly under $4     trillion   to slightly under $3.6 trillion. The recent

behavior    of productivity does not give us much cause for optimism for
restoring   a rapid   rate of economic growth in our economy, and does not
augur well for the long-term deficit of Social Security.
       Another assumption which is extremely important in the calculation

of taxes, benefits and the deficit concerns the length of retirement. As

noted above, forecasts of life expectancies made earlier drastically under-

estimated the rapid increase in the life expectancy of the elderly since

1960. In the last two decades, the life expectancy of the elderly increased

about 3 years for women; 14 years for men. Simultaneously, there has been

a rapid acceleration of earlier retirement. In 1948, one-half of males over

age 65 were in the labor force: today that figure is only one-fifth. If
                                     —17—




either life expectancy increases still further or the trend to earlier

retirement continues, the long-term deficit in Social Security will

increase drastically. As a rough approximation, increasing the length

of retirement, and eligibility for Social Security benefits, by an extra

year would add about $250 billion to the long—term deficit. Because the

population has increased the length of its retirement period so much (by

increased life expectancy and earlier retirement) and because we have an

ever-growing fraction of the population which has entered the labor force

later, shifted out of physically demanding an.d dangerous jobs, etc., one

major avenue of reform of Social Security would be to raise the age at

which people could collect Social Security benefits. We simulated one

such scenario: raising the retirement age from 65 to 68, or more precisely,

adding an average of three years to worklives. Going back to the other

assumptions of the base case for productivity growth, inflation, etc.,

we note that such a move would result in a very modest increase in taxes

from the additional years of work of about $170 billion, but would result

in a $620 billion benefit decrease. Note that this would be accomplished

without decreasing the annual benefit received by any worker once retired.

The reduction in total benefits in discounted 1977 dollars comes about

solely   because people will be collecting benefits for a shorter period
because of their later retirement. This changes enough to more than off-
set   the impending enormous Social Security deficit and the impending

enormous tax increases above and beyond those already voted. Indeed,

such a program in conjunction with the other assumptions noted above

would leave Social Security with a surplus of over $150 billion. An

alternative scenario, gradually raising the retirement age less rapidly
                                    - 18   -




and not quite as high, cDuld still put the Social Security System into a

long-term balance. This scenario highlights the extreme importance of the

length of the retirement period for the total benefits paid out and the

long-term deficit of the System.

       The long-term benefit payouts and tax collections, especially the former,

are also extremely sensitive to the presence of the enormous percentage of

transfer payments involved in Social Security benefits, especially for older,

current workers and retirees. Leaving aside curret retirees, two other

scenarios were simulated in which the positive transfer payments currently

accruing to people who have not yet retired were simulated: Trans and Trans

80. The Trans alternative removes the transfer component of benefits completely.

They are assumed to be shifted to general revenues in a manner to be decided

on the merits o the case once a genuine earned entitlement system is set up.

We must note, however, that when they are shifted to general revenues and the

transfer payment system for elderly is set up out of general revenues, this

may obviously involve either increases in general revenue taxes or decreases

in projected other government expenditures as well as the sharp reduction in

payroll taxes and projected future payroll tax increases we are about to describe.

Also, part of the reduced payroll tax revenue (about 20) would be recouped

automatically by increased taxes once the employer component of Social Security

used to finance these transfers was no longer deductible from taxable income

for other taxes. Under Trans, taxes will not go down at all, but total benefits

will go down   about one-third, from slightly under $4   trillion to about $2.7

trillion. This totally reverses the deficit picture from a two-thirds of a

trillion dollar deficit to a two-thirds of a trillion dollar surplus dis-

counted to 1977. The two-thirds of a trillion dollar surplus obviously
                                   —19-




could result in further reductions in Social Security taxes from present

levies, let alone totally eliminating the need for future tax increases.

It could also be used to finance transfer payments if we shifted total

transfers into general revenue.

      The Trans 80 alternative substantially reduces taxes as well as

total benefits. Indeed, the total benefits would be treated exactly as

under Trans. The difference is that tax revenues would be reduced some-

what from 1980 on, leaving Social Security itself with a very modest surplus

of $140 billion and the substantial reduction in taxes from current levels.

The tax reduction would be on the order of 1.5% of income from now on. That

is, not only would we obviate the need for the already planned future tax

increases legislated in the 1977 Amendment, and the projected enormous tax

increases necessary to deal with the long-term deficit, but we would also

enable Social Security to reduce current taxes by 1.5%. Again, transfers

would be shifted to general revenues and the exact amount and nature of

those transfers should be worked out in accord with general principles of

transfer payments under general revenue finance.

      This overall version of the total situation with respect to taxes,

benefits, and the long-term deficit highlights not only the current extreme

long-term deficit of the Social Security System as presently constituted,

and the enormous tax increases above and beyond the 1977 legislated tax

increases impending in view of the long-term deficit, but also theoppor-

tunities and possiblities for deriving a solution by rationalizing the

benefit payments along the lines of separating the benefits paid to achieve

th twin goals of Social Security: earned entitlement and income adequacy

during retirement. It also highlights the extreme sensitivity of the
                                      -20-


long-term    deficit and benefit payments and tax receipts to such things as

slower productivity growth and changes in the length of the retirement

period.     We might conclude this brief section by noting that the long-term
future of Social Security is not something to be left to the long term to
deal with. Every year we postpone dealing with the problem gives us one
less   year to generate a smooth transition to a more rational and cost

effective system of providing adequate income support for our elderly

population.

          To analyze the transfer component involved in Social Security at the

aggregate level in a little more    detail, we present in   Table 2 estimates of

the total transfers and transfers as a percentage of total national income,

under the same scenarios discussed above in conjunction with Table 1. We

estimate here the total transfers to cohorts 2-5, leaving aside the issue

of the transfers already being paid to retired workers. These will be

discussed below under the disaggregated results. Obviously, most of the

benefits being received by currently retired workers are in the nature of

transfer payments. For the base case, under the standard, if optimistic,

assumptions, total transfers to cohorts 2—5 would be almost $2 trillion and

amount to slightly under 5% of   total national income! Placed in perspective,
this is   only slightly less than the share of income being devoted to defense

expenditures. Under the standard assumptions of the base case with our

slightly lower rate of productivity growth, transfers decline slightly

to $134 trillion but increase the percentage of the now smaller income

(due to the lower productivity growth) to slightly over 5%. Obviously,

under the Trans alternative total transfers have been eliminated completely

and hence are zero in both the total and as a percentage of income; the
                                  -21-



                                Table 2

 Total Transfers and Transfers as Percent of Income, Various Reforms



                              Total Transfers to     Transfers as % of
Case                             Cohorts 2_5a         National Income

Base                             1,818.8                  4.7%

Base with productivity = 1%      1,746.3                  5.3

Trans '80                           72.3                  0.2

Trans                                0                     0

Ret                              1,542.0                  3.8




        aAll fioures in billions of discounted 1977 dollars.
                                   -22-




Trans 80 alternative allows transfers to be paid for several additional

years before taxes are adjusted (remember we start from a base year of

1977, since that is when our data ends), and transfers would be virtually

abolished in this case. Finally, we note that the increase in the retire-

ment age would substantially reduce transfer payments by about $275 billion

to cohorts 2-5, and reduce transfers as a percentage of national income by

approximately 1 percentage point. These enormous amounts for total trans-

fers to cohorts 2-5 reveal that fundamental changes in Social Security

towards separating the transfer and annuity goals of the program would involve

major changes in the necessary taxes under Social Security:




7.    Detailed Results for the Base Case

      In order to present disaggregated figures concerning the benefits,

taxes, and transfers received by the average family of different age and

income, we will focus for the next few pages on the base case assumptions.

Recall from the discussion above, however, that these assumptions may be

somewhat optimistic and that slower productivity growth or increased

retirement periods would add substantially to the taxes necessary to

finance 'promised" benefits. The base case simply ignores the long—

term deficit and assumes that current workers will not be forced to pay

any tax increases above and beyond those already legislated despite the

enormous long-term deficit. Were part of the solution to the long-term

deficit to gradually raise taxes above and beyond those increases already

legislated, as discussed in the next section, the break given to current
                                    -23-




workers would be substantially worse than under the base case; indeed,

younger workers would lose substantially with respect to Social Security.

Under the base case, assuming that taxes would not be raised until the

baby boom generation retires or later, almost all current workers come

out fairly well in terms of their average net benefits above and beyond

taxes paid plus interest, but there is an enormous bad deal for workers

under the age of 25 who will ultimately be forced to finance such benefits.
                                                                         -


       Table 3 analyzes the base case for six different age cohorts:

current   retirees (for simplicity persons over 65); for ten-year age

intervals (25-34; 35-44; 45-54; 55-64) and cohort X, persons under the

age of 25. The situation of a family in these ages is discussed in terms

of a variety of estimates: the average tax paid per family in each age

cohort; the averaqe benefit received per family in each age cohort (the

difference between the benefits and taxes); the average net benefit as

a percentage of the taxes the family paid. Also included are discussions

of the total taxes paid by the cohort and the total benefits paid to the

cohort when they ultimately retire under current estimates, as well as

the transfers as a percentage of total benefits received by the cohorts

when they ultimately retire.

       There are a variety of important points illustrated by the base

case. First, the average tax per family, adjusted for inflation and

discounted to 1977, will increase -markedly as time goes by and hence

is much higher for younger workers than older workers or current retirees.

This occurs for a number of reasons: some of the retirees will not have

paid taxes through their entire life; the tax rates actually paid and

taxable ceiling used for each year have been growing through time and,
                                     -24-




                                   Table 3

                                Base Case


                       65 +     64 - 55      54 - 45   44 -   35   34 -   25     <25

Average Tax                                                        73,843
                        7,058   18,345       33,883    53,326
per Family

Average Benefit        49400    47,639       56,600    66,321      73,577
per Family

Average Net Benefit                                                  -267
                                                                               1 a rge,
                       42,343   29,294       22,718    12,994                  neaative
per Family

Averace Net Benefit                            67.0      24.4        —.36
                       600.0       160.0
as % Tax per Family

Total Taxes Paid                     235        349       389         540      552+
                         172
by Cohort (billions)

Total Benefits Paid                                       483         503
                       1,282         629        570
to Cohort (billions)

Transfers as   of       86.6        62.7       38.8      19.4        739       large,
Total Benefits                                                                 negative



Assumes: 7 inflation
         1.5% productivity growth
         3% discount

N.B. for eligible survivors only
                                  -25-



hence, the annual taxes paid have been growing through time and will continue

under current law. The average tax paid in 1977 dollars adjusted for infla-

tion will be 10 times as high for 25-34 year olds as for people currently

retired.

       Benefit payments increase much less rapidly through time and, hence,

as we get to younger ages. Current retirees and persons soon to retire will

receive benefits based not so much on what they paid in taxes, but upon an

estimate of what the current tax revenue will support. Since the current

tax revenues are levied at a higher rate and on a larger income base than

were taxes collected from the current retirees and soon to be retired, their

benefits are obviously much higher than the taxes paid plus interest. There-

fore, 25-34 year olds will receive only about one-half again as much in the

real 1977 value of benefits once they retire as current 55 and over benefici-

aries. Again, recall the base case ignores the possible changes in life

expectancies, or retirement patterns, as discussed above. Differencing the

benefits and taxes reveals the enormous net benefits, or transfers, received

by the current retirees and those who retire in the near future. The average

current retiree receives about $42,000 as a net transfer from the Social

Security System by the taxes paid by current workers. This amounts to six

times what these people, on average, paid plus interest. An average family

in the next cohort, 55-64 year olds, will receive back 1.6 times what they

paid in plus interest as a transfer payment, a total of slightly over

$30,000. The average net benefit, or transfer, declines as we

get to progressively younger ages both in absolute amount and still more

rapidly as a percentage of tax paid per family, since the latter will rise

rapidly. By the time we get to younger workers 25-34 they are actually
                                      —26-



losing in terms of the taxes paid plus interest being less than the average

benefits they can expect to receive. Those persons under the age of 25 will

suffer an enormous loss under the current calculation. Because of the untenable

state of the long-run deficit, the current calculation is unrealistic for

this young cohort, and we merely list their loss as large and negative.

The total taxes paid and benefits received by each cohort

follow the obvious pattern: taxes rising substantially as we pass through

time. Again these tax amounts do not include any increases that must be

voted if we are to close the long-run deficit by increasing taxes rather

than decreasing benefits or by one of the structural reforms suggested in

the alternatives discussed below. Transfers as a percentage of total

benefits fo11o: a pattern similar to those for the averaae family.      The over-

whelming    bulk of benefits are transfers for current retirees; for the next
cohort about 60% will be transfers; for the 45-54 age cohort slightly under
40%; the transfers   will eventually vanish and become negative as we reach

the younger cohorts. Obviously, for ages under 25 there will be a large

negative transfer. Also, the transfers as a percentage of total benefits

will decrease   for all age cohorts not currently retired if   we start to raise

taxes now in anticipation of closing the deficit. The time pattern of such

tax increases will be reflected in differential rates of reduction of the

transfers   as a percentage of total benefits for the different age groups.
In   the extreme, if we wait until the baby boom generation retires,        -




the transfers as a percentage of total benefits will be an astoundingly larae
negative number for those currently under the age of 25.
                                     -27-


       Table 4 takes a deeper look at the net transfers received by indivi-
duals from Social Security in the different cohorts. We examine the net
benefits received and the percentage break (the net benefits divided by
the total benefits) for four different income classes. For each cohort,
we note looking across the row of percentage break that the percentage

break declines rapidly as income increases. For example, for the cohort

25-34 years old the percentage break goes from slightly over 8% for family

income under $6,000 to minus 2.5% for families with incomes above $10,800.

The same is true for each cohort. Again, for cohort 5, the current retirees,

the percent break declines from 87.6% to 75.3% as we move up the income

scale. This particular feature of the relationship between the percentage

break and income reflects primarily the progressivity of the benefit pay-

ment formula which is tilted heavily towards replacing a     larger   fraction

of pre-retirement income for low income workers than for higher income

workers. Of course, the total net benefits may be slightly larger for

some cohorts for higher income people reflecting the interaction of the

larger intergenerational transfer and the larger tax payment which higher

income individuals rake.

       Finally, in examining the base case we take a look at one other

type of transfer as a percentage of benefits paid: disaggregating by

industry of employment. The transfers as a percentage of benefits paid

vary substantially across industries for a number of reasons: the different

average income earned by workers of different industries; slightly different

tax treatment in   effective payroll tax rates because of   differential pro-

portions of workers above and below the taxable ceiling, etc. It is

important to note that once again we observe the substantial net transfer
                                                         -28-



                                                       Table 4

                                    Net Transfers by Income Class


                                           Income ClassC,

                                           <   6000         6000-8000    8000-10,800   10,800+
                            -
            Net   Benefits a                   5,972             3,505    2 ,267       -1,923
Cohort      id:
                        b
            ,   Break                           8.1               4.9       3.1         -2.5

                            •   b
            Net Benefits                   15,700               15,586   13,185        11,054
Cohort 2:
            % Break                            26.7              23.4     20.4          16.3

            Net Benefits                   24,519               25,645   24,170        20,733
Cohort 3:
            % Break                            50.1              46.7     44.5          35.1


            Net Benefits                   30,446               30,224   29,432        30,292
Cohort 4:
            % Break                            69.2              64.3     61 .3         57.8


            Net   Benefits                 39,376               36,587   39,671        42 ,476
Cohort 5:
            % Break                            87.6              80.0     81.0          75.3



N.B. Base case with inflation = 7%; productivity = 1.5%; discount rate
= 3  net of inflation.

      aNet benefits = Benefits for average family in income class where both
       survive to retirement, in 1977 dollars, discounted to year of retirement,
       less taxes paid computed analogously.

                                       .
      b0/
            Break = Net benefits ÷ benefits paid.
      cm 1977 dollars, for head of household only.

                   1 = 25-34;... .Cohort 5 = 65+
                                     -29-



                                   Table 5

Transfers as Percent of Benefits Paid for Selected Industries by Cohorta


Industry                                          Cohort

                              1              2       3       4      5


Agriculture                 -1.1        14.9      40.9     57.7   80.0

Mining                     —42.1       -10.1        5.1    39.5    N.A.

Construction               -37.9       -18.5      11.3     43.8   70.2

Manufacturing              -27.3        -6.3      17.3     46.8   64.5

Transportation!
Communication              -24.1       —16.4      24.4     48.5   69.0

Wholesale                  -31.7        —4.2      17.6     38.1   69.4

Retail                      -9.2        14.7      41.4     58.4   82.5

Service                      3.8        21.4      41.5     62.8   83.5

Bari:ing Insurance
Real Estate                -19.4            9.3   28.7     51.3   79.3



aEstimate. for average individual in each industry.
                                       -30-




to current retirees, and expected net transfers to the oldest cohorts of

workers, which will turn negative for the youngest cohorts of workers.

These negative transfers occur even without considering the large tax

increases necessary to finance the impending long-run deficit.

          With these insights into the current Social Security situation in

mind, we turn to a brief discussion of the alternative scenarios discussed

above.




9.        Disaggregated Estimates for Alternative Reform Possibilities

          We have calculated, for a series of potential benefit and tax reforms,

disaggregated estimates of average taxes paid per family, average benefits

received per family, the averaae net benefits per family, the average net

benefits as a percentage of taxes per family, the total taxes paid by and

benefits to each cohort, and the transfers as a percentage of total benefits

for each cohort.

          The first alternative considered (in Table 6) is that labeled Trans.

Recall that this eliminated all transfers and set up a situation where they

could be treated separately under general revenues if so desired. In this

scenario, we note the familiar pattern of the average taxes paid per family

rising substantially as we move to younger and younger cohorts. We       also
note   the same pattern for average benefits. However, now a different
pattern   emerges for the average   net benefits received per family.   In this
case the average net benefits are virtually zero for all age cohorts. They
differ slightly because we have not constrained the transfer to be zero for
each cohort in each case, but have reduced the aggregate benefit payout each
year to eliminate the transfer. Once again, the total taxes paid by each
                                  -31-




                                Table 6

                                Trans


                                         Cohort Age in 1977

   1977$                65+    64-55       54-45     44-35    34-25

Average Tax                                          53,326   73,843
                       7,058   18,345     33,882
per Family

Average benefit
                       6,629   17,793      34,769    53,461   73,576
per Family

Average Net Benefit                                            —267
                        -429     -552         886     134.9
per Family

Average Net Benefit    -6.07    -3.01        2.62       .25    -   .36
as % Tax per Family

Total Taxes Paid                                              539.6      552
                       172.1    235.0      349.4      389.0
by Cohort (billions)

Total Benefits Paid
                       172.1    235.0       350.4     389.0   502.5
to Cohort (billions)

Transfersas % of         .01     - .01        .29         0   -7.39
Total Benefits
                                       - 32   -


cohort and total benefits received by each cohort increase substantially as
we go to younger and younger cohorts and net to approximately zero in the

aggregate for each cohort.

          Moving from Trans to Trans 80 in Table 7, which you recall involved a

small tax cut as well as eliminating the transfers, yields a very similar pattern

to that discussed above for Trans; indeed, the benefits received by the averaae

family in each cohort are identical to the situation under Trans as are the total

benefits paid out to each cohort. However, now the taxes differ somewhat to

take account of the modest surplus that would result by eliminating all the

transfers. In this case the average taxes per family are somewhat lower for

each cohort, decreasing progressively more in percentage terms as we move to

younger and younger age cohorts. The total taxes paid per cohort follow the

same pattern.

          Table 8 presents the same analysis under the base case assumptions for

the scenario we    label   Ret to indicate retirement aaes are raised by   three   years

on    average. As noted above in    the discussion of the aggregate simulation comparing

scenarios, Ret results in a situation where slightly higher taxes will be paid

by the cohorts because they will be working slightly longer, but the benefits

received   while maintainable   at the same annual level would be paid out over a

somewhat shorter period2 Again, the aogreqate benefit and the average benefits

in    each cohort will decline; we present estimates of benefits discounted to the
original retirement age     and note the decline in absolute and percentage terms.

For   example, the 25-34 year-old cohort loses about $9500 or l3 of benefits.
We note, for example, that the average net benefit per family declines

from $42,000 for   current retirees to virtually zero for people at the age of
about 40 to a larger negative number for people around the age of 30. The
same is   obviously true of average net benefits as a percentage of taxes per
family.    We note, however, that the total benefits received by each cohort

will decline substantially with the later retirement. This decline becomes
                                 -33-



                              Table 7

                              Trans 80


                                         Cohort-Age in 1977

   1977 S             65+     64-55       54-45     44-35     34—25     <25

Average Tax           7045    17,818      31,368    47,729    64,409
per Family

Average Benefit       6629    17,793      34,770    53,461    73,577
per Family

Average Net Benefit
                      -415     -24.6       3,401     5,732     9,168
per Family

Average Net Benefit
                      -5.89     -.14       10.84      12.0     14.23
as % Tax per Family

Total Taxes Paid
                      171.6    228.8       324.6     349.0     470.0   459.7
by Cohort

Total Benefits Paid
                      172.1    234.9       350.4     389.0     502.5
to Cohort

Transfer as % of
                        .25     2.60        7.36     10.28      6.46
Total Benefits
                                   -34-


                                  Table 8
              Ret-Condi tional on Current Life Expectancy


                                            Cohort-Age in 1977

     1977 $               65+      54-55     54_45     44-35      34-25    <25

Average Tax
                         6,459    20,582    36,885    57,328     77,680
per Family
Average Benefit
per Family              L5,208    3,3l9     51,087    59,284     64,079

Average % Reduction
Relative to Base Case     8.5      9.0        9,7      10.6      12.9

Average Net Benefit
per Family              38,750    22.737    14.202    l.F -fl,cfll

Average Net Benefit         600   109.04      38.50      3.41    -17.51
as   Tax per Family

Total Taxes Paid          172.1     236.6     355.7     382.3      508.4   712.9
by Cohort (billions)

Total Benefits Pid       1282.2     525.7     465.4     395.3      396.7
to Cohort (billions)

Transfers as $ of         8658       55.0     27.88      3.29    -28.18
Total Benefits'
                                    —35-



progressively more important as we approach the younger age cohorts and

reflects the importance of doing something about the long term deficit

as soon as possible before enormous implicit obligations, which are cur-

rently unfunded, become cemented in place and we are forced to go to

enormous tax increases to fund them.

       This is vividly documented by comparing Ret with the two tax

scenarios--Tax 80, a small tax increase now (above those already legislated

to take effect in the future) which will totally close the deficit, and

Tax 2030, a large ta.x increase to finance the baby boom generation's retire-

ment at that date. Estimates for the latter two alternatives are contained

in Tables 9 and 10, respectively. Recall these refer to the increases

necessary to cover the OASI deficit only; the DI and HI deficit would add

considerably to the totals. The average tax and average benefit paid and

received per family look rather similar to the Ret case; the average net

benefits differ somewhat. What is most important is the enormous difference

in the total benefits received by each cohort as part of the Social Security

System and the total Social Security taxes paid for each cohort. Under

Trans, Trans 80 or Pet, benefits have been reduced in the Social

Security Sys tern either directly or indirectly, and the total benefits paid

to each cohort are much lower than if the implicit unfunded obligation

involved is paid.       The total benefits paid to younger

cohorts differ enormously under the Tax 80 and Tax 2030 programs, as do

the taxes paid. For example, while the total benefits paid to each cohort

are identical under Tax 80 and Tax 2030, the time pattern and, hence, aare-

gate amount of taxes paid by each age cohort differ enormously. The aggregate

taxes paid by current retirees and by workers aged 55 to 64 are virtually
                                       -36-




                                   Table 9

                                   Tax 80



                                            Cohort-Age in 1977


       1977$              65+        64-55        54-45     44-35     34-25

Average Tax
                          7,074    18,966        36,839     59,907    84,935
per Family

Average Benefit
                         49,400    47,640        56,600     63,321    73,576
per Family

Average Net Benefit
                         42,327    28,674        19,761      6,414   —11,358
per Family

Average Net Benefit                                                   -13.37
                          598.3      151.2        53.64      10.71
as % Tax per Family

Total Taxes Paid
by Cohort
                          172        237         378       440       605


Total Benefits Paid
to Cohorta               1297        61L1        592       485       516

Transfers as   of
Total Benefits             87         61          36         9       -17



a
    These values differ sliQhtlv from the base case because a smaller sample
size was used in this calculation.
                                   -37-




                                 Table 10

                                 Tax 2030



                                       Cohort-Age in 1977

      1977$             65+      64-55        54-45     44-35   34-25

Average Tax
                        7,058    18,346       33,883   53,326   73,843
per Family

Average Benefit
                       49,401    47,640      56,600    66,321   73,576
per Family

Average Net Benefit
                       42,343    29,294      22,717    12,994    -2.67
per Family

Average Net Benefit
as Z Tax per Family
                          600    159.68       67.05     24.37     -   .36


Total Taxes Paid
                          167    230         349       393      526
by Cohort

Total Benefits Paid      1297    611         592       486      516
to Cohorta

Transfers as   of
Total Benefits             R7     63          41        19       -2




a
  These values differ sliahtly from the base case because a smaller sample size
was used in this calculation.
identical under these two scenarios. By the time we get to 35-41 year olds,

Tax 80 has this cohort paying $100 billion more in Social Security taxes

than if we wait until after they retire to raise the tax rates in order to

finance the unfunded deficit. For those age 25-34 the difference amounts

to $270 billion! This highlights the importance in chosing a time frame

for dealing with the long-term funding problems of Social Security. Chos-

ing to do nothing about this implies that we are trying to stick younger

and younger generations with the bill. Will they be willing to finance

future retirement payments at much higher tax rates than now exist?

       In summary, we may note the variety of potential strategies, or

avenues for disentangling the enormous problems that high and rising Social

Security taxes and dual purpose unrationalized benefits create. We can

simply say that we are going to raise taxes by even more than those legis-

lated in the 1977 Amendments by an enormous amount, either currently (Tax 80),

or in the distant future (Tax 2030) and try to shift around the burden of

paying for these increased Social Security benefits which are not currently

funded, or we can try to rationalize the benefit payments by separating out

the transfer and annuity goals of the system, strengthening the earned

entitlement function and having a separate transfer payment program funded

by general revenues at whatever level is deemed socially desirable. Such

alternatives exist under Trans and Trans 80, and are easily combined with

a slight increase in the retirement age as suggested by Ret. These dif-

ferent scenarios suggest that there will not only be an enormous long-run

impact on our overall econony depending upon which of these types of avenues

we pursue, but that different groups in the population will be taxed and

benefited quite differently depending upon which of these alternatives we
                                   -39-




select. It is time for serious discussion of a fundamental refocusing of

Social Security to rationalize the benefit structure and relieve the long-

run burden of much higher payroll taxes implicit in the unfunded deficit.

This paper is the first of our NBER Social Security simulation model pro-

jections. We hope it will stimulate such discussion as well as provide

some quantitative estimates of the taxes, benefits and deficit implied

by alternative potential solutions to the long-run Social Security funding

problems.
                                        -40-




                                     Footnotes



1See A. Robertson, 'Financial State of Social Security Programs after the
 Social Security Amendments of 1977," Social Security Bulletin, March 1978.
 The eight percentage point increase includes that estimated to fund the
 deficits in hospital and disability insurance as well as OASI.

2They might be defensible on other grounds.

3mis example is taken from D. Parsons and D. Munro, "intergenerational
 Transfers in Social Security," The Crisis in Social Security, M. Boskin,
 ed., 1977.


4Sensitivity of the "Base Case" estimates to various assumptions were also
    tested.


5A fraction of each cohort that is in non-covered industries or who have
 insufficient quarters of coverage are considered to be ineligible for
 benefits. Wives who do not qualify on their own or on their husband's
 behalf receive no benefits. The retirement pattern can also be simulated
 by a retirement behavior equation, but these initial estimates are used
 to compare them with typical SSA assumptions.

6The year of death of an individual was predicted using his or her age, race
 and sex. Individuals predi cted to have died before reaching the age of 65
    are excluded from the analysis. Year of death predictions used The U.S. Fact
    Book [1978] for all ages less than 65 and ages 65, 70, and 80. For ages not
    given, year of death was predicted interpolating from the 1969-71 death rates
    in: National Center for Health Statistics, U.S. Decennial Life Tables, Volume 1,
    Nirnber 1, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, May 1975.

1Benefits are increased by 17% for cohort 5 to adjust for widows.

8The actual dependent variable used was the log of earnings. The independent
    variables include dummyvariables for a Southern location, rural location,
    race, married, white collar, service collar, blue collar, industry, self—
    employed.    Additional variable included were weeks worked and level of
    education.

C
    Femaie labor force participation was assumed LO keep the same aoe distru—
    tion as in 1975, but to slowly increase for each age group until 2005. The
    rate increases 12.5 percentage points for each age group by 2005. (This is
    based on assumptions of the 1977 Annual Report of the Trustees of the Social
    Security System.) Again, this is for comparison only. Future estimates
    will incorporate a separate female labor force participation equation.
                                     —41-




11Assumptions:

  (1)   In terms of cohort size, actual population statistics are used for
        individuals born from 1953 to 1977. Estimates of size for 1978 to
        2050 were made assuming that birthrates decline from 1.7 to 1.65 in
        1980 and then slowly increase to 2.1 in 2005.

 (2) Female labor force participation was assumed to keep the same age
      distribution as in 1975 but to slowly increase for each group until
      2005. The rate increases 12.5 percentage points for each group
        until 2005.

 (3) Coverage by the Social Security System is assumed constant at 90%.

 (4) The percentage of women married is assumed constant at 93% based on
      1975 data from the Statistical Abstract.

 (5) Unemployment is assumed constant at 5%.

 (6) The mortality rates for each age group remain constant.

 (7) The couple retires together at age 65.

 A]1 assumptions are based on the assumptions of the 1977 Annual Report of
 Trustees of the Social Security Administration.

 (8) The wage was adjusted to account for the fact that all income used
      in the estimates is below the taxable limit since the wage equation
      and the Social Security Match Tape data are used. The adjustment is
      based on taxable/total ratio in 1977.

   RET-type reform could be phased in gradually, e.g., a moith   per year
 increase in the age of eligibility for benefits for sufficiently long to
 to increase the retirement age to 67 or 68 before the "baby-boom" generation
 retires. This would avoid problems of changing the rules abruptly for those
 soon to retire or just retired.
