                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION UNDER PEGGED
         AND FLOATING EXCHANGE RATES: AN EMPIRICAL
                         COMPARISON


                      Michael R. Darby


                     Working Paper No. 585




              NAT IONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                         December 1980




This paper was presented at the NBER's 1980 Summer Institute
Program in International Studies. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NBER Working Paper #585
                                                                  December, 1980



          International Trnsixiasjqn JJnde Pegged, 4n.d FIö4tir1g
                 Exchange 1ates: An Enirica1 Compatison

                                  ABSTRACT

       This paper continues the investigation of the surprisingly slow and

 weak international transmission of inflation indicated by the Mark III

 International Transmission Model. The Mark IV Simulation Model is presented.

 This is a simplified version of the Mark III Model which retains the trans-

 mission channels found significant in the Mark III and is suitable for simu-

 lation experiments. Separate versions of the Mark IV model describe the

 pegged and (dirty) floating exchange regimes. In order to be consistent

with the stochastic processes governing policy variables in the sample

period, policy experiments involved one percentage point increases in the

disturbances of those processes for a single quarter with the behavior

thereafter governed by the estimated process. U.S. money shocks were im-

mediately mimicked (in accord with the monetary approach) in Germany but

only with a lag (specie—flow mechanism) in the Netherlands. Canada and the

U.K. showed only Keynesian absorption transmission. Weaker transmission

is
     generally found under floating exchange rates with a J—curve important
in   the dynamics. No significant international transmission was found in

experiments involving money shocks in the U.K. and Germany and real govern-

ment spending shocks in the U.S., U.K., and Germany. The money shock experiments

indicated short—run money control in U.K. and Germany, although less under

pegged than floating rates.




                                        Michael R. Darby
                                        Department of Economics
                                        University of California, Los Angeles
                                        Los Angeles, CalIfornia 90024
                                        (213) 825—3343
                                  For J. S. Bhandari and B. H. Putnam, eds.,
                                  The International. Transmission of Economic
                                  Disturbances under Flexible Exchange Rates.
                                  Not for quotation without the author's
                                  permission.
                                 D.2: November 14, 1980




                INTERNATIONAL TRANSMISSION UNDER PEGGED AND
             FLOATING EXCHANGE RATES: AN EMPIRICAL COMPARISON

                             Michael R. Darby*
                   University of California, Los Angeles
                   National Bureau of Economic Research


      The Mark III International Transmission Model was constructed to test

 and measure the importance of alternative channels of international, trans-

 mission including the effects of capital and trade flows on the money sup-

 ply, of export shocks on aggregate demand, of asset substitution on money

 demand, and of variations in the real price of oil.    This quarterly econo-
 metric model was estimated using data for 1957 through 1976 for the United

 States, United Kingdom, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the

 Netherlands. The results, reported in Darby and Stockman (1980), indicated

 surprisingly slow and weak transmission from country to country. The



     *The good counsel of Arthur Gandoj.fi, Dan Lee, James Lothian, and

Michael Melvin made this paper possible, but they are not to be implicated

in the results. Other valuable comments were received from Anthony

Cassesse, Robert P. Flood, Jr., and especially Anna J. Schwartz and

and participants in the U.C.L.A. Money Workshop and the N.B.E.R. Summer

Institute. The calculations were performed by Michael Melvin and
Andrew Vogel on the TROLL System at M.I.T. The author acknowledges the

generous support of the National Science Foundation
                                                       (grants APR78—13072 and
DAR—7922874), the Reim Foundation, the Scaife Family Trusts, and the Alex

C. Walker Foundation. The research
                                     reported here is part of the NBER's re-
search program in International Studies.
                                           Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                               2




 startling implication that substantial sterilization policies were success-

 ful in achieving short—run monetary control under pegged exchange rates was

confirmed by simple reduced—form tests in Darby (1980b). This paper con-

tinues the investigation of these findings by presenting the results of ex-

periments with a simulation version of the Mark III International Transmis-

sion Model.

     The results here generally support the earlier findings of weak trans-

mission. The only exception is Germany for which a U.S. monetary shock is

rapidly mimicked under pegged exchange rates. But since a domestic Germany

money supply shock also affects German real income and prices, the Germans

may have been acquiescent rather than impotent to resist U.S. monetary policy.

Predictions of the monetary approach to floating exchange rates are not borne

out in the simulations either: Although the results here are sensitive to

specification, a J-curve phenomenon appears to be operative. Although

monetary shocks in nonreserve countries have sensible domestic effects,

international transmission is trivial. Similarly the domestic effects of

real government spending shocks are too small to have an appreciable foreign

impact in any case examined. These results force us to question the

standard assumptions which imply strong channels for International transmission

since those channels are not obvious in the data.

     The Mark IV model is outlined In Section I.    Section II discusses the
simulation results for the United States money shock experiments. The

third section illustrates the results of
                                           nonreserve—country_money_shock
experiments and of real—governmen_soc experiments.
                                                        The final section

presents Conclusions and suggestions for future research.
                                                                                     3




                            I. The Simulation Model


       The Mark III model was designed to test a number of popular hypotheses

 about the transmission of inflation while
                                                  allowing for a variety of lag
 patterns across countries. Unfortunately the large number of insignificant

 coefficients and collinear endogenous variables makes the model unusable

 for simulation purposes. A special simulation version of the model (the

 Mark IV) has been created by dropping
                                       insignificant variables and combining
 terms' except where variables are left in to permit
                                                     transmission or for
 strong a—priori reasons (such as the interest—rate terms in the money—

 demand or price—level equation). The
                                              resulting model thus Includes the sig-
 nificant relationships of the Mark III model but is sufficiently simplified

 for the reasonable calculation of
                                       simulation results. Given the way in
which the model was derived, classical
                                              statistical statements cannot be
made with respect to the Mark IV.       Its   purpose instead is to illustrate the
implications of the relationships found
                                               significant in the Mark III model.
     The Mark IV   model exists in    two versions. The pegged—exchange_rate
version   (Mark IV—PEG) combines the reserve—country (U.S.) submode]. with the
pegged—rate   submodej.s for the   seven nonreserve countries. Floating—rate

nonreserve submodej.s are used instead of the
                                                    floating—exchange rate version
(Mark IV—FLT). A detailed presentation of the basic structure is available

in the description of the Mark III model.2
                                                   An Appendix to this paper lists
the actual computer model together with the estimated coefficients. The

remainder of this section summarIzes the model.

     The Mark III model was formulated to test and measure the empirical

Importance of alternative channels of international
                                                          transmission including
the effects of capital and trade flows
                                           on the money supply, of export shocks
                                                                                  4




 on aggregate demand, of asset substitution on money demand, and of variations

 in the real price of oil. The Mark IV model incorporates these channels to

 the extent that they were supported by the data.

        The reserve—country submodel of the Mark IV consists of 9 behavioral

 equations and 13 identities.3 The behavioral equations determine a

 skeletal macroeconometric model (real income, price level, unemployment

 rate, nominal money, and interest rate) together with a bit more detailed

 international sector (exports, imports, import prices, and capital flows).
 The   pegged—exchange—rate nonreserve submodels are basically the same   as
 the   reserve   submodel with the important exception that the balance of pay-

ments enters the nonreserve (but not the reserve) countries'
                                                                  money—supply
reaction functions.4 The floating nonreserve submodels differ only in their

international sectors: To make the seven
                                              domestic—currency_per...dollar exchange
rates endogenous an exchange—intervention reaction function is added to

determine the balance of payments previously determined
                                                            by an identity.
The sector is then renorinalized to solve for the exchange rate.5

        Let us first examine the skeletal macroeconometric model included in

each of the submodels. Real income and the (nominal) interest rate are deter-

mined by shocks (innovations) in the money supply, real government spending,

and real exports, and for the interest rate
                                              equation only, the expected inflation
rate.6 Thus real income and the real interest rate are affected by

the factors which unexpectedly shift aggregate demand relative to aggregate

supply. The price—level equations simply equate short—run money demand to

money   supply.7 Nominal   money Supply is determined by a reaction function

in response to lagged inflation and unemployment rates, to current and

lagged government spending shocks, and for nonreserve countries to current

and lagged balances of payments. The unemployment rate is determined by a
                                                                                   5




 dynamic version of Okun's law for the United States, United
                                                                Kingdom, and
 France. Changes in measured unemployment and real income were uncorrelated

 for the other countries; so for them the unemployment equation is deleted

 and logarithmic transitory income used instead in the money—supply reac-

 tion function.

      The   included channels by which international shocks can be   transmitted
 to these basic macroeconomic variables are three in number: (1) For the

 nonreserve countries, the current and lagged balances of payments affect

 the nominal money supply. The estimates indicated very substantial if not

 total sterilization of the current balance of payments in every case, how-

 ever. This is consistent with the central banks'
                                                     pursuing money—growth or
interest—rate goals set in response, among other things, to past data on the

balance of payments. (2) Export shocks affect both real income and the interest

rate along standard Keynesian absorption lines. (3) An asset substitution

channel exists by which foreign interest
                                            rates adjusted by expected deprecia-

tion can affect money demand and the price level in the United Kingdom,

France, and Japan. The real oil price does not enter in this sector but in

the international sector and influences the domestic
                                                        economy through these
three channels. Tests of direct real influences will be reported at length

in The International Transmission of Inflation volume.

     The reserve and pegged—nonreserve international sectors will be dis-

cussed next.      The export equation depends on foreign real income, the real

price of oil, the domestic and foreign price levels, and the exchange rate.

Imports are explained by a demand equation including domestic real income

and current and lagged import prices relative to the price level. Import
                                                                              6




prices in turn depend on import supply variables such as the size of im-

ports, foreign price levels, and the exchange rate. The capital—flows

equations allow for interest rate and expected depreciation effects,
                                                                       foreign
and domestic real income effects, and trade—deficit financing. In the floating—

non—reserve models the import demand and supply equations are renormalized to

relative—import—price and exchange—rate equations, respectively. The added

balance—of—payments or intervention equation relates the balance to changes

in exchange rates relative to lagged changes and lagged changes in relative

purchasing power.

     One check of model adequacy which might uncover omitted channels of

transmission was suggested by Bob Flood. Omitted channels will show up

as correlations of the residuals of the model's equations. These correla-

tions were checked for the Mark III Model both within each country and for

U.S. nominal money, real income, and price level versus all foreign variables.

Little more than the expected number of correlations were significant at

the 5% level for either the pegged or floating period and no pair of cor-

relations was significant in more than two cases. Therefore it was concluded

that the model adequately represented the channels apparent in the data.

     The international sector thus incorporates a variety of potential

channels of transmission. For example, as suggested by the monetary ap-

proach, either trade or capital flows might cause huge movements in the

balance of payments (and hence money) if domestic prices or interest rates

were to begin to differ from international parity values. This did not

appear likely from the small estimated coefficients, but only simulations

can determine this definitely. So let us now turn to some simulation ex-

periments.
                                                                                  7




                      II. U.S. Money Shock Experiments


      As is well known,8 a common problem
                                             with policy studies based on
 econometric models is that the policy experiment is often inconsistent with

 the policy regime for which the model is estimated. As a result, the

 simulated behavior may be irrational under the alternative policy regime.

 Thus one must choose a policy
                                 experiment which is consistent with the
 estimated model. The consistent
                                   policy experiment chosen is a 0.01 in-
 crease in the disturbance term of the U.S.
                                              nominal—money—supply reaction
 function for one quarter. Thereafter the
                                             money Supply develops according
 to the endogenous structure of the model.

      This experiment was performed for both the pegged and floating versions

of the Mark IV simulation model.9 The
                                         main results for the United States
are summarized in the six panels of Figure 1.
                                                  This figure shows the
difference between the simulated values of
                                              the major variables given the one
percent money shock and the values in the
                                             corresponding base sinilulation without
the money shcok; for ease in discussion all
                                               differences are reported in basis
points)0 Note that the vertical scales are adjusted to the simulated
                                                                     varia-
tions so that similar appearing movements
                                             may be for much different magnitudes.
We first note that for the U.S., it makes
                                             very little difference whether the
pegged or floating model is examined. In either
                                                    case, nominal money initially
increases by one percent (100 basis points) and then fluctuates between 75

and 150 basis points. Thus for the U.S. a one—quarter shock to the money—

supply reaction function has a persistent effect on the actual nominal money

supply. Given the response of nominal money, the other variables respond reason-

ably in terms of standard macroeconomic lore:
                                                 Real income is initially (peaking
                                                                          8



at about 160 basis points) increased, but this effect washes out after two

years. Prices gradually rise, reaching 50 basis points two years after the

shock. There is a brief liquidity effect apparent in the interest rate, but

this is quickly reversed as inflationaryexpectations and income effects

became (temporary) important. Export movements are trivial, suggesting

that feedback from foreign effects is negligible for the United States.

Only the very slight balance of payments response seems at all surprising.

     Figures 2 through 5 present the corresponding results for the United
                                              11
Kingdom, Canada, Germany, and the Netherlands.     Let us first examine

Germany (Figure 4). In the pegged rate period, we have a response generally

consistent with the monetary approach to the balance of payments: A large

initial balance of payments surplus (0.6 percent of GDP or about 6.6 Percent

of base money!) overwhelms the Deutsche Bundesbank's partial sterilization

policy so that the money supply is increased nearly as much as in the United

States. A similar pattern of temporary real income effects and gradual price

increase is also seen but there is no initial liquidity effect indicated

for the Interest rate. The Netherlands (Figure 5) money supply increases

much more gradually under pegged exchange rates, with the effect on exports

initially important for both real Income and the interest rate. This pattern

seems consistent with a Humean specie—flow mechanism in which monetary trans-

mission is more gradual and there is a significant short—run effect on trade

flows (see panel (f)) both via absorption (foreign real income) and relative

price channels. However for the United Kingdom and Canada (Figures 2 and 3)

under pegged rates, there is no sign of monetary transmission in either the

balance of payments or money supply. There is evidence of real income (and

for the United Kingdom) interest rate effects, but these seem to derive from

absorption type effects of increased exports. The price levels even fall slightly

due to income effects increasing the real quantity of money demanded.
                                                                          9


         Summing up, under pegged exchange rates the simulation results
                                                                        vary
 from the monetary approach paradigm (Germany), through the Humean lagged

 monetary adjustment paradigm (Netherlands), to the simple Keynesian

 absorption in which prices and interest rates are irrelevant (the United

 Kingdom and Canada). Clearly the results are partially puzzling whatever

 view of transmission one might hold. The construction of the Mark III

 model had attempted to allow the data to choose which transmission patterns

 are important; at least that attempt appears to have been successful.

         The floating period results for the same four nonreserve countries

 are probleniatica]. in that the initial effect (if any) of the U.S. money

 supply increase is to depreciate the exchange rates.'2    This result may
reflect a structural problem in the Mark IV model. Only in the import

supply equation were strong, consistent exchange—rate effects obtained in

the pegged period. This equation was solved for the logarithmic change in

the exchange rate in the floating period. (An intervention equation was

also added to explain the balance of payments.) In initial unconstrained

estimates for the floating period, the
                                          logarithmic change in import prices
entered with a coefficient of between 0.3 and 0.5 while the change in the

dollar—denominated rest—of—the—world price index entered with coefficients

of —1.5 to —3. In theory, these coefficients should be of equal magnitude

and opposite signs; this theory is consistent with the pegged—period esti-

mates.     Unfortunately the floating—period estimates appear to be dominated
by common movements in exchange rates against the dollar. Simulations
using the unconstrained, inconsistent coefficients, resulted in nearly
universal initial exchange rate appreciations of two percent which
                                                                     grow to
seven percent after two years with no corresponding movements in interest
                                                                       10



rates or price levels. For this reason, the constraint of a single coef-

ficient on the logarithmic change in the ratio of import to rest—of—world

prices was imposed. When the constraint is imposed, however, the surprising

initial depreciation results. These results are reported since, as explained

immediately below, some sense can be made of them and they do illustrate the

potentially perverse effects of a 3—curve phenomenon.

     Given the initial exchange rate depreciation of some 70 basis points

shown in Figure 4, the German monetary authorities intervene to support the

mark and the money supply falls. Over time, the initial depreciation is

reversed and the money supply recovers. Prices and income follow the

monetary movements. The initial movement In the German exchange rate occurs

in the simulation because of an estimated J—curve pattern in the import

demand (relative—price—of—imports) equation. Since exports rise with the

rise in U.S. income and capital outflows fall with the fall in the U.S.

interest rate, imports plus the balance of payments surplus has to rise

given the identity. The balance of payments (intervention) is not very

responsive under floating rates so the dominant movement is an increase in

the value of imports. Since the demand curve is somewhat inelastic in

the short—run, the increase in value requires a substantial increase in the

domestic—currency price of imports. The more rapid growth in import prices than

dollar—denominated rest—of—the—world prices leads to a higher (depreciated) ex-

change rate.

     For the Netherlands (Figure 5) under floating exchange rates, the

simulated effects are really trivial except for an export increase peaking

at 55 basis points as compared to about 75 basis points under pegged rates.

Again the exchange rate depreciates, but while the initial depreciation is

quite small it is curiously persistent even as U.S. prices rise relative

to Dutch prices.
                                                                    11



       The United Kingdom (Figure 2) displays generally weak and apparently

perverse movements in the first year or so for the exchange rate, exports,

and   real income. This is due to the J—çurve phenomenon with an added
complication: The rapid growth rate of import prices increases expected
depreciation. This decreases the real quantity of money demanded in the
U.K. where a significant currency substitution effect was estimated. The

resulting increase in the U.K. price level reduces exports.

      Only for Canada (Figure 3) is the transmission under floating rates

broadly similar to that under pegged rates, excepting more frequent oscil-

lations. This is consistent with the unimportance of price movements

found for Canada in the pegged rate period.

      Overall, transmission of a U.S. money shock is weaker under floating

rates than pegged rates, although Canada is an exception. While the re—

suits appear to be sensitive to the specification of the model, one speci-

fication would suggest that a J—curve element in the import—demand equations

can lead to surprising effects in a general   equilibrium model.
                                                                            12




                            III. Other Experiments


        The implications of the Mark IV model have been further explored in a

set of five additional pairs of experiments. Two of these pairs compare

the effects under pegged and floating exchange rates of one—quarter money

shocks (such as described in Section II) in Germany and the United

Kingdom.      The other three involve a one—quarter increase of 0.01 (1 per-

cent of government spending) in the government spending shock in the United

States, Germany, and the United Kingdom, respectively.

        In the pegged case, a one—quarter 100 basis point increase in the

Germany money—supply reaction function disturbance actually increases

German nominal money by some 75 basis points as seen in Figure 6; an in-

duced decrease in the balance of payments partially offsets the increase

in the disturbance term. The initial reduction in the balance of payments

is quickly reversed as increased inflationary expectations increase the

interest rate. The money supply effect peaks at 85 basis points and there-

after decays toward zero. The real income, price level, and export effects

are predictable given the movements in the nominal money supply. But un-

like the United States, no noticeable transmission to any other countries

is detected in the simulations (or graphed here): No variable in any other

country in any quarter deviates from the base simulation by as much as 10

basis points and peak effects on the order of 1 basis point or less are the

rule.

        Under floating rates, the German money shock, has broadly similar ef-

fects except that the money supply drops quickly after the first year from

the 100—120 basis point range and then stabilizes in the 40—70 point range.

The exchange rate moves cyclically, first appreciating, then depreciating,
                                                                             13




and finally appreciating again. Again no transmission to other countries

is detected.'3

       The results of the money shock experiment in the United Kingdom are

displayed in Figure 7. In the pegged case there is some tendency for the

money supply to be reduced by a falling balance of payments which is not

present in the floating case. The only remarkable results are the lack of

movement in the floating exchange rate and the (incredible) negative impact of a

money shock on U.K. real income.'4 Again there was no noticeable transmission

to other countries (on the 10—basis—point—peak criterion) to report.

       The next set of experiments involve one quarter increases of 100

basis points in unexpected real government spending. This sort of govern-

ment spending shift is consistent with the policy regime for which the model

was estimated. However, the implications of this shock for the actual

level of real government spending differs according to the actual process

observed to govern the evolution of real government spending in each

country. Because the logarithm of U.S. real government spending appears to

follow a random walk with drift, the 100 basis point increase in real

government spending is implicitly a permanent one. The corresponding

German variable follows a first order moving average process which implies

that   the level of real government spending is increased by 100 basis points
in the initial quarter but by only 25 basis points thereafter. For the
United Kingdom the pattern is   more   complicated due to a second order auto-
regressive process, but the effect on the level of real government spending

is very nearly approximated by an initial 100 basis point increase and a

57 basis point increase thereafter.'5
                                                                            14




     Figure 8 shows rather similar effects for the U.S. government spending

shock in both the pegged and floating periods. Given the fact that income

is about four times government spending, the implied peak government spending

multiplier is about unity. The 15 basis point decline in the price level

reflects the fact that the estimated income effect on the demand for money

exceeds the induced increase in nominal money. As might be supposed by

the trivial effects on the interest rate, exports, and balance of payments,

no noticeable transmission was detected.16

     The United Kingdom experiment reported in Figure 9 is nearly trivial

in magnitude within the country the peak multiplier is about    and there

is nothing to report by way of transmission to other countries. Recall

however that only about half of the Initial increase in government spending

is implicitly maintained past the first quarter. For Germany (where only

a quarter of the initial increase is maintained thereafter), none of the

peak effects within the country reach even   10 basis points in either the

floating or pegged case. Naturally transmission to other countries is nil

even on a 1—basis—point—peak—effect criterion. This experiment is not

Illustrated here. It is interesting to note that for all three countries

the peak real income effect implies a multiplier of about untiy with

respect to the permanent change in real government spending
                                                                                    15




              IV. Conclusion and Implications for Future Research


       Simulation experiments help us to understand the workings of a large

model in which the simultaneous and dynamic relationships are too compli-

cated to consider analytically. The results of the experiments tell us

something about how the world would operate for a given model specification

and coefficient values which are not inconsistent with a Bet of data. The

results may     tell   us something   about   the way the world works, but they

surely tell us more about just what simplifications in our simple models

may lead to erroneous results.

       Consider, for example, standard models in which an increased domestic

money supply leads to lower domestic relative to foreign interest rates

and a resulting adjustment process. This implicitly assumes that the

liquidity effect dominates any inflationary expectations effect on interest

rates during the relevant adjustment period. With relatively weak

liquidity effects and strong expectations effects as. estimated here, the

transmission and adjustment process does not follow standard lines.'7

       The simulations confirm the apparent implications of the Mark III

estimates: International transmission of inflation through money flows is

a weak and slow process even under pegged exchange rates, with nonreserve

countries exercising considerable short—run control over their money sup-

plies. Of 'the four nonreserve countries examined, only Germany appeared

to quickly and passively adjust its money supply to a U.S. monetary shock

while for    the United Kingdom and Canada        the only simulated transmission

was   via   absorption effects. Further when a German monetary supply shock

was simulated, overwhelming balance of payments flows were not simulated so

that substantial       money, real income,    and price effects were observed.
                                                                             16




These simulations certainly do not disprove the usefulness of the monetary

approach to the balance of payments in the short run, but they do contri-

bute to a growing body of literature which raises questions about its short—

run usefulness.

     While the international transmission after a U.S. monetary shock under

floating exchange rates was weaker than under pegged rates (Canada excepted),

the exchange rate movements were puzzling. They certainly do suggest that

the implications of short—run inelasticity of import demand (3—curves)

should be investigated further. If the world, like the Mark IV model, is

characterized by imperfect international substitutability among goods and

assets, J—curves may   play   a significant role in the adjustment and trans-

mission process.

     The nonreserve money shock experiments revealed no significant interna-

tional transmission under either pegged or floating rates. Some monetary

approach writers18 have argued that an increase in these countries' domestic

credit would result in a generalized increase in the world money supply,

but this is incorrect for a system such as Bretton Woods tied to a fiat

reserve currency with reserves being dollar—denominated bonds.'9 Since

monetary transmission is nil under either pegged or floating rates, only

the very small Increase in world export demand is operative and this is

trivial in magnitude for a money shock in any one of these nonreserve

countries.

     The   government spending shocks were generally too weak in their domestic
effects to have any appreciable Impact abroad. The largest simulated effect
was in the United States with a peak government spending multiplier of about
unity. However, the initial one percent increase in real     spending was all
                                                                            17




permanent in the United States, half permanent in the United Kingdom, and

one quarter permanent in Germany, with the peak multipliers in rough pro-

portion.

     In conclusion, the simulation results suggest a great deal of national

economic independence under both pegged and floating exchange rates. These

results have been very puzzling to those of us associated with the NBER

Project on the International Transmission of Inflation. However they are

part of a consistent pattern emerging from the evidence. A first order for

research in international macroeconomics is to explain why the data fail

to disclose the strong transmission channels which we customarily assume.
                                                                               18




                                    References


 Carr, Jack, and Darby, Michael R., "The Role of Money Supply Shocks in the

        Short—Run Demand for Money," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming

        1981.

 Darby, Michael R., "The International Economy as a Source of and Restraint

        on United States Inflation," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 437, January

        1980. (1980a)

_____     "Sterilization and   Monetary Control under Pegged Exchange Rates:

      Theory and Evidence," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 449, February 1980.

        (1980b)

_____    "The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments: Two
                                                                Specious
     Assumptions," Economic Inquiry, April 1980, 18: 321—326. (1980c)

_____ and Stockinan, Alan C., "The Mark III International Transmission

     Model," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 462, March 1980.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of

     Political Economy, December 1976, 84: 1161—1176.

Lee, Dan, "The Effects of Open Market Operations and Foreign Exchange

     Market Operations," Ph.D. Dissertation, U.C.L.A., Department of

     Economics, 1980.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in

     K. Brumer and A. H. Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and     Labor
     Markets, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy Vol. 1,

     Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing Co., 1976.

Meiselman, David I., and Laffer, Arthur B., The Phenomenon of Worldwide

     Inflation, Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1975.
                                                                             19




Parkin, Michael, and Zis, George, Inflation in the World Economy, Toronto:

     University of Toronto Press, 1976. (1976a)

______________________________ Inflation in Open Economies, Toronto:

     University of Toronto Press, 1976. (1976b)

Swoboda, Alexander K., "Monetary Policy under Fixed Exchange Rates:

    Effectiveness, the Speed of Adjustment, and Proper Use," in J. A.

    Frenke]. and H. C. Johnson, eds., The Monetary Approach to the Balance

    of Payments, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1976.
                                                                              20




                                    Footnotes



      'Collinearity is reduced where the coefficients of various lagged

 levels of a variable indicate that either a sum or first difference is the

 appropriate variable. Similarly a number of hypotheses implying equality

 of coefficients permitted combining terms into simple logarithmic sums or

 differences.


      2Darby and Stockman (1980).

      3This is four more identities than listed in the Mark III model: Two

 of these define expected money and exports based on last period's information;

 these series are predetermined for purposes of estimation but endogenous in

a dynamic simulation. A third identity defines logarithmic transitory in-

come which was written explicitly in the Mark III. The fourth defines a

lagged prediction error term needed for dynamic simulation.   Similar identi-
ties were added to all the other submodels to obtain consistent dynamic

simulations.


     4As is appropriate for a reserve country, the balance of
                                                              payments was
found to have no influence on the U.S. money supply. See Darby (1980a,

1980c).

     5The equations are solved for exports, relative price of imports,

exchange rate, net capital outflows, and the balance of payments.

     6Variables such as real income, prices, and money are measured in

logarithms. The interest rates and unemployment rates are decimal frac-

tions. Exports, imports, net capital outflows, and the balance of payments

are all scaled by dividing by nominsi income. Shocks are deviations of actual

values from optimal ARIMA predictions of the variables.
                                                                                 21




         7The z3hort—run money demand function is adapted from Carr and Darby

 (1981). It allows for money—supply shocks to effect money demand. In the

 Mark III model a foreign interest rate
                                           adjusted for expected depreciation
was included to test for asset substitution, but this
                                                          was significant only
 for the United Kingdom and Japan and (at only a 15% significance level)

 France.


        8See Lucas (1976).


           dynamic simulation was performed for nine quarters. In a dynamic

simulation, the input series are the exogenous variables plus the initial

conditions (endogenous variables before the beginning of simulation). The

values of endogenous variables within the simulation period are assigned

their predicted values. As is common for a large model with few exogenous

variables, the cumulative errors in the endogenous variables eventu.ally

take the simulation off track. For the Hark IV, this is not a significant

difficulty until after the first two years. The pegged simulations began

in 1962 III and the floating simulations began in 1971 III; in each case

this Is the beginning of the feasible simulation period as determined by

all nonreserve countries maintaining firm dollar pegs or having broken from

them.

        10
          A basis point is 1/100 of a percentage point; so the basis point

differences are the actual differences times 10,000. Note that all the

variables are measured in units conformable for meaningful basis point

discussion.    Pegged observations are plotted as squares; floating as diamonds.

        '1The simulation results for France, Japan, and Italy were so erratic

as to be inexplicable. The peculiar estimated coefficients —— which we
                                                                                   22




 attribute to severe data problems for these countries —— appear to be the

 problem. See Darby and Stockman (1980).

         12The exchange rates are measured in domestic
                                                       currency units per dol-
 lar so an increase is a depreciation.

         13
           For example, the strongest simulated effects were for the Netherlands.

 The peak effects on real income were        1 basis point; on the money supply,

 price level and interest rate     0.2   basis points; on the exchange rate
   0.3   basis point; on the balance of payments      0.1 basis point; and —— the
 big one —— on exports     8 basis points.


      '4The negative coefficients on money shocks were not jointly
                                                                   signifi-
 cant in the Mark III model, but were retained in the reestimation of the

Mark IV model so that this channel was not foreclosed.

     '5To be precise, the implied increase in U.K. real government
                                                                   spending
compared to the base run for the first nine quarters is
                                                             100, 56, 44, 63, 59,
55, 58, 58, and 57 basis points, respectively.

     16Almost achieving our 10 basis point threshhold were 8—basis—point

peak increases in Canadian exports and real income. The simulated results

for other countries were generally sensible in direction but tiny in mag-

nitude.


     17Dan Lee (1980) in his dissertation has shown that Dornbusch's (1976) famous

overshooting result for floating exchange rates follows from allowing

participants in the financial markets to have rational expectations with

respect to exchange rates but not prices: Recall that Dornbusch argued that

lower home interest rates after a money supply increase must be balanced

by (rational) expectations of an appreciating currency and this implies an
                                                                            23




initial over—depreciation. If the interest rate instead rises with (ration-

al) inflationary expectations, then expectations of depreciation are appro-

priate and the overshooting argument falls.

     18See, for example, Swoboda (1976), Meiselman and Laffer (1975), and

Parkin and Zis (l976a, 1976b).


     L9This point is developed at length in Darby (l980c).
                                                                                                 24


                                                   FIGURE 1
                        Deviations   of Key American Variables from Base Simulations
                                       American Money—Shock Experiments


                                                         55.0


                                                         so, U

                                                                                .—.——




                                                                 t
                                                                           ——


    (a) Real Income —— log                                (b) Price Level —— log P1
                           y1



    4:. C


                /   \

•   .:
            7




                                5

    (c) Nominal Money —— log N1                           (d) Short—Term Interest Rate ——
                                                                                            R1
                                                                                           25



                               FIGURE 1 (Continued)



as                                                .


     r
PC



     s_
                                                                          \\
           I     V

                     •*I \---
                     JJ
(e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——
                                    a




                                        (B/Y)1
                                                 I;


                                                      (f) Scaled Exports ——
                                                                           \
                                                                           6



                                                                               (X/Y)1
                                                                                                I




                                                      Note: Vertical scales are in basis
                                                             points (actual deviations x
                                                             10,000).
                                                      Key:     Pegged rate deviations
                                                               Floating rate deviations
                                                                                          26


                                       FIGURE 2
                Deviations of Key British Variables from Base Simulations
                            American Money—Shock Experiments




                                                                            6

 (a) Real Income —— log                           (b) Price Level ——   log
                            y2                                                  P2


 s.o                                         :2




                                   -
                                     --

                        6                                               6

.(c) Nominal Money ——   log   N2             (d) Short—Term Interest Rate ——
                                                                                     R2
                                                                                                         27




                                                                                  //
                                                FIGURE 2 (Continued)



  Et.                                                                 _________   __________


                                                           3C.




                              I




                              •1
                                   /
                                       -'—---.-
                                        \



                                            /
                                                I
                                                     -
                                                           20..




                                                                         /
                                                                                           2r
            :             :!                                      Li/                   _____ _____



                                                                                   /
        :


        :

                                                     ———
                                                           .L     L




        —       \     :
                .'   I

        .

                          6
                                                                                           6


 (e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——                          (f) Scaled Exports ——
                                                 (B/Y)2                                        (X/Y)2




                                                           Note: Vertical scales are in basis
                                                                  points (actual deviations x
                                                                          10,000).

                                                           Key:               Pegged rate deviations
                                                                              Floating rate deviations




-0.

(g) Exchange Rate —— log
                         E2
                                                                                       28

                                           FIGURE 3
              Deviations     of Key Canadian Variables, from Base Simulations
                               American Money—Shock Experiments




 ?. (
 2.

 ic'.   4-




 ;.
                        B


(a) Real Income ——   log    y3                   (b) Price Level   ——
                                                                        log P3




(c) Nominal Money ——   log   143
                                                   \)
                                                 (d) Short—Term Interest Rate —
                                                                                  R3
                                                                                         29



                                     FIGURE 3 (Continued)




                         6


 (e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——                  (f) Scaled Exports —
                                      (B/Y)3                               (X/Y)3




  Jsc.
                                      I




   s:.
                    A                               Note: Vertical scales are in basis
                                                           points (actual deviations X

               S   /S\       _____________
                                                           10,000).


             V \                                    Key:     Pegged rate deviations
                                                             Floating rate deviations



- I C.

                                 V
- iso.
                                               II
(g) Exchange Rate —— log E3
                                                                                       30


                                      FIGURE 4
              Deviations of Key German Variables from Base Simulations
                          American Money—Shock Experiments


                                           —c




                                            C.




                                            C




                           E



(a) Real Income ——   log       y5               (b) Price Level   ——
                                                                       log   P5




                         //
                     /



(c) Nominal Money ——     log    M5              (d) Short—Term Interest Rate      ——
                                                                                            31



                                     FIGURE 4 (Continued)




      .L /T7                         p




                           6                      II
 (e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——       (B/Y)          (f) Scaled Exports ——
                                                                                (X/Y)5




                                                       Note: Vertical scales are in basis
                                                              points (actual deviations x
                                                              10,000).

                                                       Key:      Pegged rate deviations
                                                                 Floating rate deviations




c..                    S                         21


(g) Exchange Rate ——   log     E5
                                                                                       32


                                       FIGURE 5
                Deviations of Key Dutch Variables from Base Simulations
                           American Money—Shock Experiments




  .\
  ::
(a) Real Income —— log
                       6


                       y8
                                        1




                                             (b) Price Level ——   log   P8




(c) Nominal Money ——   log N8               (d) Short—Term Interest Rate     ——
                                                                                  R8
                                                                                  33



                                FIGURE 5 (Continued)




•
•   -•




                      6
                                                                       j
(e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——            (f) Scaled Exports
                                    (B/Y)8                        ——
                                                                       (X/Y)8




                                             Note: Vertical scales are in basis
                                                    points (actual deviations X
                                                    10,000).
                                             Key:      Pegged rate deviations
                                                    • Floating rate deviations




(g) Exchange Rate —— log
                         E8
                                                                                   34


                                      FIGURE 6
               Deviations of Key German Variables from Base Simulation
                           German Money—Shock Experiments




                                            4O.O


                                            3C.




                                                        1/




                                                                   6

(a) Real Income —— log   y5                 (b) Price Level ——   log   P5




(c) Nominal Money ——   log   N5             (d) Short—Term Interest Rate ——
                                                                              R5
                                                                                  35



                                FIGURE 6 (Continued)




(e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——            (f) Scaled Exports ——
                                    (B/Y)5                           (X/Y)5


IMO.


120.

100.


 80.


 60.                                         Note: Vertical scales are in basis
                                                    points (actual deviations X
 qo.                                                10,000).

 20.

  0.



-20.
       U




           /\\\,
           /
                                             Key:      Pegged rate d&viations
                                                       Floating rate deviations




(g) Exchange Rate —— log
                         E5
                                                                                        36


                                       FIGURE 7
               Deviations of Key British Variables from Base Simulations
                            British Money—Shock Experiments




                                                                   II

                                                              /1


                                                         :/
                                                      //
                                                      /
                                             - -.JI 1'
                                                    /
                                                  I                       6                  Ii
(a) Real Income ——   log   y2                (b) Price Level ——         log   P2




(c) Nominal Money ——   log   M2              Cd) Short—Term Interest Rate ——
                                                                                   R2
                                                                                         37




                                  FIGURE 7 (Continued)




  HHN
             /
         \
             I

   —
                       6                     II
(e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——                 (f) Scaled Exports ——
                                    (B/Y)2                                (X/Y)2




                                                  Note:   Vertical scales are in basis
                                                          points (actual deviations x
                                                          10,000).

                                                  Key:    a   Pegged rate deviations
                                                              Floating rate deviations




(g) Exchange Rate ——   log   E2
                                                                                     38


                                      FIGURE 8
             Deviations of Key American Variables from Base Simulations
                   American Government—Spending—Shock Experiments




(a) Real Income ——   log   y1               (b) Price Level ——   log   P1




(c) Nominal Money ——   log   M1             Cd)   Short—Term Interest Rate ——
                                                                                R1
                                                                                  39



                                FIGURE 8 (Continued)




-3.C.                 —
                      6

(e) Scaled Balance of Payments ——            (f) Scaled Exports ——
                                    (B/Y)1                           (X/Y)1




                                             Note: Vertical scales are in basis
                                                    points (actual deviations X
                                                    10,000).

                                             Key:      Pegged rate deviations
                                                       Floating rate deviations
                                                                              40


                                       FIGURE 9
               Deviations of Key British Variables from Base Simulations
                     British Government—Spending—Shock Experiments




                       6
                                                                   S


(a) Real Income ——   log   y2                (b) Price Level ——   log   P2




(c) Nominal Money ——   log   N2             (d) Short—Term Interest Rate ——
                                                                                                                   41



                                                           FIGURE 9 (Continued)



       12.0


                    A
                            \ / \/ A
        9.u



       5L \/
       4




       c.ct
                /



                    .
                            \\ /

                                           \       \
                                                       \
                                                                        -sc:,


                                                                        -E.
                                                                                                                    -




                                                           e




            I                          S                                -6. 3C—

       (e) Scaled Balance of Payments                  ——
                                                                          (f)     Sealed Exports ——
                                                               (B/Y)                                  (X/Y)2

  0. 175




                                   /N
  0.
       nr




  , - ncr




 0. nfl'        S
                     /  I
                            I
                             // \          S   S
                                                   \
                                                   \-\
                                                                         Note: Vertical scales are in basis



                                                                        Key:
                                                                                points (actual deviations X
                                                                                    10,000).
                                                                                    a
                                                                                        Pegged rate deviations

-0.    u            /                                                                   Floating rate deviations


-r,-
            z 2'
                                   6                               II
       (g) Exchange Rate —— log
                                E2
                                                                                        42




                                          APPENDIX

           THE MARK IV INTERNATION TRANSMISSION SUMULATION MODEL


      This appendix lists the Mark IV model.            Table 1 defines the variables
 used. Table 2 lists the Mark IV—PEG used for simulations in the pegged

 period. Table 3 lists the Mark IV—FLT used for simulations in the floating

 period. Note that the "Coefficient and
                                                 Parameter Values" list at the end
of each table contains a number of
                                            extraneous coefficients which are ir-
relevant to the Mark IV model. The model is resident in the TROLL
                                                                  sys-
tem at M.I.T. The Mark IV is a simplified version of the Mark III model

described in Darby and Stockman (1980).

     A few notes on TROLL's modelling
                                               language are in order: An asterisk indi-
cates multiplication. A negative number
                                                     in parentheses iediately fol-
lowing a variable denotes that the variable is
                                                         lagged that many quarters;
X(—l) E
          X1.    The first difference operator is DEL(1: X) E X —
                                                                          X(—l).
Double equal    signs   (==)   are   used for Identities with the exception of
permanent income identities.
                                                                                   43




                                      TABLE 1

          Definitions of Variables and Parameters in the Mark IV Model


Country mnemonics are indicated in the listing below by double asterisks
(**)   The mnemonics are:

CA         Canada                                      JA         Japan
FR        France                                       NE         Netherlands
GE        Germany                                      UK         United Kingdom
IT         Italy                                       US         United States

BTOY**       Balance of payments divided by GNP (or GDP if GNP is unavailable).
             The balance of payments is on the official reserve settlements
             basis.

CTOY**       Net capital outflows as a fraction of GNP.      (Measured as CTOY** =
             XTOY** - ITOY** — BTOY**.)

DMY611       Revaluation dummies with 0 everywhere except 1961 I, 1967 IV, or
DMY6 74      1969 III, respectively.
DMY693

DV**         Nominal income weight; share of country **     in   total sample
             nominal income.

ER**1L       Error terms for ARINA process of exchange—rate expectation forma-
ER**2L       tion as defined in model.

GRE**Xll     Expected annualized growth rate of the exchange rate from present
GRE**X2l     quarter to next quarter.

GRPX1**l     Expected annualized growth rate of the price level from present
GRPX1**2     quarter to next quarter.

ITOY**       Imports as a fraction of GNP.

LNE**        Logarithm of the exchange rate measured in domestic currency
             units (DCUs) per U.S. dollar (LNEUS   1).

LNG**U       Innovation in the logarithm of real government spending based on
             a univariate ARIHA process.

LNN**U       Innovation in money; LNMN** — LNMN**EX.

LNMN**       Logarithm   of money stock measured in billions of DCUs.
LNMN**EX     Expected   value of LNHN** based on a univariate ARIMA process.

LNP**        Logarithm of the price deflator for GNP (or GDP). These deflators
             are measured in DCUs per 1970 DCU; so LNP** = 0 for 1970.
                                                                              44




 LNPIM**    Logarithm of import price index. (LNPIM** = 0 for 1970).

 LNPR**     Logarithm of an index of foreign prices converted by exchange
            rates into U.S. dollars per 1970 U.S. dollar. (LNPR** = 0 for
            1970)

LNQIM**     Logarithm of relative price of imports; LNPIM** — LNP**.

LNRPOIL     Logarithm of an index the real price of oil based on deflating the
            dollar price of Venezuelan oil by the U.S. deflator. (LNRPOIL = 0
            for 1970)

LNYR**     Logarithm of real GNP (or GDP if GNP is unavailable) measured in
           billions of 1970 DCUs.

LNYR**P Logarithm of permanent income measured in billions of 1970 DCUs.

LNYR.R**   Logarithm of an index of foreign real income (LNYRR** = 0 for
           1970).

LNYRT**    Logarithmic transitory income; LNYR** — LNYR**P.

PEGDIF**   Logarithmic difference between actual and parity value of the
           exchange rate.

R**        Short—term nominal interest rate in decimal per annum form.
           (Three—months treasury bill yield where available; but a long—
           term   government bond yield had to be used for Italy.)
SGRPX1*l Variables used to simulate the expected—inflation—rate transfer
SGRPX1*2 functions.
T          Time index (1955 I = 1, 1955 II = 2,   etc.)

UN**       Unemployment rate in decimal form.

XP**       Trend quarterly growth rate of real income used in computing
           logarithmic permanent income.

XTOY**     Exports as a fraction of GNP.

XTOY**EX Expected value of XTOY** based on a univariate ARIHA process.

XTOY**U    Innovation in scaled exports; XTOY** — XTOY**EX.

Zl**1      Variables used to simulate the expected—inflation—rate transfer
Zl**lL     functions.
Zl**2
Z2**l

ZP*        Weight of current income in forming logarithmic permanent income
           (taken as 0.025 in all cases).
                                                                                                                              45



                                                                 TABLE   2
                                               The Pegged Period )de1: Mark IV—PEC




 bIib(, uk.C1.AMATI(*th

    bIsCA b?QP bTOCiI b1'UI!I b1(.JA 1(jkhk bTUkW 1uu 1u(.A c1,M CTUbL c1ju
    L1okA (.LNk. (.TUUI IUtjb k.LA1L I.idadL. k.*U'IIL.            th.LhAj1 ,kk.rMi1 It.4.Asi
    L,I11AI1 Uk.JA21 (,hLbLX11 ,kjIU11         A1CA1 LKk'IIK1 ,h(kA1C,Li k(hA11L1 4.,edJii.JA
    MkUd*.1        ltdU bkPA1U1 UVzcA 11*sktM V1UkL A1,k11 11L,JA 1LJk 11uui iluxub
    LtMAU LtMFitU Lk.M(ik.U LtffiITL LhflJAt Lb.MCA LiJ.CAk. L.tMtUj L.Mitpk
    LtL.j, IdMhIL LNPtt11LX LMthJA LMt'JLA MtLt. LzhE.iM.t.X LNPthL, LbMts&tLA LMthU    Ltdtt.L LtLA
    LtIMNUbLA MUtUj Lt$U$L, IL.A LNkLk L.M.L       tu1IC.A Lhk1#4k   k1h1 LhHhJA  LL'Q1Mhk
        1IU Lkt1fflJS NkIi LNkJA LtghN. hKA LtMfrk h ti                            t'kut. LikMU
    UrhIb .t4PUi i.hIUb LP1MCA LN1kfrK L.ht.1M4j LL1M.JA £4i1Nb. h.tIhuI t.LMUb LtkLA
    LtKCAk Lt.htVk       kfrh&P dkGt. IdkMGk.P LIkhIU LtK1Tk L.hi.JA LLJ LtK1k LIKt.k.p
    LtMRCA LkTMRkI Nàt$I Lhfrkd1 LNaèJA LhtlthL Lkkdji               Mjb 4WILA
           LIYWU1 LtkTJA LhkTtL. LhkT Lb
    M( MiT kJA MN& MI Mj b,hhXiçi b(kPAifri 1ub L ktlia( LhkKu Ltitbb UYMUbk *i(A Mkh
    LkT(,k.
                                            b(k&'Xiii bkkAii2 Utibh LNUa( LMUb A1..A
    .1sYCAk.A    ZT(j(.A&a   £Wbh(    kkL1. 1jfrM                  L(,t.            AIUkbLU AT(ii'A £iUk1I.A
    kUI., £1OJA X1uYJA                .jtL                 i1uMt.kj. kt4.u        £L(JkUMt.A                  1*U A1uUb
    AIUkL.bLZ XTUUbtJ kILA1L
                          1(LiL.                 k1111    .LiA BAMLIL ilaiL aiL.S1L ksaU
    bMYM11 Ldio74 UIfl3 LNLCA Lhk.bM LNM.t. Lhi LMLA Lbd&hb. Lh&.UL LbLIJ t.M(.AU                                          £.M,IMJ
    LM,L& LMILTL, LM,.jM LM(,h Lt'.GUbU LMUb(J Lt.M(s1L. 1Jifr11 ,U1P.JA kkALibhk.                                     I
(..Uk.IkiCiMdl
    A1CA *1kM *1Gb. AlIT AIJA AIMb. AILaK AIUb AIU1I                         AIUuA AIUb. A1UU AIICA A1IbM *11Gb.
    A1111 AiiM       A11Mb. *11W,    A12 AIsNk. Ai2Ub               *IUb. *13Gb. *1311     A13,.iA   A13t4k. AI4CA            AI4Gb.
    A14jA *14Mb. ACA A2bl AG1. As11 A4JA kb.           AUb A.SLA A3frat A3 *3Mb *3o* A3a
    A4CA *4Mb. A40b A5CA AS1T A5.jA ASL.k. AbLA AbtL AbLib A7ki A7u. A7hL a7oI'. AbLh Abtb
    AoML AdLib. Afrh AML *UK AL,b bICA blfrM blGb. bll'L biJA LIMb. blLit blOb bIUkK b.IU.JA
    Blubsk. bluoK MiCA bFk bGL bIT b2IA Mab bU* bUb b.3cA baA b3Mb *301 b3ub b4.A
    b4VR b4Gk. *411 b4JA b4bk. *4011 *4W, MSCA *5kM *5Gb. bSl1 b5JA *5Mb. *50* 150* *MCA
    1*1k *4Gb. baiT bbJA b*ML bau* bbUb b7CA *7kM b7.,L b711 b7A
                                                                     b7Mb. 17W, *SCA book.
    101.1baJA boMb. *00* bLA b,k.                  bt.&. LIbA CIG.. CiW, ukM Lu0* l.uW,
    Clbi (.1u* 1.4101. 2IM LIj11 bI1 bOjA                               L4Iji, bfrat 1..50p. La0.
    Li7tâ 1.47Gb utiCA 00kM 0001. bull tJUJA L.t31M L.3GM L3tj*
                                             bULb. bUL.i 000* biLk IJ1ki blob.          uI..* GIht.
    010* blOb 01011 blUtL blUUic blU 01111 011kb. 0111.1. uib* 1j1&ab ui3ok.£J111  o130* uiei*
    0141* 014Gb 0141T b14A bl4iL 014&iIc 014W, bISLA bl51                          OISJA   &.lSMk. uiSU* 01501. ulbJ*
    bibLib bfrkt O2JA £1401 b40b        03kM 03JA               Li4LA 041% D4JA 04Mb. DSCA b5A bbti*
                                                          03*1. 1j30S
    0505 L.*CA Dell baUll 07vr      Ij7JA £OCA 1JLA    bICA b.Ifrit 1.101. 1.111 bAJA *1*1. 1.101. LAW,
   b1UCA      1.111k kliNE 1.110* bilUs 1.lk* k.12JA
   L14CA 1.141k 1.1401. 1.1411 b.I4JA 1.14Mb. b.14W1 1.lSt.* 1.151% b.1L.b Ll3ba 1.131? L13A 1.l3oi.
                                                         t.1.ML k.1Ut..
                                                                         &.lSLj* kI6LA 1.1*1* 1.1011 L1A
   110111. 1.1*011 k.I7CA b.17JA 1.17Mb. b.lbi* bloW, b.l0,jA 1.1001 1.1LA b.lJA
   1.2*1. 1.205 L2ULSS f.10* b.3CA 1.3Gb. £3141. 1.3011 L4CA 1.41* 1.41? 1.4*1.          1.41.A k4ba 1.411
   1.61k 1.61? L6JA 1.6*1. 1.7Gb. 1.7.i* 1.7*1. 1.01* k.oW, k.O.Jil k.óla*           1.4011 1.511 1.5141. fr.5W,
                                                                            1.fr* b.Sob. LUCA IUI* 101%
   PUJA 10*1. 100* kULib 110Mb. IlOUS 14011 140*1. oos I3uJA 13uU11 140CA 1401* I4UJA
   140*1. I4ULJS ISUCA 1501k 1501? 1SUA 150*1. 15001 rSUt. kault. frbU.JA
   (iufr* 00Gb. GUI? (.UJA (.0*1. 00011 0001. G1..iA (.1*1. OlLib (,lU1.A 01001. (.1401. bb&aMt. 1000* GUCA
   G011 G20LA (LUGL G22t11 0Ub 63kM 0311 G3JA 63*1. G3ULA 03u01. o3Ui. o3Ub                   6140* 0tb.
                                                                                                 (.41* 0411
   04.1* 64141. 051k (.51? GSJA (.5*1. G6CA 0*1* (.601. 0611 Mt. obOe. 0*0* 07*1. 070* GaLA
   0*1* 0*1,1. GOJA 0*01. G9CA Gkk GC.1. MUCA bulk *0Gb. *011 *0.1* *0141. *00* 14001. bIlk.
   I1GI. *1.1* MiMI. Milil *10* *101,1. 1410.1* *10*1. *100* M11C* 14111* *1111 1411011
   blIh(  MI1A.k.
                  *12.1* b12e. b13(.A *131k n13j* *13*1. *13011 bIeJ* *14*1. *140* bISLi. *151*
                                                                                                   1414t..A

   £41501. *1511 *150* b1L.* b31.A *311 *311 *301
   *51? *5.1* *5141. *50* *61? M6JA *0141. M7CA *71*  *30* b4LA *40* *40* OSLA *51* *501.
                                                         *711 M7JA *7*1. o7o* bocA *01* MoOL
   1101? 140.1* MMML £4001 *00* M9CA   1*91* b*11 bS.JA lOLA 101* 1001. 1011 10.1k 10141. 1001.
   100* liCk 111* 1101. lILT I1JA 11*1. 11011 110* 1L.A 1frk       AMOk. 1411 12IA 14*1. 1s01
   ius    131* 1301. 131? I3JA 13Mb. 1301 130* 14LA 141* 140* ibLA 151k 15*1.
   Ibi? 10.1* 160* ibUb 17rM 1711 170* 1MM b.uLA 1.01* *001. *011 *0*1.                                      15011          150*
   11101.                                                                                            *0Mb.   k.uljr.        100.1.
            *1*1. 1110* KIuLA 11100* e.1UUb *111* 1111? 111*1. lilLie. *11W, *1211 1.13LA *131*
   bI4LA 114PM 111411 Ml4A 1.14Mb. 11401. *140* g15(.A 1151* *l51t e.i5A *15*1. *1501 t.l50b
   14CA 141* *211 *2JA 12*1. KsU& *U* *3CA 130* 1130* *4Gb.
   *5.1* ISUS I6CA 1.01* 11601. 11611 IbM *6Mb. 17jA 17ue. *001.. *LA        1411 *4*1. *401.. *40* I(54..A
                                                                                    1IK 11*01. 11*11 I*JA
   119Mb. 1*0* 11*0* LUCA LUIM LOOk. 1.011 LOlA LOMb. 1.00* LiLA LIII *101. LIJA 1.31? L3JA
   L3ML £.4CA 1.41* 1.401. 1.411 1.4.1* 1.4111. 1.41.1 1.b(..* 1.51*. 1.511 Lb.jA 1.5Mb. LSUL(
   1.711.                                                                                                    1.611..        i.b.JA

PAMAMLI1.M:
   GVCA DVVK      IIVGI DV1T    DVJA DVME OVUK LVIII              ZPCA *11* khL *111 *PJA *1*1 ZPU* APUI
   IPCA 111* 1161. 1PIT 1JA           *1141.     11011   *101.
                                                                                                                         46

L(A11uNb

       1:     LtbUP —
       2:
       3:                      —.

       4:    Lt4MUSU       •.
       5:    LtffiNUSLZ            ——   2* iNUb(—1)—.k       —ti.437(b(1 :                        (—1))—Lk.L(j   ;


             XTOYLJbU          •
       7:                          •
       0:    LNMTUb            "
             L.ttthUs ——
             bVN*h) *j/ (l—A'Us)—7.4U.4b
   IU:
             )+0v11                  11j—L11)4b,JA* (L —LJA)+bk. (k&—) )*1/(1—L,VS)+.535ø
                                                                                                                     (LtL,k.
   11:       kULU11             ——      4*(LuLK+L,uK*b(j :
             l.1Lb1L       — 4LLj.1 :
  13:        GadX1(g,1
                                                                                                      :   L(_1))+St*b
  14:
                                                  (—1) +     *j,(L,j(_) +4j*gU(_3)
  15:                      —



                                                       (—J) +i*           j (—i)           (—3)
  ib:        bkL(1 : IjhLjb)               L1+C4UkL(J :           b         +L1Ub*1)k.1(1 :
                                              LbkMLsb(—7))

  17:       Dfr.L.(1   :   LtdMbuIj)
            L.kkub(—5)
                                                                                                                     :

  10;
            —3) +blU           •XOUbu+b11 *X1(.Y(J (_1) +bl *Ajojj () +u*uubU(_3)
  19:       LhPflhIib — 1MIS(_1)+FUUb+UU(J5*(
             : L kRUb)+14Ui.ebL(1                              L 1MLJb(1))+ UUS*L,L&.(1
                                                   : LI )+fr5U*j.(j : :
                                                                                                          :
  20:                  —

  21:       XTOy(j —

  22:       CTOYUS •
            U*bk.L(1 :             NMUb)+u*b(j : Lt           S)+U*L.U.(j          kLJ)+U*bLj.(1 : KUb(_1))+(IU*b(j
                                        S htUL)+u*s.i1 : MUK(—1))+ib.L(j                  s t(—2))+uL(1 S (htk.I.iiAj1)
                                                                                                                          S


            +U'jj.j(1 :            Kt.UKXll(_l))+t3(JS*QLLU S
 23:        .NkLsKP        —


 24:        LNQINUK .
 25:        LNhUKU -.
            LNlthUK ——

 27:                       ——


                            ——

            U.UUUo4
 29:                   ——


 3U:                       ——


 31:                   ••
                                                                                                                  47


 3:       LNP*UM •
                                                            (L.NPA— uk.LA)+DV                           (a—Lh,.4,k.

 33:      .1LiI(1L. •.             4uk.L(1 :
 34:     (KPX1(JI1 •.                4*(KUUK+KIuKa                                            +b4UD*4.I1 :

          (—1)

 35:     L.NPUII         •    BlUK+   ihNI*+b2UK*M+b3KaL K'! +b4
 3t,:    L.NKW •


 37:     UU..(1               UhUb) •                     : L UK)+ 1I,KkJ(1 :                                       :
                                                    ;
                                                          —))+t4uM'gL(j : 1 —4))+cSuK                   (1   $   UikMaX(

 30:     ULL(1           *    L.NMtUK)   a


 3;              a   bU +L1lUK*kFX1bK1+U14              •KU(.1)+U*AjUK1 (—l)+Ul+b'$u+u*Lu(...1
 4U:     LNPIPfljI( •
                                                               : L    UK)+F5Q(LçbLL(1 :
             LNI.U1)

 41:                      —

                          •

43:                       —

         G12UKU.L(1 : kU(—2))+t,W('b1.L(j : kU0(—))+                                                  I IM)+
                                                                            (IJ..(1 : (akh.ti11(—2))

44:                          -

45:     LIICA                "
4b:     L.kMCAU •a LNCA—hCA

47:     XTOYCAL
40:     ATUY(.ALA ——

                     2*       ••         NCJi(1)     CA()_U.b4$iU5*(b1(j        h.tkNLA(—1))—1JkL(1   : LNu(—)))
        _U.b5993*(IJIL(1                 ; LIdM A(—))—bk.L(1 :
        LMCAL (—4)
                         a
51:                                   CA—L.hflCM'

        LN'IRMCA             •a
        bV*L.NkaNE) 1/ (l—bVLA)—7.b3j
53:                      •• (bVUS*(LNpus_Lub)+uv *(Ltiii,*_Lt,,I)+bVfrM* (Lh M—L kK)+Uvbk.* (LkV4(aê.
                                                                 IL—Ltt.bL) )*1/ (1—bVCA)+1.e 117
        1C.A1L           a.      RFX1LA1(—1)—bGX1(.j(—1)
55:     bGah'x1c1 •. 4

50:     (i1k'XlCAI ••

57:     fr.çA1L                  4*bk.L(1 :
        (.kk.CA11             —
                                                                 $

        LtkCA        •
OU:                  •
                                                                                                                           48

bi:   LaLl.(1 :       LfathCA)    • .1CA+LA+L3A*L.Ab.4LA*                              LMJ(-1)+LMA.AU(—4) )+1uçA.t,kàc1LA(
      b.LA(—s) ) )+.jA* (U. (LI LA(—3)+&Ai.,I—)                                  ))
             •
      L6GCAU+D8CA'LkGLAU (-2)+b9CL.,AL(—3)
63:   L6PIMCA • L1MCA(—1)+fruCA+k4uCAU.(j                              :    V1L#Y.A)+fr5UCAbk.L(1   s   Lik1tCA)
b4:   ITOYCA —

65:   YTOYCA      •
      b1bCAL6LCA(—1)
66:   CTQYCA =         UCA+bCA(XI                 LA—UCA)+(bCAL,k.L.(1 : LkLA)+A*Li.L.(1
      DLL(1 :        MCA)+2UCA*.L.(1               : hWS)+13UCALik.L.(1 s (aMk.L.AA11)
67:   LNYMFIW — (1—ZkFR)               *ppp*y ( 1—fr                        k)        . (-1)
60:   L0(I$FK —. L$PIMFk—L.6pFj
      L.OMkMa     •s LNM6—LkhIX
7U:                    •

71:                  ••

7s:   XTUYFkLX —.
      XTOYk1t((—4)+U.UU131
73:   UT(.Yh      —s

74:
75:                  ••
      bL5MLdL)'1/ (1—bI1t)—7.1uU14
70:                        (LVUs (L.tEP —LNk.Lb)+LV(ji* (L kL,Is—Lk.Uh)+bVLA' (6HA—                       A)+lJ'.,& (t4P—Ltt44

77:   12P&1 •.        GPUfrkl—8GkpxlFl

76:   GRPX1F1 •. 4(IUFs+*2IhtL(1 : L                                   (1))+kbfri1)+frKbd.(1 :
      K11tiL.NPFksU(—1))
      LPL1h1 "
                 ——    4bLL(1          :       LtL)—.KLIKA11(—1)
61:   (kLfkA11 •           4*(LUM+L1*                      IM+L.4ikeLEL(1   :
      LkiL(—1)
                 • BUR+LNMNfr +b lck+UtkIfr k+b41tKk M+blUfr *                                 (US+kk.iX1 1) +j5t      It4
03:              —
                      A1frk+Ah*Lh_1)+_AH)*p_1)+AMU+A7frhtU+A1*
      LfrkU(—)+A11AIUkkL
84:   DU.(1 : Ut&IK)          —   C1FK+LUD.L(1 :                       +C1KbLk(1 :             —1))+2fhibk.L.(1 ;
      LkFk(—2))+C23II5bIL(1                       :   LN      t(—3))+C2k(IJLL.(1 : L.Kfrkt(—b))+C7rhULL(1 : L.0k*hk(
      —7))
      L)LL(1 : LNMt'kh)           •
      +.0frk     (3)fr) )+F (U                                      (Lfrfr(—3)—Pi(—) )

86:          —   DO +DUk,kFX1 1+14Fk*I (—1) +Uj 5bp +MhédJ (—j) +Jj t
      L.NEtU+b12t1XI(Yk kti (—)
87:   LbPIMFk •        LOPLM          (—1)+FUFk+k4UFMbI.L(1 : 110                1)+fr5UEIbLL(i : L          k)+FbUFkD.L(1 *
      Lkk.F*)
00*   ITOUM •
      +UsL1MFk(_1)+17fri*LMIkkK(_2)+U*LMt1MkM(_3)
      TOYfR •
      XTOYF1(—2)+b1 lEh'LNPK                      (—1)+81*t5LM1Kkk k+8IbFMLN'k M(—1)
      CTOYIK UFk+G3 'MFk+04                                    k)11+05fra*MUb+0b*(I0ff6_1Y0k)+0?k(*bk.L.(1             :

      LMIM)+fra*LL(1                       :   L.NkkfrA)
Vi:   LNYkU •
                                                                                                                                    49

                                    •
                Lt,lM.,LL           •
                AT&YL,Lt.                   '1ULAJLA
               blVfljL
                                    •
       97:
       90:
               UL*LPL)*1, (l—.)—7.4USb
       99:     Lt'i1M(,t.
                                        (LIJ0' (LNkUO—L U)+bVj,* (            LN+JLj4'          (    CA       k.A)+bjfrit* (itkIaLt,t.,fr

  1UU:         i.1(L1L " 4&LL(1                   :


  lul:         uixii 4*(U0+j                                       Lk.AL      (_l))+4C,I*U(1         :

  1u:          kkx21                                                            : Lt't.bL))
  1u3:                   •

  1U4:


  luS:        LLL(1 : J(,I)                   —
                                                                              )+UL.            1)+

  1u6:              —



  1u7;        ITUYGL —

 ltJo:                      —
              AL    0(—)+h1u                      .kaL4u     ti   uL(—1)+b1
              —1)
 1U9:         CTOGk. =
                                        :                 ldLL(1 :
              L)OL.U S                                         : atj}+u* L.(1+(lu.*L(1
                                                                               :
                                                                                              : ht,I4+U*.L.(1 :
               S itk.GEX&1)+U*bL(1                    :       A1t—1))+*.41 :
                                                                                                          :


 ilu:         LtYR1TP S
 111:         LNItUT •.
                         "
 113:                     "
114:                     "
115:                            •
110:                    —• II fl—11Uyfl—CT11
117:         LN9WIII "
11o:         LtLtj(11
             bVt*Ltj.j,)e1, (l—IJV11)—b.93905
119:
             LNta1I " (LVtS (Lbkb—LhLL) +bVUK* (—L                              )+bV* (              AA)+frN*
                     "
ltl:         bMX111 — 4*(uI1+N1I*g..L1 S N$N1 _1))+4jTaLk.j(j z
                                                                                                         l(—1))+9zT'(j
             GNkI11!1I =
123:         BaITiL ——          45LLj(1       :
                                                                                                                          50


  144:     (ik1?Z11 —.                                                        z       L11))+j.S1T11
  125:     £JP11 •

  126:     L.NYkfl   •
  127:     D&&4 • UiU1Tp            —   l1T+      1T*+L4LT*(Lh i'LU(.-l)+LNGIIUt ))+ IT*(                      U4 3)+ 1I
           BTOY1T(—1)+bToj())
           kIl   —

           U1U1T*ATjj1U+b11jT*XI(£IL'(—l)
  129:     LkP1iIT —      l(—l)4u1+                     U1T*L(1 : LkMkO1L)+5U12bL(j : Lkit1T)
  13U:     1T()1!I   •
 131:     Il.ilT —
          Al
 132:     TOIi — GUll#b31l*kIT+41T*RLzlxll+IT_bbl.*
                                                    (UY1l—1ltfl)
 13:      LNIJA1 —
                          (l_JA)*JA+zpjA*A+(jALh(_l)
 134:     LN(JIMJA •.

 13b:     L.1thJAU —-

 136:     LkIThJAL —.
          )+U.Ul474—U.37b41ebNA(_4)
 137:                —.

 136:     X1CjJALA —— 4X
                                        JA(—1)—(to)A(_4)_j.j134*(u1L(1                   Alu1jA(—j))—blL(1 :
                                :   AiO..II(—2))—L,ki(1          :
          (—9) +b.UUUuUUk_LJ,
 139:     B?QYA —.         OYJA—IT(IYJA—CT(JYJA

 14U:    .kk1JA'——        1hJA—jejAk
 11:     t.kkkRjA    ——

         DVNk*Ljg) *1/ (1—b,JA) —6.64563
         L6PIt.JA ——      (DVU6
                        (L U6—L (Jb)+bVljk' (
         )+bGI' (LNPGk—L,,jLL)+bVjl. (1l—i L)+Vt.L
                                                                                           (   A—L6t.A)+bvpk*
                                                                             (&—Ltt) )*j/ (1—LIVJA)+U.617771
143:     ZIJA2
144:     SGKPXIJ4 ——       4(KUJA+IJA'L(1                 :
                            :
                                Lhk.JA(—1)))
145:     MkX1JA2
146:     6kJA2L          4*DE.L(1 :
147:     KEJAX21 •. 4 (LUJA+LIJA*bT
                                                                                          )+L5A*LA4+bJA*
                                                       JA+L3JApLGb1frJA+L4JA*bk(1 : L6fr4A)

146:              • blJA+LNMkJA+64JA*
                                                                                                 (MUS+GIILIAZ4I)+bbJA*(

149:     LNYkJA
                                                   (—2)                      (3)
150:     L*..L(1 :   LhMkJA) —
                                +Ll7JA      (u*   (6          (—1) +bl1J   A(4)   )   )+610jA* (6 IA( 3)+bThjA( 4)
         619JA* (Q* (bTOJA(—3)+blt,JA(—4)))
151:     k.JA
                                                               (—1) +b16JAkkXIJA2 (—1)
         U$JAU (—1) +D4JA*N$jA (—2) +bSJA                      JM1 (—3) +U* W,.JAU+b7JA*LNt..j*U 4—1)
152:     L1I4JA — L 1NJA(—1)+iUjA+F3UJA*b(1 : L
          : LNPA)+I'bOJA*L(1 : LkL4)            hthA)+4UJ4*b41 : ITuA)+V5uJAuu(j

153:     1TQJA •

154:     XT(JA - 6UJA+blA*k6M+hs                                       Ml +67Al+bAA1U                                          C
         (_2)+b1uJA*LJA+h [2 *bkA+h1                             3A*(_j)+n14uA*b                      A4—L)+       £*.4J1A
                                                                                                                            51


               .1UJA                                                          a     1+                     :   LA)
  lbb:                          •

  1b7:                               h-L.kPtt.
  lSb:                      —-      L—1tffiA
  1b:          LNM14NL ••
               )—U.4iSiLtihNbL(—4)+u.uubb1
                                ••

  11z          ATONL.X ——
  lbs:                      ••
  1b3:                          •

  1b4:         L.Nkit,.         •.
                   JALN1A) *1/            (1—LJVNL)—7.17Ub
  165:                                                                                                                 (L.hMtd.khc
               )+bL (Lh—Ltk.L)+bVVI                                 11—111)+bjA (.hu.JA) )1/              (j—)+J.jb3o
  166:         1k.1L. —s            4bLL(1        LilY )—Lk1A1NL1(—1)
  167:         WX1ilE1 s. 4'(KU                 +A1i.LL             L.A+          oithI—1)+b.4kt.bLL(1 : i—i))+KbLkt't.(
                                         a

  166:         LMk.tX11 •             4*U+L3              P LI L+L4kLLLL(1 &
  169:         LhktlL   • b1hE+LhNN+b                     Lhkilt.}+b3kLk1+b4athb+b1Ut,sL Ub+LNk.X11)+bbbd
               LhNL(—1)—L.Nt-tL(—I)
  17u:         LtMN •
               L.hPiN.L (—s) +A6             LN#ULJ (—3) +7NL'              Lb+AbNk'L(4lt.La frl) + £LLtLiiLL, (—)   +A1V*.tt.t
  171:         L.L(1 : LtlMt'ikt.) • k.1            +k.      *'+L3t*LN            U+k.4k* (      (—1)+Lt(..65U(—) )+k5N (Lt4k..a(
               —3)+LNGM.u(—4) )+bN                 (Lb L(—1)—LNkbt(—3) )7(u(sL)—3)))+I11hs.


  174:              •
               XT Lta+b11i.LATOL (—1)                      +L13 'Xl               (—3)

  173:


               1I(Nk. •
                        a       j+jI(1 : L
               Lb1t*E • L1L(—1)+tU                          +1Utit'Uk.L(1 &              1(—I))+tut.LL(1
                                                                           L)+kbUtlkLL.(i :
  174:

  175:                      •
                                                                              +LI4'Lhkt
  176:         CTOYhk. •            UilI+1k6
               )+G7NL'1àlYf(Ttk.                                                                                              v

ç(Jk.FI1LNT   AND PAAANLTER VALULS

         LICk                         9.9191(13           kIll                    U.9119       AI(IiL
         Alil                         U.U1lb              LilA                    u.Uub14      Alhil.           (1.UUi4
                                      U.uU5bt1            AlliS                   u.uU7004     AlucA           —u.u134
         A1uka                        U.u1t143            AIIA.k.                 U.u13.b      Aluil
         AluJA                       —U.ub.7                                                                    u.U4S164
                                                          AIWIt.                  u.U35157     A1UUI
         AIuUb                        U.Ub7441            AIICA                   u.b7u57      AluM
         Ai1k.                        U.9b43b
         Alit.k.                      U.U7b19
                                                          AII1T
                                                          AIIWI
                                                                              —u.313459
                                                                                  u.1so3
                                                                                               AliJA           —l.1Ii4
                                                                                               AIILiS           U.717539
         A1CA                         U.1b4bj             A1iM                —1.1.715374      A11.i.
         Ai11                        -U.U44.77            A1.JA                   u.34o5,      ALa.L
         A1WI                         U.444U4                                                                   U.IJb4bo
                                                          A121j5                  U.53s314     ki3CA
         AI3IM                        U.u15316            AI3IJL              —U.3336          A1311
         A13JA                                                                                                 —Ia.s71I4
         A13l                        —1.15516
                                     —u.U415
                                                          A131ii.
                                                          A14t..A
                                                                                  U.Lu4741
                                                                               U.5447o7
                                                                                               AL3             —U.sle7
         A14L.
                                                                                               A14fra           U.i14.4
                                     —U.b14Sb             L141T               —9.465403       AI4JA
         A14o1.                      —9.113143            A14UK                U.UIJbo5       A14Li6
                                      U.134u71                                 U.1u1sb        Aik.              9.94147
         AS1T                         U.u2461             A4JA                —U.U3o3b        AIIL              (1.999174
                                      9.4Ub55             A41.IS                  9.906659    A31..A
                                     —U.b411o             A36L                    u.344067    *311              9.993076
         A3JA
         A39s
                                      U.14673             A3M1..
                                                          A4LA
                                                                                  9.441104    A3               —9.16449
         A4(.t.                       9.969415            MIT
                                                                                  9.177733    A4IM             U.Ubb7o
         £416
                                                                                  u.U79uo4    MiA              9.1913
                                      U.U9444             A4Uo                    u.U4U35     A49b
         A5..A                        9.975535            *511                    u.IuulI     ASLI.            —u.O17S
                                                                                52


 A513         U.4bbb4     ASJA          0.211515     A5tL           —v.03886
             —U.ub2u7     *501.        —0.04704      *61*           0.1,3415
 Ab1         —u.U5S1      at1           0.04070      Ib11           —0.01757
              0.066371                  U.0u6819     A00.           —0.120095
              v.935403    *71*         —U.Uu4b7      A7ka            v.U773
 A7v1.       —u.u3b3o     *711         —u.00134o     i7o*           U.U44tio
 A7tL         U.U3744     A70p.         v.l74o4      A7os          —0.034460
 AOCA        —0.149958    Abtl          U.UU74b.     AbOt.          0.03Usd
 *611         U.0vUS9t    Ab.)A        —U.0195o.s   *ot.           —U.U311b1
 AbOK
 A9Fk
              0.057360
              0.049895
                          *001.         0.13b711     **            —0.U2e
                          *901.        —U.Uu7t.     *911           —U.UU1b.ø
 A9JA         v.044973    Att.          0.016572    *90K            '0.110697
 *901.        0.05507     61CA          0.119397    Bilk             0.05476
 B1GE         U.U3547     bill'        0.206264      U1JA            0.446139
 1.1         —0.005615    1.10K       —0.151936      bioS            0.063,05
 OIUCA       —U.056102    b1UF1        0.029941      B1UGE         —0.000u47
 BIUIl'      —0.037106    O1OJA        0.060375      1.1081.        0.000617
 0100K        0.076828    01006       —0.001131      B2CA          —0.218794
             —0.018392    B2GE        —0.063613     021?           —0.069662
 B2JA        —0.201664    b2N         —0.081635     020K           —0.046694
 b2US        —0.022227    63CA        —0.152691     b3fr           —0.018886
 B3G1.       —0.006227    B31T        —0.042952     B3JA           —0.065941
 6381.        0.107645   030K         —0.276035     03Us           —0.09072
 64CA         0.244962   B4Fk          0.462903     B4GI.            0.023618
 1.41?        0.160445   O4JA          0.95586      1.481.         —0.013744
 040K         0.504004   64LJS         0.346502     8SCA           —0.626784
B5fr'        —0.996486   OSOl.        —0.935252     1.51?          —0.947064
B5.JA        —0.827685   8585         —0.890964     850K           —U.d'2932
BSIS         —0.9906     E6CA         —1.07b06      661k           —0.724769
O6GL         —1.07676    1.61?        —1.24523      O6JA           —0.986582
             —0.977966   860K         —0.689923     8605           —0.725651
1.7CA        —0.267171   071k         —0.237026     07G1.          —U.14173o
1.71?        —0.191914   1.7JA        —0.356022     b'NL           —0.451249
070K          0.037385   b7US         —0.393195     66CA           —0.271711
B8Fk          0.024827   86G1.        —0.311723     1.81?          —0.378615
B6JA         —0.312743   0881.        —0.621455     01.0K          —0.151933
8806          0.169832   89CA         —0.635726     B9FR            0.04942
O9GE         —0.308631   1.91?        —0.151063     O9JA           —0.209714
6981.        —0.309134   6908         —0.167466     6908            0.010405
C1Fk          0.001842   CiUK          0.002293     CbS             0.004693
C2016        —0.033332   C200K        —0.067536     C2OUS          —0.14491
C21FR        —0.036075   C2ILiK       —U.U34o1      62106          —9.187741
             —0.024205   1220K        —0.064932     62200          —0.050047
(231k        —U.OlloUl   62308        —0.054061     C23LiS          0.063531
             —U.003o91
             —0.010717
                         (S4uK        —U.U4113      12400           0.U5u9
                         (.2508       —0.01505      C2SUS           0.017716
C26FR         0.000474   C26UK        —0.005727     62606          —0.027592
C27Fk         0.0072     C271JK        0.000353     C2705          —0.061705
DVCA          0.046296   DVFR          0.077221     DVGL            0.107001
DVI?          0.046061   DVJA          0.107698     DVNE            0.016771
DVIJK         0.063287   DVUS          0.531464     OUCA            9.092006
DOFR          0.003366   D0.L          0.003628     001?           —0.002471
DOJA         —0.000932   DUNE          0.003585     000K            0.003081
DUOS          0.010089   D1CA          0.049893     D1FR            0.073674
D1GE          0.231726   Dill'         0.02'uoo     D1JA            0.027117
DiNE         —0.043995   010K          0.009035     0101.           0.434367
D10CA        —0.007863   D1OFR         0.20013      D10GE           U.2u21
0101?         0.239529   010.3*        0.007344     010116          U.137uu2
01008         0.192506   01005         0.508074     D11C.A          0.037266
D11F8         0.12236    D11GE        —0.24156      Dill?           0.161757
011.3*       —0.025161   DuNk.         0.0616'      D11UK           0.010407
DuOS          0.23597    D12CA        —0.013955     D12114          0.194568
012GE         0.0877     D12IT         0.054745     012.3*          0.025661
012111.       0.03381    01208        —0.003938     01205           0.544253
D13CA        —0.032712   01318         0.07675      D136E          —0.24942
0131?        —0.009773   D13JA         0.002267     013116          0.046054
01308         0.213998   D13US        —0.213716     D14CA           0.961063
D14F8         0.763452   D14GE         0.762b4      0141?           1.02760
D14JA         0.983108   01481.        0.799926     01406           0.625856
D14US         0.539202   D1SCA    —3.4961871.—US    D15fr'R,        0.000154
D1SGE     3.84555u5—05   DiSIE     1.9603'uL—US     D1S.JA     —2.144426k—US
01581.        0.000151   D1SUK         0.000103     61505      —b.0917961.—06
D16CA        0.005978    DI6FR         0.0124       01661.         —0.08953
D161T       —0.019956    0163*         0.030426     01686           0.04514
0160K       —0.022298    01601.       —0.154852     G2CA           —0.070202
D2FO        —0.49829     D2GI.         0.1307       021?           —0.020308
02.3*       —0.006893    02111.        0.07030      0208           —0.299786
D206        —0.230722    D3CA          0.015319     03F8           —0.154023
D3GE         0.07571     031?          0.004611     D3JA           —0.021473
03116       —0.162029    030K          0.025404     D3US            0.163077
D4CA         0.092636    D4FI         —0.09139      6461.           0.10942
041?         0.037063    D4JA         —0.032911     04111.          0.06593
0401         0.036448    0408          0.091485     D5CA            U.11b4b4
DSFO         0.03674     DSGE          0.05852      05!?            0.02739
                                                                                          53

   05Th          —0.016782
  U5US
                                 DStiE             0.00622       050K          0.077159
                  0.103347       D6CA             —0.073145      DbF
  D6GI           —0.02391        bOlT                                         —0.034920
  DONE                                            —0.UUSSO7      O6JA         U.UU0409
                  0.00239        &bL,1(           —0.050417      D6U
  D7CA           —0.001992       b7Ej                                        —0.020453
  v7ir                                             0.01672       O7GL         U.00277
                 —0.004384       D7JA              0.001793
  070K            U.O2254
                                                                D7tif.        0.00041
                                 070s              0.01894      DOCA
  DOPE           —0.01609                                                     0.032561
                                DOGE             —0.0128        DOlT         —0.000764
  08Th            0.000889      DONE
  D8US                                            0.00804       080K          0.014188
                   0.02294      D9CA               0.01'43      091k
  D9GE             0.01666                                                   —0.00794
                                0911             —0.003281      D9JA
  D9NE             0.01609      090K
  EICA                                            0.001453      0905          0.015392
                   0.007281
  6111            0.019544
                                L1fr'frt

                                LIJA
                                                  U.0333s       L1GL          U.U13ø
                                                  IJ.054t74     L1t6          0.010131
  6101k
                 —0.00433
                  1.58587
                                L1LjS
                                Llut.l.
                                                  u.uu3         k.IuCA       —U.U34S9o
                                                 —0.038416      k.1011        0.105504
  L1UJA           0.005094
  61005
                                L10t,.            0.033038      6100K         1.3133
                  0.116645      LIICA            —0.054589      6111k
  LI1GI.          0.102443      6111T
  6118k.
                                                 —0.1b347       LIIJA        —U.041uS
                  0.004899      611bi            —0.550499      61105
                —0.077664       L12fra
                                                                              U.4s6361
  612U                                            4.39695       L1.bt.       —0.191149
                  0.126007     LI2JA             —U.lSb4US
  k.I2UK                                                        61281.        0.019509
                  5.57298      LI2US             —U.460u37      LI3CA
 E13FR          —3.24907                                                     —0.041273
 E13JA
                               L13GE              0.084755      L1311        —0.151066
                  U.2842b7     6138L             —0.028792      1.130K
 £13uS          —0.054576                                                    —4.2394
                               L14CA             —0.396027      1.141k
 E14GL            1.628                                                       0.10534
                               6141T             —3.88655       L14JA
 61486            0.403001     6140K                                          1.9SU5
 6151k                                           —0.068405      LISCA         3.b875,
                  0.103117     L1%1.              0.019635      L1SIT
 E1SJA          —0.574234      L1SNE                                          4.10458
 616cA                                            0.700025      61506         0.596783
                  0.670052     ElOPE              0.100524      61606
 6161T            1.57536                                                     0.09370
                               L1OJA              1.83261       LLOEE
 61606           0.282168      L17CA
                                                                              0.2927o1
 EI7GI.
                                                 —2.84711       1.171k       —0.132219
                 0.332797      6171T             —0.686028      L17JA
 61786          —0.892653                                                    —2.53069
                               L1'UK             —0.521172      LIOCA
 E1OFR           0.761771      E1OGE                                          0.286180
 E1OJA                                            0.625931      E1OIT        —0.372264
                 1.71901       E18NE              0.091526      1.1806
 LL9CA           2.14929                                                      0.187571
                               6191k              0.060450     LI9GL          0.039871
 EI9IT           0.810022      E19JA
 £1906                                           —1.7b2u       6191.L        —0.971241
                —0.204191      E2CA              0.000104      1.21k
 K2GK       —8.0640016—05                                                    —0.000192
                               621T              0.000454      L24A      —1.0682515—05
 E2NE            0.000421      E2UK         —6.443714E—07      62.1J$         0.000243
 E2LJ0S          0.496825      62105            —0.248602      E3CA
 E311            0.00301       L3GE                                          0.10149
 E3JA                                            0.043045      £31T         —0.014448
                —0.021066      13NE              0.058633      £306
 6305            0.004036      L4CA                                          U.1U7434
 £4GE                                            0.130066      L41k          0.011217
               —0.014921       E4IT             —0.03104       L4.1&
 1.486         —0.027174                                                     0.031742
 E5CA
                               64LJ1(            0.163098      £4JJS         0.001552
               —0.003532       ESFR             —0.017824      £SGL
 £511          —0.023132       £SJA                                         —0.0225
 £506           0.02989
                                                 0.026105      L5.L         —0.040335
                               ESLiS             0.033956      LOCA
 LOPE          —0.057298       LOCk.                                        —0.197234
 L6JA                                            0.09'bbb      Lbl!1        —0.09435
               —0.564806       66K1.            —0.316001      LOOK
 E6US          —0.057597       L7CA                                          0.07705
 E7GE                                            0.264871      E7FR          0.574765
               —0.637o7        671T              0.037192      E7JA
 E7NE             0.206985     1.706
                                                                             0.415324
 LOPE                                            0.024239      E8CA         —0.113296
                —0.0748        I.OGL            —0.i4314
 L8JA           —0.226858      LONE
                                                               1.811         0.262491
 6805                                            0.05664       LOOK           0.156708
                —0.286081      L9CA             —0.001604
 E9GE                                                          E91k           0.28364
                 0.700672      £91T             —0.129687      L9JA
 E9NE            0.062226      £906                                          0.014509
POPE                                            —U.074'46      PUCA          0.001455
                —0.00816      lOGE              —0.010675
FOJA                                                          FUll          —0.009255
                —0.018463     POkE              —U.U04'oS
FOUS             0.000225
                                                              P00K          —0.015403
                              IIUCA             —0.053768     FlukE
F1OGE            0.242206     Fluir                                         —0.099353
PlUNk.                                           0.072019     F1OJA          0.124016
                 0.223077     FIUUK             —0.002007
 P2OCA         —0.245403                                      PIOUs          0.616185
                              P201k             0.052207      F2UGI.
 1201?           0.176537     E2OJA                                          0.006946
F2OUK                                          —0.0173        F20N1.         0.09354
               —0.040341      P2uU5             0.06,515
F3OPR          —0.026652                                      130cA          0.279496
                              P3OCE             0.290149      13011
F3OJA            0.804933     13081.
                                                                           —U.14b7b
F300s                                          —0.255302      i30UI          U.740935
                 0.15222      P4OCA             0.704069
F4OGE          —0.377934                                      P401k          1.76086
                              F4OIT            —0.221008      I4OJA
F4ONE            0.138543     1400K                                          3.84313
                                                0.189983      F4OUS
PSOCA
P5011
                 0.270787
                 1.31648
                              b50                1.25097      l5U.
                                                                             2.25319
                                                                             1.20028
                              IS0JA             1.30657       150N6
P5UUK            1.28695      P5005                                          0.968503
P601k                                           0.153811      P6UCA         0.02143
                 0.612717     POOGE             0.468396
F6OJA            0.710113                                     P6011        —1.1264
                              FOOtiL            U.'99582      F6UU,
COCA           —u.U03648      GUFk                                          0.533112
COIl                                           —0.001236      000k.        —0.012u5o
               —0.003179      GOJA              0.045769
COOK                                                          GUNk.        —0.008552
                0.013468      GOUS              0.004420
G1PE       —9.407IS5i—                                        GLCA         —0.000105
                              GIGI.        —3.9271201.—DO     GilT
GIJA       —3.6584646—05      G1NE                                          0.009155
                                            2.1'39916—us      0106         —0.000265
                                                                               54



  Cbs     5.279754E—o5     G1OCA       —0.050435      GIOFA
  G1OGE                                                            0.636361.
             —0.002451     (Ufl         1.38277       G1OJA       —U.610b5
  G1ONL
  G11CA
              0.696158
             —0.298437
                           G1(J1,K      0.'5'122      GlLaLiS     —0.299741
                           (.IuIi       0.25753       G11OL      —U.42S43
  Gull        0.442983     GI1JA      —1.14262
  G11UK      —0.828963     GllLjS
                                                     GI1N6       —U.6b77
                                        0.347436     G12CA        0.1657e
  G12FR       0.908516     G12GE        0.405291
  G12JA                                              G12IT        0.361741
             —0.346612     G12N6       0.363585      G12UK       —0.680074
  G12US      —0.480483     G2CA        U.UU'542      G2Fh
  G2GE                                                            0.013437
              0.0044       G21?        0.000184      GJA          0.031405
  G2NE        0.015183     G2UK       —0.046579      G2US
  G2OCA                                                          —0.001341
              0.259146     G2OFR      —0.654758      GIUGL        0.621408
  G2OIT      —0.172217     G2OJA      —0.826017      G20116       0.983567
  G200K      0.317069      G201JS      0.007598      G21CA        0.213911
  G2IFR     —0.994672      G21GC       0.132577
  G21JA                                              G2111       —0.3S4b9
            —0.091766      G21NE       0.171835      0210K       —0.576976
  G2IUS      0.034483      G22CA      —0.194406      G221h
  G22GE                                                           0.386726
             0.546939      G221T      —0.02103       G22,JA
  G228E      0.979839                                            —0.232578
                           G22UK       0.525568      G220s        0.111434
  G3CA      —0.209463      G3FR       —0.249651
  G3IT                                               G3G6        —0.3022
            —0.204769      G3JA       —0.583978      G3NL        —0.6'9193
  G3UK       0.'52483     G3US
 G3OFk     —0.002254      G30GE
                                      —0.100705      G3OCA        0.04415
                                       0.052299      G301'r      —0.045144
 G3OJA      0.038284      G3ONE       —0.086553
 G300S                                              G300K        —0.342353
           —0.003303      G31CA       —0.048232     G31FR         0.000667
 G31GL      0.046935      G31IT        0.037957
 G31NE                                              G31JA         0.033051
           —0.051527      G310K       —0.076466     G3IUS         0.003961
 G32CA     —0.06872       G32ER       —0.017263
 G321T                                              032GE         0.051619
            0.071145      G32JA        0.023627     G3286         0.04683
 G32UK      0.016799      G321Js      —0.004193
 G4FR                                               G4CA          0.399296
            0.073793      G4GE         0.097097     G41F          0.071244
 G4JA       0.05497       G4NE         0.024806     G4L,K         0.444298
 G4LJS     —0.034747      GSCA         0.525327     GSFK          0.332204
 G5G6       0.243101      GSIT         0.328725
 GSNE                                               GSJA          0.064557
            0.543858      GSOK        —0.927833     GSUS
 G6CA                                                             0.20976s
            0.854509      G6FR         0.184551     G6GL          0.679257
 Gb!?       0.4522        O6JA        —0.212536
 G60K                                               G6bL          0.53443
           —1.08654       0605         0.571938     G7CA          0.101733
 G7FR       0.060923      G7GE        —0.065372     0711         —0.006446
 G7JA       0.04405       G7#L         0.077908
 G7IJS
                                                    G7UK         —0.6961.00
           —0.053545      G8CA        —0.115046     (..OFi         0.076835
 GOGE       0.516343      0811'       —0.125914     GUJA         —0.219103
 GONE      —0.045435      GOLIK        0.51128      GULlS        —0.106903
 G9CA       0.037359      G9F        —0.195855
 09!?                                               G9GL         —0.940236
           —0.262394      G9JA        0.0347b6      G9NL         —0.454351
 G9UK       0.060414      G9IiS       0.05499       6UCA          0.203b9b
 IlOFk      0.129624      #001.       U.0896b4      801?         —0.876539
 HOJA      —0.060943      #081.       0.253769
 800S                                               iluInc        0.548739
            0.077502      H1CA       —0.152912      #11.8         0.U73406
 H1GE       0.040467      6111'      —0.018547      kI1JA         0.016673
 HIKE       0.12252       H1IJK       0.051451
HIOCA                                               8106          0.014957
            0.025102      H1OFR        0.010249     81001         0.247567
8101?     —0.071293       H1OJA        0.010682     81001.
8100K                                                             0.586296
            0.091918     81005         0.00826     HIICA        —0.049446
H11FR       0.239274     HuGE          0.044574
HI1JA                                              HIll?          U.081144
          —0.048667      111181.     —0.41708      HI1UK          0.306618
HuLlS       0.01138      1112CA        0.113463    6121.8         0.248513
141201.     0.1238       81211'        0.05552     8I2JA
81281.                                                          —0.119308
            0.500342     8120K       —0.010101     III3CA         0.08955
8131.8      0.054154     81301       —0.021665     8131?          0.201312
H13JA       0.149767     H13NE       —0.165191
HL4CA                                              8130K          0.113126
            0.085463     HI4FR       —0.021497     61401.       —U.0b6495
81411'      0.05593'     I1I4JA      —0.010149     01481.       —0.499365
8140K     —0.103932      HI5CA        0.035674     6151.8       —0.077089
H1SGE     —0.326'02      815!?       —0.109401
H15NE                                              H1SJA        —0.03302
            0.186242     8150K       —0.124118     II2CA          0.085196
82FR      —0.000659      H2GE        —0.001326
H2JA                                               82!?           0.001095
            0.000277     8201.       —0.003371     #20K
#205                                                            —0.006863
           0.01107       #3CA        —0.038753     H3FR           0.049731
83GL       0.009901      8311'        0.164379     H3JA         —0.012907
8381      —0.065659      830K         0.140371     113us        —0.00087
II4CA      0.053718      II4FR       —0.003771     H4GE          0.003139
1141?     —0.000501      H4JA        —0.000414     11401         0.000240
H4UK       0.003317      8405         0.610356
HSFR       0.01573
                                                   IISCA         0.012595
                         8501.        0.028759     H5!'l'        0.016264
IISJA
HSUS .
          —0.000268      #so          0.032386     1*500         0.014503
           0.072265      H6CA        —0.066548     1*bFai        0.011124
II6GE      0.043488      1161?       —0.116616
H6NE                                               U6JA         —0.030658
           0.154034      11600       —0.03o433     86L4S
H7CA                                                             0.010184
          —0.001767      67FR        —0.00426      8701.        —0.001028
87!?      —0.001111      H7JA        —0.000251
1170K
                                                   14701.       —0.002796
          —0.002765      8'us        —0.008496     I*OCA         0.3425b9
           0.234953      HOGI         0.347365     8811          0.23S021
HOJA       0.292216      HONE         0.51165      8800          0.329246
                                                                      55



 8808         0.067992    H9CA     0.272154    89F1(       0.250369
 H9GE         0.113401    691?     0.229865    69JA        0.123404
 h9Nt         0.081916    690K     0.102093    8905        0.010369
 IOCA        —0.372035    IUFR    —0.040159    IUGL       —0.113784
 101?        —0.361626    IUJA    —0.023309    lONE       —l.378b8
 lOOK        —0.334918    bUS     —0.104698    IICA        0.202255
 I1FR         0.795262    I1GE     0.545657    lilT        0.772121
 I1JA         U.'20108    liNE     0.326505    110K        8.346074
 1105         0.661462    I2CA     0.127649    128k        0.010317
 12GE         0.032126    1211'    0.036875    I2JA        0.002864
 1268         0.364942    120K     0.13774     1208        0.018057
 I3CA        —0.017921    I3FR     0.062886    I3GE        0.032967
 1311'        0.093963    I3JA     0.013094    1388        0.277274
 130K        —0.08037     130S     0.082842    I4CA        0.179301
 141R        —0.059963    I4GL     0.014642    1411       —0.013915
 I4JA         0.00033     1468     0.042767    140K        0.034769
 140$        —0.066497    I5CA     0.131179    ISFK        0.037033
 ISGE        —0.007693    1511'   —0.040057    ISJA        0.010134
 ISNE         0.406705   150K      0.129456    ISUS        0.036639
 I6CA        —0.075556   I6FR     —0.018874    IbGE        0.033623
 161?         0.117275   I6JA      0.053006    I6hk       —0.157412
 160K         0.085876   1605      0.052165    I7CA       —0.055634
 17Fh        —0.041407   17G8      0.053553    1711'      —0.091501
 I7JA    —8.8864788—05   1768     —0.074126    17011      —0.031961
 170$        —0.068607   I8CA      0.066109    I8FR        0.018122
 I8GE        —0.028847   181?      0.016146    I8JA       —0.041865
 I6NE        —0.04174    180K      0.014522    180$        0.004386
 KUCA        —0.03672    KOF6     —0.007933   KUGI.       —0.004160
 1(01?        0.030647   KUJA      0.066137   11061       —0.019439
 KOOK        —0.085985   11005    —0.118647   K1CA        —1.00189
 K1FE         0.09516    K1GE      0.084483   KIlT       —70.1123
 K1JA        —0.28134    1(181     0.074312   K10K        —0.211225
 K1LJS       —I.'04      K1OCA    —0.50794    K1UFK       —0.10998
 K1OGE      —0.05558     1(101?    0.1779     ILOJA       —0.05976
 K1ONE       0.11578     1(100K   —0.364917   111005      —0.266557
 K11CA       0.43356     K1IFR    —0.205692   K11GI.       8.54003
 Kill?       0.510236    K11JA     0.10676    1(1161.     —0.120611
 Kiluk       0.12146     K11US    —0.01l'24   K12CA       —0.16197
1(1216      —0.04162     1(1201   21.9658     1(121?       0.196408
KI2JA        0.15317     1(1261   —7.00023    K12&JI(     —0.40683
1(1205       0.222       K13CA    —0.19053    11316       —0.07258
K13GE       26.5363      K13IT     0.182301   K13JA        0.0343
K13NE       —5.78759     113011    0.28402
KI4CA
                                              11305        0.02
            —0.2'53      1(1416    0.6105     1(1461.      0.1874
1(1411       0.1566      K14JA     0.2194     1(1461      —0.2528
1(140K      —0.211'      1(14US    U.27b      K1SCA       —0.6962
KiSEK       —0.1698      K1SGE.    0.5547     1(1511'      0.4312
K1SJA        0.4259      1115N8    0.5438     115011       0.3135
KIS0S       —0.1317      K2CA     —0.04238    1(216        0.1733u7
112G8       79.9045      1(21?    —0.37oS3    K2JA         0.14682
1(268       —0.064781    1201     —0.305546   K2Lib        0.087633
K3CA        0.06676      1(316    —0.34383    1(361       —0.02164
1(311'     —10.1092      K3JA     —0.18026    1(388       —5.04602
1(30K        0.563968    K308     —0.065193   K4CA         0.06475
1(416        0.0028      K4GE      0.136669   1(4!?       —0.185426
K4JA        —0.02574     K4NE      0.243743   1(4011       0.129067
1(405       —0.055842    KSCA      0.34556    1(516        0.05509
1(568       —0.01241     1(51?     0.U162     KSJA         1.33237
1(561.      —0.04987     1(5011    0.02992    1(505        0.140337
K6CA        —0.51519     1616      0.216151   K6GE         0.089455
1(6!?       —0.004496    K6JA     —2.03841    K6NE.        0.108302
K6LJK        0.14599     K6US     —0.038      K7CA         0.01197
K7F1         0.00344     K7GL      0.01886    K7IT        —0.03065
1('JA        0.056447    1761.    —0.03923    K7UK         0.041818
K7US         0.008       I8CA     —0.0327     1(816        0.01106
K8GE         0.01352     1(81?    —0.01914    1(8.3*       0.00436
1(868       —0.02741     1801     —0.028305   1805        —0.009
K9CA         0.49477     1(916     0.11732    K9G6         0.579013
1(91'!      —0.15663     K9JA     —0.212914   1(968       —0.392292
K901(        0.350697    K9US      0.246549   L0C.A      —0.000111
1.016        0.001753    LOGE      0.001334   1.01?        0.0001U6
LOJA        —0.000313    LONE     —0.001407   LOOK
L1CA
                                                           0.001221
            —0.044797    1.111    —0.736738   LiCE        —0.672213
LilT        —0.2118      1.1.3*   —0.579833   LINE        —0.1362
L1UK        —0.5398      L2CA     33.9022     1216       131.55
1.268     —113.957       L21?     17.655
L2NE
                                              02.3*     —405.337
            10.9493      L2LJK    29.8764     L3CA        —0.0089
1.316        0.6546      1.368    —0.2109     1.31?       —0.032609
L3JA         0.076104    L3NE     —0.192914   1.30K        0.1369
L4CA         0.510603    0416      0.916987   L4GE         0.238757
0411'        0.90475     143*      0.142362   1481.       0.624358
04(1K        0.564549    LSCA     —1.         1516
LSGE.
                                                         —0.036492
             0.0106      1.51?    —1.         LSJA       —0.0779
L58E.        0.024793    1.501    —0.023716   1.616      —0.45
                                                            56




L6GE     —0.0086    LbJA     —0.339w    L7FR
HUCA     —0.00314   MOFR      0.06315   PW(..     0.00864
MOlT      0.0232    I'iOJA    0.00323   MONI      0.02739
NOUN      0.00591   MiCA      0.05103   M1frI     0.13361
MlG      —0.95133   NuT      —U.Ub91    IilJA    —0.03233
M1t..     0.11611   M1UK      U.b0037   N2CA     —0.00663
M2EN     —0.06955   M2GE      U.O537    M2IT     —0.029
M2JA     —0.03956   M2NE     —0.07816   M2UK     —0.02808
P131A     0.07509   M3FR     —1.13931   N3CjE.   —U.34b5
M3IT      0.16727   M3JA     —0.871'7   M3NL
M3UK      1.20971   $4CA     —0.30121   M4FN      1.42566
M4GL.     2.98731   M41r      0.1553    N4JA      3.9244
N4t'EE   —0.10364   M4UK     —2.03667   MSCA      0.16036
M5F      —3.15593   II5GE    —0.13434   MSIT     —0.35633
MSJA     —0.02198   MSNE     —1.9'4b2   MSUK     —0.98976
M6CA      0.31538   M6FR     —0.39385   N6GI      0.10685
M6IT      0.15115   MÔJA      0.20401   N6NL     —U.35o13
M6UK     —0.20116   P         4.        XPCA      0.012
          0.01319   XPGL      0.01143   XPIT      0.01218
XIJA      0.0228    XPNE.     0.01161   XPUK      0.0067
X1-US     0.00866   Z?CA      0.025               0.025
ZPGE      0.025     IPIT      0.025               0.025
          0.025     ZPUK      0.025     PUS       0.025
                                                                                                           57




                                                                  TABLE   3

                                                   The Floating Period Idel: Mark IV—FLT



 SYMBOL DLCI.ARATIONS


 INDOGENOUS:
      bIOiCA BTOYFR BTOYGE BTOYIT BTOYJA BTOYNL BTOUK bTIjYUb CTO(.A CIUYIR C?UYGI. CIIJYIT
      CIUYJA ClOThE CTOYUR CTOYUS GRLCAXLL LRtkitAlt Gk&.GLX1 GKk1IX11 kLJAX41 GMEhkX1I
      GkLUKX11 GRPXICA1 GKPX1Fk1 GkkXICk.l GMPX1ITL GRiXlJA4 (MFiIINkJ GMkAIIJaI GMPA1U1 li.OYCA
      ITOYPK ITOYGE ITOYIT ITOYJA ITOYNL ITUYUK ITUYUi L.hkCA LNLFM LtdLUL LNLVI' LM.JA INLhL.
      LRLUII LNMCAU LNNFRU LNW..LU
      LNMNGL
                                     LtNITLi LNhIAU LNPNA LNPNLALX L.bkhLU LNNMa                     LNNI.LA
              t.MMNGIEX LNMNIT L.hMNITLX LNNMJA LtshIJIiLA LM.kNk. LNNNNE.LX LNNNUK                 LkNhUKLX LkMIsUS
      LNNIU5LX LkMUKU LNMUSIJ LNPCA LIEPER LNPGk. L.I*IMCA                    U*IPIFM L.tdINGL LNP1MII L.NkINJA
      LNPIPN1. LNPIMuK LNPIMUS LP&Vr LNPJA L.NINE L.NPkCA                     LhLkFk LtIPkL LhPbtI1 L.kPRJA LkPMM.
    LkPhlJk LNPMUS LkPUI( LNPU6 LkIMCA LNINIh LbL1M4 LMIM11 L.MJMJA L.KGIPthL Lkl.IMUX
    LNLINUS LNYRCA l.bYRCA&- LhYkFR LMYKFkP LNYkGL LPIYRGLP L1KIT LkYKIIP LtMJA LMYJAP
    1.NYkNl LNYRNLP LJIYMkCA LMYkFR LMYKKGL L.NYIMIT LIiYkkJA LNYathhL LNYMkUK LhYRkITh LhYMLCA
    LNYMTFR LNYkTGE LNYRTIT LNYWtJA L.NYRTME LNYkTUK LI4YNTUS LNYRUK LRYRUI(P LNYRUS Lt4YhSP
    RCA RER RGL RI? RJA RNE hUll RUS
    XTOYCA XlOYCAEX XPOYCAU XTOYFR XTOYFkLX
                                            SGkPXIC1 5GkPXiI b(ikIXilt bGkPXlJ4 Uli11 UNW LiNUS
                                                 XTOYFN0 AIOYGI IITUYGLLX XIOYI..EU ATUVIl
    XlOYITIX XTOYITU JITOYJA X1OYJALX XIOYJAU X1(jYt.L     UYNLLX XIUYNLL XI(JIUK XTUYUk1.A
    XTOYUKU   XTOYUS X?CYtJSE.A XIOYUSU XLCAIL ZIGEIL I1ITI aljA IINLLL k1UKLL ZIUS1L X21N.L
 EX0GEN0US
    LNIUS LNGCAU LNGFRU LNGGEU LNGItU LNGJAU LNGN1.U LI4GUKU LNGUSU LNRPOIL I

 COEFFICIENT
      A1CA        A1LR ALGE Al!? ALJA ALNL AlOE A1US AlUIl AIUJA AlONE. AIULS AIICA Auth A1IL1
      ALlI? AL1JA AIlNE. ALIUS AI2GL AL2NI. ALljI AlUS AI3GL A131I AL3JA A13N1. A141A A14LL
      A14JA AI4NL A2CA A2FR A2GE A2IT A2JA A2NE AUK AUS A3CA A3Fk A3GL A3N1.
                                                                                  A3LiE A3US
      A4CA A4IIE A4US ASCA MIT ASJA AN1. AHCA AbEdi.
                                                      A6US A7Fh A7GL A71dL A1UE ANCA AdLL
      ANNE ANUS A9FR A9NE A9UIC A9US SICA HLFk BIGE 511? S1JA NiNE. blUE BlUS BIUIE NIUJA
      EIONE BIOUK B2CA B2FR b2GE b21? 52.3* BNL 52UK b2US L3CA 53.3* B3NE 1.3U1 5305 B4CA
      541M B4GE B41? B4JA B4NL 14U11 54LS BCA BSEI( bGL bI1 SSJA ShidE BSUE •SUS NSCA
      E6PR B6GE B6IT B6JA BSNE B6UK SbUS N7CA B7PR 57G1. 571? N7JA B7NL 5706 BN(.A SaGE.
      581? B8JA B8NE BNUS B9CA B9GE 591? 69.3* S9NE CIFR CLUE CIUS C2OFR C200& C200S
      C21FR C21UK C21US L22FR C220K C22US C23FR C23UK (.23U6 C24UE C24U6 C251k C25UK C2NUS
      C27Fk C27U5 DOCA DOFR DOGE. DOlT DUJA LONE bOOK DUUS DICA 011k U1GE. OuT D1JA I1NL
     D1UI( OiLS 0101? D1ONE 0100K D100S Dill? DuNE 1)1105 0121k Li12US 013N1. 0130i t.14LA
     D14FR 014G1. 0141? D14JA 014NE D141JK 01405 Li1SCA bl5frk D1SJA D1SXL D1SUE 01506  i.iINJA
     D16US D2FR 02.3* 020K D2LS D3FR D3JA D3N1. 0306 D4CA D411 D4JA 1)4kb DSCA USJA 050K
     D5US         D6CA DSrR D6UK 071? D7JA DNCA D9CA E1CA LIEN E1GL El!? L1JA B1RS 110K sios
     E1OCA E11FR EI1NE L11UK £1105 £12FR E12JA 512N1. 1.120K 1.1205 E1311t £131? 1113.3*     1.130K
     E14CA E14FR E14GE £141? E14JA E14NE 1.140K EISCA 1.151? £15011 &1NCA Ll6Pk Elbil        L1NJA
     E16NE £16011 E17CA 1.17.3* 117ME £170K ELNFM £1NGE LINJA t.lbUl( £I9CA k.1SJA E2CA £2PM
     E2IT E2NE 1120$ £2OLJS 11210S 1.3CA L3GL L3EdE 1.3011 I4CA 1.41k 1.4!? E4RL 1.4011 1.511 1.5kb
     1150$. E6FR E61? E6JA E6NE L7GE 1.7.3* E7NE E8FM E8GE 1.5.3* 1.80$ L9Pk L9G1. FOCA FUE'k
     LOGE P01? P0.3* LONE P0011 PODS PiCA F1FR P1GE FlIT P1.3* FiNE FLUE PIOUS F2PN P2OUS
     F3CA P3FR F3GE F4G1. P4.3* P4005 P5005 F6CA FbFR PbGE FbI? 16.3* P6NE FNUK COCA       GUIR
     COGS GUI? GOJA GONE GOUlI COOS G1JA G1NE G1US ClOCk G1UGE G12W( Gl'S G2NE G2UK
     G2OCA G2OGE G220K G22US C31I G31T G3JA G3NE C3OCA G3OGL G32lK G32U5 G4FR G411 C4JA
     C4t15 GSFR
                GSIT GSJA GSNE G6CA GNFR G6GE Gb!? GbME G6UK GNUS GNE. GlUE GNCA 08th
     GNGE GNJA G8UK G9CA G9FR G9GE EIUCA hUlk HOGE 1101? IIUJA NONE. 110011 11005 SIlk 1*101.
     51.3* MiNE 111011 1110$ HIOGE 1110.3*  II1UNE. 11100K HIICA 8111k Hill? HIIUE III2CA 11121k
     1112GE H12JA 1112145 H13CA 11131T 1113.3* H13NE 5130K HL4JA HI4NE. hl4UIl II1SCA 8151k N1SGE
     H1SIT         815011 8205 H3CA H3FR 1131? H3UK 8308 H4CA 114U11 84U6 HSCA HSFR HSGL 1*511 II5JA
     HSNE         550K 86!? 563* H6NE MiCA H7FR 1111? 87.3* 57141. 117011 IINCA 801k 55Gb 5611 IINJA
     HSNI.        88011   1180$   II9CA 1191R 1191?   119.3* lUCk 10114 IOGE. lull IUJA lONE. LOOK IUU8 IICA
     111k  I1GE. lilT 11.3* likE 11011 110$ !2US I3CA 11114 13US 14111 141? 143* 1401. LSCA
     15145 15011 I5US I6CA I6FR 16G11 161? 16.3* I6NE bUll 1605 170$ JOCA JOPR JOGE
     303* JOkE 30011 JiCA .31.3* J1UJ( J4CA                                             .301?
     KOEk                                                     .32FR J2GE 321? J2NE .3311 .13kb 330K J4GE KUCA
                  KOGE KOIT 1103* KONE 1100K 11005 liCE lINE 111*11 K1UCA 1110011 K1UU$ llhlFb K11IT
     KliNE         1111011 111105    1112!?        KI4CA 1.141k K141T 1114.3* K1414L 111401. 111406 KISCA
                                              1113CA 11131?
     1115114 E1SIT 1115.1* K15bL 1115011 KiSUS K2CA 112111 1121? K2JA 1.2141. 11401. 11205 K3CA E3U1I
     11305 K4GE 1141? K4NE 114011 114U5 K5CA KSJA 1.505 CA 1161k
     1171111 118011 £9CA £9111 119G5 1191? K9JA 1191411 119011 11905 MUCA 1(6Gb KNIT 116.1* 11614k K7JA
                                                                           MUIR NUGE (SUIT MUJA NONE.
     NOOK MiCA MiLk NiCE Nil? P11.3* MiNE P110K N2CA M2Pk N2G5 P121? P12.3* M2N11 P120K M3CA
     P131k P13Gb P131? P13.3* P13145 P130K M4CA P141k N4G5 P1411 P143* P145k. P140K MSCA P15111              P1501.
     P15!? P15.3* MSNE P15011 K6CA (461k N6GE PIN!? (56.3* P56kb   (56011
PA kLAN E 1 E N
    DVCA DVFR DVGE DVI? DV3A DVNE DVUK DVUS                        XPCA kliFR XPGE SPIT SPIA 1111411 IPUB SPUS
    IPCA ZPPR £PGE ZPI? 111.3* ZPNE ZPUK ZPUS
                                                                                                                  58



E(iUATIONS


     1:      LNYRUSP • (1—ZPUS)XPUS+ZPUSLNyRUS+(1—1US)LtUSk(—fl

     2;      BTOYUS •• XTOYUS1TOUS—CWYLiS

     3:      LNQINUS •— LNPIt4U&—LNPU$
     4:      LIIM* •s         LtIPO4US—LNMNU$LX

     5:      LNMNUSEX —. 2LNPINUS(—1)—LNMNUS(2)U.44937(DEL(1                :   LNMNUS(—1))—DEL(1   :   L.kMt4U(—2)))
             +0.U0021_U.B0994*LNMUS(j(_2)
     6:      XTOYUSU —— XTOU&—XTOYUSEX

     7:      XTOYUSX •. XTOYUS(—1)40.35462'XTOYUSU(—2)+U.2U22'XTOUSu(—3)+U.u0053
             L1YRTUS •         LNRUS—LNYRU5P

     9:      L.NYRRIJS         (DVUK*LNYRUX+DVCA*LNYRCA4DVPR*LNUFR+DVGE*LhYkGL4DVjT*LNYR1T+DVJA*LhRJA+
             DVNELNYRNL)1/ (IDVUS)7.4094b
    10;      LNPRUS ——        (DVUK(LN?UK—L.NLW(I +DVCA*(LNPCA_LN1CA)+bVF*(LNLFR_LNL)+DVGE*(L(L_LhLGL

    11:      GREUU1I •— 4'(1(N0Iik+M1UKDEL(1 ; LNPIMUK)+M2UK'ULL(l : LNkPO1L)+N3UIILL.(1                      :
             LNYRRLJK)+M4UK'UEL(l : ITOflJK)+MtJKDEL.(1 LNPhUK)+M6UXDLL(1 : LtEUK)))
                                                                 :



    12:      Z1USII.          4'DEL(l : LNPUS)—GRPX1USI(—I)
    13:      GMPX1USI           4*(KQUS4K2US*LNMNUS(_1)+K305*L$I4NLJS(_2)+jc4US*DLL(1 :     L.pUs(—1))+guMIm
             +K9US'LNPUS(—1)4K1UUsLNpU$(—2)+K11UsLNMUsU(-1) ) 14U1Ub1L+X15U'Z1U51L(—1)
    14;      LNPUS • B1US+LNNNUS+B2USLNYRU5P+83U5LNYRTUS+B4USRUS+B5US'                 (kNMNUS(—1)LlPUS(1))+
             B6US*LNMUSU+E7US*LNNUSU(_1)+bLS*LhMUSU(_2)+U*L.NMU&U (—3)
    15:      L.NYRUS     —   A1US+A2US*L.NUSp(_1)+(1_AUSI*LNflUS(_1)+A3US*LNMUSU+A4US*L.NMUSU(_1)+U*
             A11US*XTOYUSU+AI2US*XTOYUSU(_1) 4OXIOYUSU (_2)+U*XTLUSU(_3)

    16:      LaLL(l    : UNLJS)     CS+C2ULS'tLL(1 : LtkUS)4C2lU5*DLL(1 : LNUS(—1))+C22L,..LL(1
             LNYKUS(—2))4C231jSLEL! : L!YhUS(_3))+Ci4Ub*ELL(1      : LtkUs(_4)I+CoIJb*LL.(L :
             _b))4C21LS*L)IL(1 : U.k1JS(—'))
    1':      DEL(1 : LNMNUS

             _1))+L21US*LLL(1 : LNMNU&(—2))
    ib:      RUS •
             LNMUSU(_1)40*LNIUSU(_2)+D5US*LNMUSU(_3)+O*LNGUSU+0*L.NGUSU(_1)+0*LNGUSU(_2)+0*LbGLii.U(
             _3)+D1OUS*XTOYUSU÷D11US*XToYUSLj(_1)+b12uS*XYUSU(_2)+u*UsL(_3)
    19:      LNPIMUS • LNPD1US(—1)4F01JS+FIUUsDU(1 : L               1I4W(—1))+F20IbLLL(1 : LNk?OIL)+O'bLL(i
              :   LNYiRLJS+I4UIJSDEL.(1        : flUY1S)+FUUS*bk.L(1 S LN1LS)
   20:       ITOYUS • IOUS+I1US*1TOYUS(_1)+I2US*LNYRUSP+13US*LPRTUS+I4US*YRTUS(_1)4I5t,S*L.k(.1MUS
             +I6US'LNIMU5 (—1) +17U$'L.NQINUS       (—2) +OLN(.jIHU$ (—3)

   21:       XTOYUS
             U*LNPMUS(_1)+H8US*LNYkRUS+U*L,EkkUS(_1)+U*LNPUS.U*L.kb(_1)
   22:       CTOYUS          GOUS+G1UST+0*LNRPOIL.+U*kUS+0*GREUKX11+U*kUK+G6U5* (XWYUS—ITOYUS) 4ULt1TUb+
             ODEL(1 : LNYRUS)+0*DEL(i : LNYkkUS)+O*DL(1  RUS)+U*DEL(1 : kUS(_1))+G12U*ULL(1
                                                                      :

             RUS(—2)+UDEL(1 : kUKI+0*DEL(i : RUK(—1))+G22USUk.L(1 : lUI(2))+UbLL(1   Ght.Litii)          ;.

             +O*LL(i : GRLUKXii(_1))+G32US*bIL(1  GELUhIi1(—))
                                                             :



   23i       LNYRUKF •        (1_ZPUK)*XiUK+ZfrUK*LhYiUK+(1_ZPLiK)*LNkURP(_1)
   24:       LNQIMUK •         LNPIMUK—LNPUK

   25:       LNRUKU "         LNMNUK—LNMNUKE.X

   2b:       LNMNUKEX           LNMNUK(_l)+0.21096*(LNU(_1)_LNU.(_L))+U.2b454*(LNN(_t)_t.tMRUt.(_3)
             )+U.0062'
             XTOYU(U •• XTO'ljK—XTOYUL(IX

   2b:       XTOYUKLX
             0.00084

   29:       BTOYUK •• XTOYUK—ITOYUK—CTOYUI(
                                                                                                           59


 3U:    LhYRTUK           LNYkUl(—LNYkUKj
 31:    L.NYkMII(     .
        DVNELNYRNL)*1/(1—tjvi,ni)—. 3buob
 32:    LNPRUK            (DVU& (LNkU—L Wil+L.9cA (INPCA_LhLCA)+L9I* (LN EL—LM.Ik)+LVGk.' (LhP.—Lt4.L

 33:    Z1UK1L. •.        4DEL(1   :   LNPUK'—GRPXIUKI(—1)
 34:    GkPZI(JKI as 4*(KOUK+K1U                                                                          z   UdYMUK

                                                                 4ULp(JKU(3) )+K14511Ut1L+K1K.1Ut,1L
        (—1)

 35:    LNPU —

 3o:    LNThUK
        _2)+U*t.NMUKU(_3)+AUk*LNGU+o*t.N)KU(_j)

 37:    DLL(1 : UNUK)   C1uK+C2UuKDLL(1 : LN UK)+C1UKDkL.(1 :      RU(—1))+C22UK5LL(1
        LNYKUK(_2))+C23UK*DEL(1 :   iUL(—3))+C24UM5LI.L(1 : L RUK(—4))+C25Ut5b.L(1 : UdYHUK(
        —5))

 3b:    DEL(1 : L.NMI'iUK)

        ) )+E17UK*(1*(6TOyUK(_1)4bTQK(_2)) )4E16UK (BTIjK(—3)+b1(jYLaIc(—4))
 39:    RLK

                                             +U*X .YUKU(—2) +U13*Xi(JYtJU(_3)
4U:    D6L.(1 : L.NLUK) • FOUK+F1UK*ULL(1           :   LN1MUK)_F1UK*DLL(1   :   LNkkUi.)
41:    LNCjIkUK •

42:    BTOYUK • JUUK+J1UK*bi(,YUK(_1)+J3uI*bEL(L : LhEL,I(—1))

43:    XTOYLJK = hOUK#H1UK*LNEUK+(H3UK+h4UK*U)



44:    CTOYUK — GOUK+G2Ug*LNRpOIL.ibUK*(XTOYUK_1!OYUK)+G7 •Lk                      K+GbUKIJI.L(1 : LkYKUK)+
                                                                                    GkE.jKA11(—2))
45:    LNYRCAP - (1—ZPCA) *XPCA42)CANCA+(1_Z?CA)*LtYRCAI(.1)
46:    LNQIMCA •a LNP1MCA-LNhCA
47:    LNNCAU —s LNMNCA—LNNNCALX
46:    XTOYCAU            XTOYCA—XTOYCAEX
49:    XTQYCAEX
50:    LNNNCAEX —. 2'LNl4NCA(—1)—LNPtp1CA(2)—Q.64605e(DLL(1
                                                          : U4PINCA(—1))—DLL.(1                 :    LNMt4CA(—2)))
       —0.65993(DEL(1          :
                                   LNMNCA(—2))—DEL(1    :

       LNNCAU(—4)
51:    2OYCA           XTOYCA—UQYCA—CT(JYCA
52:    LNRTCA             LNYRCA—LNYkCAP
53:    LNYRRCA     (DVUS*LNYRUS+DVUK*LNYRUK+DVFR.LNYR+DVGE*LNYR,UVIT*LNYKIT+DVJA*LjJA+
       DVNELPdYRNL) 1/(1—DVCA)—7..361
54:    LNPRCA —- (DVUS' (LNPUS—L,Us) 4DVUK (LNUK_LNUJK)+Dvfa(e (L
                                                                  Fk_Lkfr.frk)+bVUk.* (f,k
       )+DVIT*(LNPIT_LNEIT)+DVJA*(LNPJA..LNEJA)+DVNL*(LNPNLNENL)).I/(1_DVCA)+124117
55:    ZICA1L          GRPX1CA1(—1)—s6Rpx1C1(—j)
56:    &GRPX1C1

57:    GRPX1CA1           SGRPXIC14I(I4CA'ZlCAlL+KlSCACZlCAlL(..l)
Sb:    GRLCAX11 —— 4(1(:0CA+MlcADE.L(1 : LbiPIPiCA)+h2CA*DLL(j : Lk)*OIL)+k3CADLL.(1
       LNYRNCA)+N4CA-UEL(1 : I YCA)+$CA5iLL(j : UdkMA)+kbCA'bLL(1 :
59:    LNPCA —
                     BlCA+LNMNCA+B2CA*LNYkcAP+E3CA*LNyRTcA4B4cAskcA4sscAe(LNMh(_1)_LNpcA(_1))+
       BbCA*LNMCAU+b7CA*LNNCAU(_1)+E8CA*LNNCAU(_)+69CA*LNNCAU(_3)
60:    LNTRCA    -
       LNMCAU(_2+A6CA*LNNCAU(_3)4ACA*LAU(1,+A1tCA*X..UYCAU+A14CA.A.YCAU(3)
                                                                                                                  60

 61:   LL(1           LNMt'ICA   •



 62:   kCA
       LhCCAU4bbCALNGCAU (-2 0CALtGCAU (—                     :4)

63:    DEL(l          LNLCA) — F0CA+F1CA*LLL(1 : L DiCA)+3CA*tJE.L(1 : Ll,kPjjb)—FICAbk.L(1 :


84:    LNQIMCA —
65:    ETOYCA — JOCA+JlCA*BTOyCA(_1)+J2CAaijIL(1 : LNkCA)

66:    XTOCA •
       H9CA*XTOYCA(_2)+u*LN1kcA+H1 1CAtLN CA(—1)4H12CALYjkCA#H1 3CA*LidCA(_1)+U*L.tCA+
       H1SCA*L.NPCA(_1)

67:    CTOYCA                                                            :   I.tRCA)+G9CA'bU..(1   :   ULthCA)+(.10CA
       DLL(1 : RCA)+G2OCAbEL(1 : k0S)+G30CA'bIL(1 : GRECAXI1)
68:    LNkFKP —
89:    LNcIMfr1 —.         LIMF—LNpF1
70:    LNMFRU             LlMNPR—LNpjNFkEX

'1:    LNMNFkEX —.

72:    XTOYFRLI •         XTCYFi4—X1OyIk.x
73:    XTOYFRLX •—
       XTOYF RU (—4) 40. 00131

74:    BTOYFI4 •

15:    LNYRTFR
76:                  ——
       DVt.E*LhhNL)*1/(1_oI1)_,.18o14
'7:    L.WPRFk   — (DVUS* (LNHJS—LNEUS)4DVOK' (LNkULNLUa(                    +L)VCA (LtPCA_LtLCA)4D9(E*

7b:    Z2J41 •           Gk'X1FR1—SGRpX1fr'1

       E(,hi-X1F1           4*(KUF+K2F*jL(j : L                                                        :

60:    GRPX1FR1
81:    GREFRX11             4*(1*(M0F+h1F*LL(1 : LNk1h                )+ti2iDEL(1        :
                                                                    : L kfr)+Pb}KLLL(1 : Ltkht)))
82:    LNPFR • B1FR+LNMNFR+62FR*L               RFk?+ULNkT +B4F4*Fj(+B10Fk*

83:    LJ4YRFR   •
       LNGFRU(—2)+A1 1FR*X1OYFRU
84:    DEL(1 : UNFR) • ClFk+C2UFR*DEL.(1 : LR)+C21F*DEL(1 : LRFi(—I))+C2frIDk.L(j
       LKYRF(—2))+C23FR*L1EL(1 : LNYRFR(—3))+C25Fj'DLL(1 : LNYk(—5))4C27kiULL(1 : Lb.kk(
       —7)!

85:    DEL(1 : LNPNFR)           •

       ETOYFR(—4))
86:
         GFM+b12FhxTOR0 (—2)
87:    DLL(1 : L.NEFR) — F0FR+F1Fi'UEL.(I                :   U4PIPlFh)+F3Fk%*bLL(j   :   LNkkO1L)—FJKb&t.(1 : LM'Fit

68:                  •

                 —
                                           :   L.NEFk!

90:    XTCYFR — HUFR+H1FR'LNLF14B3F               LNLFI4(—1)+H5         LekIO1L,47       'l+hb'A F(1) b*
91:    CTFR —
       LbkF1)+G9kRbEL(l              : Lb1kkFk)
92:    LNYRGL     •
                         (1—ZkGL)pGE+GE*LNL+(1—Zp)*LNk(,(_1)
                                                                                                          61


  91:    LNIPCj •.
  94:    LA..LLj        LNtGL-LIIIMLLA
  9S:    LtitLEX          Lt'MNCL(—l)+Li.Ubb+U.

  90:
  9':   b1OYCE •
  90:   TOYGLEX "
        LITGL
 lou:   LYhRGE.
        DVNL*LNYINb)t1, U—DVGL) —'.2U'b4
 101:   LNPI%Gj.



102:    Z1GE1L          4'IEL(l : LNkGL)—GRx1GE1
103:    G}U'k1Gl •. 4(K0C+K1GL(L NCEX—LNM L(—1)#I(4,b&LL(1 :
        K9GL* (Lt PGL(—1)—L tGL(—2 I
104:    G1LGLX21 •.                                : L                         :

        Lt'lbh<GE+N4GL'0LL(j :                            : LtkhGL)eh6GL'uk.L(1 : LNk.GL)))
        LGL • El          4LMNGE+E2GL*LN GE&+U*LNYh1GL+b4GE*kGL+ue (kIJS+G              EAl)+Eb(,E* (LbMtk.(—1)

lob:               •

        A12GL*10yGLU(_1 4A13G*X1OYGLb(_I +A14GE*XT(J(,EU(_3)
10':    LLL(l :

                                                              (LL(—#E(,E(—4'
1UO:

        XTC1!CL1(—1 +IX1OYCEU(—2
109:    bEL(1 : LNLGLI • FUGE4ILGILLL(]           : L 1hLL+I3(L*I.,LL(1 :              1L.)+4C..E*bLL(J
        LtYG_llc[.*LL(1 : Ll1CE
ito:
111:                   J0GE4J2GE*bEL(1 : LtLhE+J4(.L*LLL(1     :
112:    XIOYGE     •
        ATOYGL(—21      +H1UGL*LNGL+O*kh((_1)4flI
        —ii

113:    CTCYGE •
        GOGE*bEL(1 :                          :
                                                                                       LjTO)+ULk1(+
                                                     kK(L)+tlUGL*bLL(1 : hGL)+U0L.L(1 :
        DLL(1 :  RGE(_2))4G2OGL*&EL(1 : RLJS)40*bLL(1 : kLiS(—1!)+U*LLL(1 :
            kLGEX21)+ODEL(1 : GkLGLX2I(_1))4U*OLL(1 : GKL(EX21(—))
114:    LNYhdrI
115:    LNçIMII         LNIM1T—LMIT
116:    LNMIIIJ "
ll:     L4PtNI1'LX
        U.1U90b*LI,jTU(_3,
        XTC,'1TLJ •—

119:    X'IOYITLX ••


120:    ET(1YVI •.
121:    LtYRTIT •. LNYkIT—LpyRI1j
12:     UYkKIl •-

123:    LhPkIT
        )+IvGL
124:    Z1IT1
                                                                                                             62

125:    SGkPX1I1   4(I(OIt+K2TTDLL(1 z                         :    M1Ifr1))+k1TbtL.1 :
        LhpIT(_1))+K11IT*LhN1TU(_I)+Kl21TLhMIU(_2I+1311*L.tdtI1U(_3))
126:    Gk1X11t1       SGkX1I14K141T'Z1I1(1)+15It'Z11T1(2)
127:    GkEIIX11        4*(1*(I101T41111*1iLL(1 : Lk1P1T)+Ii21T*UI.L(1 ;               LNhu1L4+I31LILL(1
        LNRkIT+N4IT*DEL(1 : 1TOIU+M511*ULL(1 : LMkI1)+h61*DLL(1 :                              Uk.IT)))
128:    LNPIT • B1IT+LNMNIT+B21TLNR1TP+U*L    11+4IT*1T+b51T* (LhMN1(—1)—UIP1T(—1) )+bI1*
        LNMITU+b7IT*LNM1TU(_1)+BdILNMITU(_2)+B91T*L1T0(.3)
129:    LNYKIt       A1IT4A2IT*LNYR1I(_fl4(1_A21T)*LkYI(Ii(_1)+A5I1*LNM1(_2)+A1U1T*LN11L,(_3)
        A11ITXTOYITU+A1 31T*XTOII11,(_2)

130:    DEL(1      L.HMNIT) •     E11T+E21T*4E41T*(LNGITU(_1)+LNG1(_2))+L511*(ING1TUN3)+LN(,11U(4
        ))+6IT*(LNPIT(_1)_LNPIT(_3))+L13I1*LNT1i(_4)+E141TT(.1T+U511*1*bTLY11+L1b11*(
        8TC1T(—1+8TOYIT(—2))
131:    kI'I     DUIT+D1IT*GRPX1IT1,D141T*1T(_1)+U4I*LNM1T0(_2)+i(6IT*LN(.I1071T*L11W(1)
        D1OIT*XTOYITU+D11IT*XTOYITIJ(_1)

132:    DEL(1 : LNEIT) —         F0IT+F1IT*bL(1   :    LNPIMIT)F111DLL(1         : LttPhIT)

133:    LNcjIMIT •    1DIT+I11T*1YIT+I41T*LNkTI14IbIT*L.t4çj1M1t(_1)
134:    BTOYIT • JOIT4J2ITDEL(1 : Lt4E1T)4J3ITDLL(1 : LNLIT(—1))

135:    XOYIT

138:    CTQIT GUIT+G3IT*kIT+G4IT*GIX11+G5IT*KUb+(6IT* (X.)111TU11)
137:                  (1_ZJA)*XPJA+ZJA*LNYUA+(11iJA)*L.NYMJA1(1)
138:    LL4QIMJA " LNtIIJA—LN-JA

139:    LNJAU •• L.NP8JA—LIMNJAEX
140:    LNMNJALX " LNMtJA(_l)+Q.446l4*(LNhNJA(_1)_LkMNJA(_2))+0.17b89*(LNJA(2)LMThJA(3)
        )+u.Q1474—0.341LPJAU(—4
141:    XTOJAU •• XWYJA—XTOYJAL
14k:    TOYJALX —• 2*XTOYJA(_l!_X yJA(2)1.1134(LLb(l : ?TL                          A(—1)—b.L(1 :
        U.394*(LLL(l X1GyJA(—2l—bLL,(1
                             :                            :




143:    IOYJA         XTJA—1JA—C1(.iJA
144:    LNYITJA ••     LkJ—LNKJAi
145:    LhYkEJA "

14t.:   LFkJA

147:    1JA2         GRiX1JA2—SGhIX1J2

148:    bLR?)lJ2        4*(KUJA+K2JAhIjFJ(1 :
        l+K9JA*bLL(1     :   L'JA(—1)'l
149:    GkiX1JA2        SGk1X1J2+k14JA*11JA2(_1)+K15JA*11.JA(2)
150:    GKLJAX21 ——     4*(1(IzOJA+f1JA*bLL(l         :       Ltk1JA42JAbEL(1      :   LNhkOIL)+M3JA*bLL(1
        LktJ1+t4JA*LLL(1 : I1(JA)#I5JADLL(1                       :   KJ   +l.jUUA*I.L.L(1 :

151:    LNEJh      1Jk+LNHNJA+JALNJ+l3JA*L.NRTJA4b4JA*MJA+b1UJA*(hUb+Mfr.JAA21)+B5.JA*(

152:    LNYKJ
        A11JAXIJIkU+A13JAX1O1JAU(—2) +A14JAX'L(.,IW(—3)
153:    UEL(1 :    LNMlA)

        L19JA*(1* (LTCJ1(—3)+LRJA(—4)
154:    iJP.
        LNIJAU(—1' 404JALt JbL(—21

        LLL(1 : L8LJIt           HIJA+F1.JA*LLL(l : L DiA)+k4JA'LL(1 : LNkKwA)_1.JA*bLL(1 : Lt'ikuJA

        LNCIPJA •     1UJA+1JJtA+I4JALtJA4I6J1L.t.It1JA(U
                                                                                                 63


 157:       BTOYJA — JUJA+JIJABTOYJA(—1)

 1 56:      XTO'JA • bUJA4H IJA NEJA+H5JALNIkOIL+h6JA    T)A+h'JA1+hbJAX1(JA (—1) +b9JAA.1A
            (—0 +bLUJA'LN 4A+HL2JA'bP4YkfrJA+H1 3JALhliA(—1)4li14JALJA
 159:       CTOYJA — G0JA+G1JAT43JARJA+G4JA*GKE.JAX214GSJAkU5+8JAbLL(1             LNkJA)
 160:       LNYRNEP

 161:       LNQINNE         L.NPUthE—LNPNL

 16:        LNMNEU —_ LNMNNI.—LNNNNELX

 163:       LNNN8EX
            —0.439Sl'LNMNEU(—4)'0.0U661
 164:       XTOYtEU " XTO1NE—X'1OYNEE
 165:       XTOYNEEX —. XTOYNE(_l)_0.31379*XTOflLU(_1)_U.33b62*XTO1NLU(_9)40.UU094

 166:       bTONL —_ XTON—IV0YNE—CTONE
 16':       LNYRThL    ——   LNYRNE—LNYRNEP

 166:       LNYRRNE    "     (DVUS*LNYUS+DVUK*IWkUK+DVCA*LRCA+DV*LNYk+bVGL*L.NYkGL+DVITLK11+
            DVJALN.JA)1/ (1—DVNL)—7.179U6
 169:       LNPRNE -— (DVUS' (LNPUS—LNLUS)+UVUK (LNkUK—LhLU+bVCA (l CA hk.CA)+UVfrh
                                                            tIJA—LtJA) )*1/(1_DVNL)+1.163b
                                                                                            (PLt4t1
                                       (LNFII—IA'itlT)4DVJA

 10:        Z1NLIL ——       4'UEL(l   : U1PNE)—GRPXINL1(—1)

 l'l:       GNPX1NLI —. 4*(KlJNE,K1NELNMNNLU(+K2.kE*LNhNNL._1)+K4NL*L1U..t1 : LR(_1!)48bNL*1tZ,L(
            —1)+K9NLbLL(1 : bNPNL(_1))+K11*MN&U(_1))+K14NL.1t4L1L+81SN*Z1NLlL(_I)
 172:       GRLNEX1L    4(1(JUNE+M1NE*0EL(1 : LNPIMNE)+M2NE.*DEL(1 : Lh1PO1L)+M3NLDEL(1
            LNYRRNk4Il4NEDEL(1 : ITOYkL)+NSNLLLL(1 : LN NL)+N6NLULL(i :
 l'3:       LNPNL • El +L     E+b2hLLtkliLk1+b3NL*LNTNL+E4N.*NNL4B10tiL* (MUS4Gh(U4LZ11)+BSML*
            LNMNNE(_1)_LNPNE(_1))+E6NL*LNMNL.U+b7lL*LNP:NLU(_1)+EbLNMNLUfr2)4b9NL*LMIlEbfrl)

 174:       LNYRNE    •   A1NE+A2NELNYRNEP(1)+(1A2NE) *LL(_1),A3*LNMU,A4*LIM4EU1)+ASE
            —31 +Al1NL*XTOEU+A12NL*XTONLU(_1)+A13*XNLU(_t)+A14i*XTJ(_3)
 1'S:       &EL(1 : LNImNLI •


            aTceyr'iE(—1)+BTOYNE(—2)))

 176:       lINE •    D0NE+D1NE*GRPX1NL1+D14hL*MNL(_1l+D15*i+I3NL*N(_1)+b4NE*EUI_2)lO*
            XTNEU4D1l*XToYNLU(_1)40l3t,LX1O1hLUfr3)
 177:       DEL(1 : LNENE) — FU1IE+FItIEDLLII : L8PIMNE)_FINE*DEL(1 : LNPRNL)

  178:      LNQIMNE • I0NE+I1NEITOYNE+ISNELNRTNL(1)+I6NLl.NQIl4NEfr1)

  179:      BIOYNE        JUNE+J2NEDEi(1 : LNL.NL)+J3NE'LLL'1 :

  180:      XTONE - H0NE+H1NE*LNENE+H5NE*LNPO1L+H6NE*LRTNL4H7*T+88NL*XTOYtLfr1)+8lU8E*
            LNPNNE+h12NELNYkRbL+ll13NELNlIRNE(—1)+h14NLLNPNL
  181:      CTCiYNE       GUNL+G1NE*1+G2NL*LNkIL+G3NE*NNL4G4NL*GKNIAIILSNL*bUEGbNL* (XO1TAjkNL
             +GNLLNITNL

COEFF1C1IT AtD PAMANETER VALUES

           A1CA                0.010803       A1FR            0.012619    A1GE        0.010821
           AlIT                0.011699       AIJA            0.020614    AlbI.       0.009964
           *1011               0.005561       A1US            U.007o64    A1UCA      —0.01349
           A1UFR               0.016439       A1OGE           0.013896    AIUIT       0.025164
           AIOJA              —0.026697       AlONE           0.035157    *10011     —0.023974
           MOOS                0.067441       AI1CA            0.b79US    Allill      0.213191
           A1IGE               0.296236       AI1IT           —U.3b3459   AI1JA      —1.91914
           A1INE               0.097619       AI1LiK           0.189603   *1105       0.717539
           AI2CA               0.164836       A121k1          —U.'15374   A12(.L     —0.23778
           AI2IT              —0.044277       A12JA            0.349852   A1sNL      —0.064006
           *12011              0.42402        A12US            0.532314   A13CA      —0.020676
           A13FR               U.015316       AL3GE           —0.333226   A13IT      —0.227114
           AL3JA              —1.15516        A13NE            0.104741   *13011     —0.21287
           *1305              —0.0415         A14CA            0.54470'   AI4F&t      U.121494
                                                                                     64
  A14GE        —0.514582      AI4IT         —0.465403    AI4JA
  A14W6        —0.113143
                                                                        —1.095e
                              AI4UK          0.006859    A14LIS         —0.925131
  A2CA          0.134071      A2Fl           U.1Ul       A2cL            0.04147
  A21'r         0.02401       A2JA          —0.036396    A2NL            0.090174
  ?i2UK         0.240655      A2US          0.088659     A3CA             U.244oo
  A3FE        —0.264110       A3GE          0.3446*'     A311             U.093b1
  A3JA         0.142673       A3PL          0.241104
  A3US
                                                         A30K           —0.18449
               0.967393       A4CA          0.177733     A41k            0.068790
  A4G.         0.069415       A41T          0.079064     A4JA
  A4NE                                                                   0.1083
               0.094424       A4UK          U.040359     A4LJS           U.548935
  ASCA         0.075535       A5FR          0.10011      ASGL           —O.u17s
  ASIT         0.266542
  ASUK
                              ASJA          0.211515     A5L            —0.03800
              —0.026207       ASOS         —0.04104      6CA             0.193415
  A6FR        —0.055212       AOGE          U.04078
  A6JA                                                   AOIT           —0.01757
               0.088371      A6NL           0.006019     AOLJK          —0.126895
  A6US         0.935403      A7CA          —0.004872
  A'GI.
                                                         A7Fl            0.072732
              —0.036326      A'IT          —0.001348     A7JA            0.044260
  A7NL.        0.037422      ALJK
  AOCA                                      0.174624     A700           —0.03441,6
              —0.149956      AOFF(          0.U074b      A8GL            0.0302*1
  A8IT         0.000596      AOJA          —0.019563
  AOUK                                                   A8tE           —0.031161
               0.027366      A800           0.13o711     A9CA           —0.02029
 A9FR          0.049895      A9GI.         —0.00762      A91'l
 A9JA          0.044973                                                 —0.001628
                             A9NE           0.016572     A9UK            0.118697
 A9UO          0.05507       OICA
 SIGE.         0.073547      buT
                                            0.119397     L111            0.0547*
 818K         —0.005675      210K
                                            0.206264     OLJA            0.446139
 BIOCA
                                           —0.151938     8100            0.083905
              —0.056102      B1UF           0.029941     ObOE.          —0.000847
 BIUIT        —0.037786      O1tIJA         0.080375
 6100K                                                   8101.16         0.000617
               0.078628      oious         —0.001131     82CA           —0.21*794
 B2EM         —0.018392      b2OE.          0.Ub3613
 O2JA                                                    0211           —0.069662
              —0.201664      621.oE       —0.001635      040K           —0.046694
 820S         —0.022227      E3CA
 83GE.
                                          —U.152691      03FR           —0.018000
              —0.006227      031T         —0.042954      E3JA
 8386          0.107645                                                 —0.065941
                             830K         —0.276035      6306           —U.U9u72
 B4CA          0.244962      b4F1          0.462903      b4Gt.           0.023618
 841T          0.160445      L4JA          0.95586
 040K                                                    04N6           —0.013744
               0.504004      B4US          0.346502      OSCA
 25FR                                                                    0.628704
              —0.996466      8506         —0.935252      851T           —0.9476*4
 BSJA         —0.827685     OSNE          —0.890964     BSLJK           —0.072934
 6508         —0.9906       OOCA          —1.07606
 E6GK                                                   661.6           —0.724769
              —1.01676      BOlT          —1.24523      ObJA
 8686                                                                   —0.988582
             —0.977966      bbL,j(        —0.689923     6606            —0.745851
 O7CA        —0.2b'171      b1.6          —0.2304b      0106
 E'IT        —0.191914      1.7J/l        —0.356842     b'NL
                                                                        —0.141731,
 670K                                                                  —0.451249
              0.037365      L1L           —0.393195     OOCA           —0.271711
 Lo16         U.024b27      6806          —0.311123     Loll           —0.376015
             —0.312743      LONL          —0.621455     LOU,.
 6000         0.169632                                                 —0.151933
                            L9CA          —U.63572o     t.ki            0.04942
 69c,L       —0.30863]      6911          —U.151u63     L9JA           —0.209714
 6966        —0.309134      L91j6         —0.167466     6906            0.010405
 C1FN         0.001042      CIUK           0.002293     ClUb            0.004693
CIUFN        —0.033332      0200k
C21FR        —0.036075      0210K
                                          —U.Ub7536     C2U            —0.198491
C221.'i
                                          —0.032401     0210s          —0.181741
             —0.024205      0220K         —0.064932     C2206          —U.05U47
C4311.1      —0.011601      C23UI.        —0.054061     C2300          —0.063531
C24ER        —0.003691      C240K         —0.041132
C2SF6                                                   C24US           0.059092
             —0.010117      C250x         —0.01505      C2506
C2616                                                                   0.01771*
              0.000474      C2OUK         —0.005727     C2606          —0.027592
C271K         0.0072        C271Jk         0.000353
O9CA                                                    C271J0         —0.061'uS
              0.046296      OV}1<          u.u'722[     UVUL            0.bO7uul
OVIT          0.040061      UVJA           U.lU'09
090K          0.063207
                                                        IJV&.           0.01b771
                           LJVLJS          0.531464     000A            0.002086
bOEN          0.003366
L.OJA
                           L'OGL           0.003628     0011           —0.002471
             —0.000932     001.6           0.003585     bOOK            U.0U3u1
Ij006
0106
              0.010009
              0.2312o
                           D1CA            0.049*93     bilK            U.u'3o74
0166
                           bill            U.027uu      VIJA            0.021117
             —0.043995     0106            0.009035     0106            U.434s7
OIUCA        —0.00b63      D1UFN           0.20013
DIOIT                                                   b1OGL           0.20221
              0.239529     DIOJA           0.007364     01066           0.137002
0100K         0.192506     01008           0.508014     O1LCA
0111.1.       0.12238      D11GL          —0.24156      01111           0.161751
DLIJA        —0.025161     L.111IL         0.06167      D1IUK           0.01840'
01106         0.23591      D12CA          —0.013955
01206         0.0877
                                                        012lK           0.194500
                           D12IT           0.054145     D12JA           0.025o61
01266         0.03381      b120K          —0.003936
D13CA                                                   bl2Ub           0.544253
             —0.032712     0131.6          0.070'S      01306          —0.24942
01311        —0.009773     b13.j/          0.002261     01366           U.04bu54
01308         0.213998     01300          —U.213'lb     D14CA           U.9*1b3
014F1.        0.763452     UI4GL           0.'62o4      01411           1.02768
D14JA         0.983108     0141.6          0.'99920     b14U8
DI4US                                                                   0.b2SoSo
              0.539202     D1SCA      —3.49e16'L—US     OlSFh           0.000154
015G6     3.6455506—05     DiSIT       1.9603'oL—US     U1SJA      —2.14442b1—US
01588         0.000151     lilStji(       o.Uoblo3      otSus      —6.0917966—06
DI6CA        0.0059'o      0161.1.1       0.0124        61606         —v.06953
                                                                                     65

   LIOVI        —U.01995,       LalbjA
  DI6IJK        —0.022290
                                               0.030440      blbL        0.04514
                                olotm         —o.154o5       j2CA       —0.0b40
                —0.49829                       u.13u'
  bsJA          —0.000893       LNL                          b2IJ,
                —U.23u'        b3(.A           0.015319      L.31*      —U.1540i
  L3,L           U.07571       L11
  b3t.k.                                       U.0u4(.U      03JI        0.0414'3
                —0.102029      l)7ui           0.025404
  I4CA           0.092636      D4Ik
                                                             03Ub        o.163u77
  b41'I                                       —U.09l3        b4Gl        U.1U944
                 0.037063      £4JA           —0.U3.11       b4K.        0.06593
  040K           U.03644       D4LjI,          U.U91o5       D5CA        0.116064
  L5JA
                 0.036'4
                —U.0lb7        b5hL
                                               u.u5o5,      .L1I         0.02739
                                               U.UUO2                    0.077159
                 0.1(J3347     DOCA           —0.073145
                —0.02391       0611                                    —U.(i34b
  bbKk.                                       —0.005407      DbJA        0.000409
                 0.00239       D6Lilc         —0.050417      0601,
  LI7CA         —0.001992                                                0.U21è453
                               D7frk           0.01672
  b711         —0.004304
                                                             IJ7GL      U.UU2'7
                0.022054
                               b7.JA           U.U0l'93      0KL        0.00041
                               C7,1,           0.01894       DoLA       U.0325t.1
               —0.01009        D0(L           —u.0t2
  bOJA          0.000889       DONE
                                                             b8I&      —U.000'04
                                               0.00664       bOOK       U.0l41o
                0.02294        D9CA            U.U1743       D9FN
  09G1          0.01666                                                —0.00794
                               0911           —0.003281      D9JA       0.000607
                0.01609        090K            u.U01453
  L1CA          U.00'2o1       L1fri
                                                             19US       u.01S39,
  Ll1•I
 110K
                0.0l95         L1JA
                                               0.03332
                                               U.I)54t'4
                                                             LiCE
                                                             L1NL
                                                                        0.Ul3soo
                                                                        U.01u131
               —0.U0433        1105           0.00329        LIUCA
 ElL1K          1.SbSb'                                                —0.034390
                               hUGE          —0.030416       LiUll      U.1U55v4
 E1UJA          0.005094      L10NL           U.033b30       1100K      1.43133
 L100L
 LLICL
                0.116645
                0.10i443
                              I.IIcA
                              11111
                                             —0.054589
                                             —0.14634'
                                                            h1t
                                                            &1t..iI
                                                                        1.01545
 L11KL          0.004899
 L1CA
                              hllIiK         —0.550499      Li10        u.421,3o1
               —U.U'7604      L12lk           4.39695       h1GL       —0.191149
 L1211          0.12uu'       LI2JA          —o.15405       L1aL        0.019509
 LI3H,
                              Lla.s          —u.40b03'      LL3CA      —0.041473
               —3.2490        k13CL           0.084755
 LI3JA
 L130s
                U.ib4'        LI3N[.         —0.020792
                                                            L13V1
                                                            Li3LK
                                                                        U.1S1Uo
                                                                       —4.394
               —U.0545'6      LI4CA          —u.3.b27       L141h       0.10534
 L14GE          1.020         L1411
 L14N1.                                      —3.bø55        L14JA       1.9bUS
                0.403001      LI4IjK
 L15            0.103117      Li5c.
                                             —0.000405
                                              0.019635
                                                            L1SCA
                                                            L1511
                                                                        3.eo7b.
                                                                        4.1U4S
 E1SJA         —U.S'4234      L15tE           0.'u0825      115w        U.59oó3
 LI6CA          U.'UU5        L1bis           0.106524      LibbI       U.U31b
 1161T          1.57536       LIbJA
 11601                                        1.43261       11601       0.2v47o1
                0.282168      LL7CA          —2.84711       L17Fa
 L17GE          0.332797      1171T                                    —0.132219
 Ei'NL                                       —0.680o28      L17JA      —2.53009
               —0.892653      L.171j1(       —0.521172
                0.'61'71      hod                           E1OCA      0.2b61
 LIOJA                                        0.625931      11011     —0.37sb4
                1.71901       11001           0.091526      h1bL,i
 LI9CA          2.14929       119F0
                                                                       0.107571
EA9IT                                         0.060450      11901      0.039071
                0.810022      E19JA          —1.78208       11901
11906          —0.204191      E2CA                                    —0.971241
E.2G1
                                              0.000184      1211t     —9.000192
           —8.0640011—05      621T            0.000454      L2JA
120E.          0.000421       1206       —6.4437141—07      1205
E200S          0.496b25                                                0.000243
                             121LjS          —0.240002      13(.A
13Fk           0.00301                                                 0.10149
                             13G1.            0.043045     L3IT
L3JA          —0.021066      1301                                     —0.014448
13Us                                          0.050633     1306        0.107434
               0.004036      £4CA            0.138066      L4FR
E4GI.         —0.014921                                                0.011217
                             £41?           —0.03104       £4JA        0.031742
E4NL          —0.027174      1400
ISCA                                         0.103098      1408        0.001552
              —0.003532      15F1           —0.017044      ISGI
151?          —0.023132                                               —0.0225
                             15.3*           0.026105      1501.
ESUK           0.02989                                                —0.040335
                             1505            0.033956      EÔCA       —0.197234
              —0.057294      16G1            0.097666      161?
EOJA          —0.564006                                               —0.09435
                             E6NL           —0.316001      1606        0.07705
16tJS         —0.05759'      L'CA
L7GE                                         0.264871      17F0        0.574765
              —0.763707      £71?            0.037192      1JA
1701           0.2069o5                                                0.415324
                             1706            0.024239      LOCA       —0.113296
LOFR          —0.0748        L8GE
18.3*                                       —0.343714      1811        0.262491
              —0.226050      E8NE            0.05664       1806
LOUS          —0.286001      E9CA
                                                                       0.156700
E9GE                                        —0.001604      19F0        0.20364
               0.700672      E91T           —0.12960'      I9JA
1901           0.062226                                                0.014509
                             1901           —0.074740      IUCA        0.001373
IOFM          —0.009077      lOGE
FOJA                                        —0.004262      FUll        0.001751
              —0.008808      10141          —0.01574       lOOK
1005           0.000225                                                0.016760
F1GI
                             F1CA            0.17973'      1110        0.573409
               0.022682      FlIT            0.409235      lIJA
1101           0.20650                                                 0.319091
                             F10K            0.024094      F1OCA      —0.053768
11010         —0.099353      hOd
110.3*                                       0.242206      IIUIT       0.072019
               0.124b16      110141          0.223077      11006
P1005          0.616105                                               —U.UU2Uu7
                             1410            0.41o867      F20CA
1201*          0.052207                                               —0.245403
                             F20G1           0.006946      1201?       0.176537
F2OJA        —0.07173        12001
F200S                                        0.09354       12006      —0.040341
              0.067515       F3CA           —0.020791      1310
l3G1.        —0.120761                                                —0.001143
                             130CA           U.2',496      F3u1.i      0.U24652
                                                                           66

 I3UGL           0.290149     3U1T       —U.14b'b      F3UJA          0.004933
 F30t'st.
 P4L
                —0.255302     1300K       0.740935     P3000          U.15
                —O.'31'Oo     14JA       —0.66905      fr4UC          0.704u6,
 1401K           1.'bUbU      140(L      —U. 37934     14011         —U.21u0o
 F4OJA           3.64313      140KL       U.13o543     14UL
 14000           2.25319      ISUCA       O.2'0787     1501K          1.25097
 FSOGL           1.20020      SU1T        1.3164b      ISOJA          1.30857
 FSU1dE          0.968503     F5001       1.18695      1SUUO          0.153811
 F6CA           —0.095084     IOFR       —3.23475      FbGt.         —1.85920
 bIT            —1.85255      FOJA       —2.01446      1681.         —1.364
 lOOK           —2.2'36       ISUCA       0.02143      1601K          0.612717
 F6UGE           0.468398     IOUIT      —1.1264       160.JA         0.710113
 1801.1.         0.799582     1'OULJI     0.533112     OUCA          —0.003648
 GOFk           —0.001236     GOGE       —0.012056     GOVt          —0.003179
 GO.JA           0.045769     GONE       —0.008552     600K           0.013488
 GOUS            0.0U4428     G1CA       —0.000105     GUN       —9.4071551.—tm
 G1CL.      —3.92'120L—06     GUT         0.000155     (.1JA     —3.65b4b41.—uS
 6181.       2.1739911.—US    G1UK       —U.0LIU265    6100       5.2797541.—US
 (,1UCA         —0.050435     6101K      0.636369      GIUGE         —0.002451
 GIOIT           1.38277      G1UJA     —0.610265      GIUNI.         0.696158
 G1OUK           0.157122     GI0US     —0.299741      G11CA         —0.290437
 G11FK           0.2S8753     61161.    —0.422543      GluT           0.442983
 GIIJA          —1.14262      61181.    —0.687207      G11uK         —0.028963
 ChUb            0.347438     G12CA      0.16576       G12k*          U.9U8516
 61261.          0.405291     (.121T     0.361741      GI2JA         —0.346612
 G12N1           0.363585     GI2UK     —0.680074      61205         —0.480483
 G2CA            U.UU'542     G2FR       0.013437      G26L           0.0044
 621T            0.000184     G1JA       0.031405      6281.          0.015183
 G2UK           —0.046579     G206      —0.001341      G200A          0.259140
 620th          —0.654758     G200L      0.621408     62011         —U.1717
 G2UJA          —0.026017     G208L      0.98356'     6200K          U.317Ub9
 G200S           0.007598     G21CA      0.213911     621F8         —0.994072
 G21GE           0.132577     G21IT     —0.352209     G21JA         —0.091786
G21NL            0.171835     6210K     —0.578976     G21LJS         0.034403
G2CA            —0.194406     G22FK      0.306726     G226L          0.546939
62211           —0.02103      (.22JA    —0.2357o      622tL          0.979*39
6220K            0.525588     G22ub      0.111434     (.3CA         —0.209463
G3FR           —0.249651      6361.     —0.3022       6311          —0.204769
G3JA           —0.583978      G3NL      —0.879193     6301.          0.752483
6305           —0.100705     GJUCA       0.04415      G3Ufrit       —0.002254
G3UGE           0.052299     63011      —0.045144     (.3ti.JA       0.036284
63081.         —0.006553     .3UUK      —0.342353     63006         —0.003303
G3ICA          —0.048232     63118       0.00086'     G3U.L          0.046935
63111            0.037957    G31JA       0.033051     63181.        —0.051527
G31UK          —0.078406     63100       0.003961     G326A         —0.08872
G32Fh          —0.017283     63261.      0.051819     63211          0.071145
G32JA           0.02362'     63201.      0.04603      03201.         0.016799
63206          —0.004193     G4CA        0.399290     6411.          0.073793
G4GI.           0.097097     G41I        0.071244     (.4JA          0.05497
G4NE            0.024806     G4UK        0.444298     6405          —0.034747
GSCA            0.525327     GSFR        0.332204     656k.         0.243101
651T            0.328725     OSJA        0.06455'     6581.         &.S4365o
G51i0
G6FIt
               —0.927033
                0.184551
                             6505
                             6661.
                                        —0.2U9'62
                                         0.679251
                                                      CA
                                                      6611
                                                                    0.654509
                                                                    0.4522
GtiJA          —0.212536     GONL.       0.53443      6601.         —1.00654
GOLJS           0.571938     G7CA        0.101733     G7f8           0.060923
G7GE           —0.065372     G7IT       —0.006446     G7JA           U.044U5
G7NE            0.077908     G708       —0.696908     6705          —0.053545
G8CA           —0.115046     GOFR        0.076835     6866           0.516343
6811           —0.125914     GOJA       —0.219103     6681.         —0.045435
GOUK            0.51128      6605       —0.100903     G9CA           0.037359
G9FR           —0.195855     6966       —0.940230     6911          —0.262394
G9JA            0.034766     G9OE.      —0.454351     69011          0.080414
G9US            0.05499      8OCA        0.203096     OUFR           0.129624
11001.          0.089664     bOlT       —O.b'b539     8UJA          —0.060943
11081.          0.253769     HOOK        O.4o739      boos           0.017502
H1CA           —0.152912     H1FR        0.073406     6161.          0.040407
HilT           —0.018547     81JA        0.016673     8186           0.12252
810K            0.051451     8105        0.014957     81UCA          0.025102
HiUrk           0.010249     H1OGE       0.247567     81011         —0.071293
HIUJA           0.010682     81086       0.508290     610111.        0.091910
111005          0.00826      H11CA      —0.049448     8111K          0.239274
HuGE.           0.044574     111111      0.081144     H1IJA         —0.048667
81186          —0.4180       811011      0.306618     81105          0.01138
H12CA           0.113463     1112Fk      0.248513     81266          0.1230
111211          0.05552      HI2JA      —0.119308     111281.        0.500342
812011         —0.011)11)1   UI3CA       0.08955      H13F8
81366                                                                0.054154
               —0.021665     81311       0.201372     8134A          0.149767
81381.         —0.165191     813011      0.113126     II14CA         0.085483
814th          —0.021497     81461.     —U.U5b495     8141?          0.055937
N14JA         —0.010149      61481.     —0.499385     814011        —0.103932
II15CA         0.035674      81511.     —0.077809     81561.        —0.326702
8151?         —0.109401      81SJA      —U.u3302      0151.1.        0.106242
815011        —0.124116      II2CA       0.005196     1.211.        —0.1)00659
       Ii2CL     —0.001346      la2lT
                                                                                   67
                                            0.001095     It..1A         0.000477
                 —0.003371      H201(      —U.UUbbb3     0205
      h3CA       —0.038'53                                              0.01107
                                031k        U.U49'31     b3C,1         0.uUS9uI
      11311       U.16431       O3JA       —0.014901     O3Nt.         —0.Ubbb5
      030K        0.140371      0305       —0.0000'      040A
      041k       —0.UU371                                              U.Ub37j
                                84c,5       0.003139     0411         —0.000501
      04JA       —0.0013414     11401.      0.000240
      040S                                               0401          0.00331'
                  0.610356      IISCA       0.012595     osio          0.01573
      11561.      0.028759      kiSI        U.01b2t4     HSJA         —0.000268
                  0.032306      liSUK       0.014503     0506          0.072265
      Ii6CA      —0.068748      h6&R
      11611
                                            U.U1114      0601.         0.0434bo
                 —0.116610      II6JA       U.030056     0601.         0.154034
      1160K      —0.038433      OOUS        0.010184     H7CA         —13.001707
      L'IR       —0.00426       11705     —0.001020      071T         —0.001111
      Ii'JA      —0.000251      11701.    —0.002796      07(1K        —13.002765
      1171)0     —0.000490      O8CA       0.342569      IlOFO         0.234953
      I$CL        0.347365      H8I        0.235021      IiOJA         0.292216
      libOL       0.51165       bOOK       U.32946       11005         U.U6799s
      h9C.A       0.272154      119FR      U.2503b9      11901.        0.113401
      091T        0.229865      LI9JA      0.123404      11901.        0.001916
      119111      0.102093      11905      0.010369      IOCA
      1010        4.16517       1001.     —0.265758      lull         —0.491063
      I0J        —0.358942      luoL      —u.smss        iou          —0.641571
      10110      —0.104690      IICA       1.00269       111k          4.01
      I1GS        1.09201       lilT
      1101.       1.0494'       110K
                                           2.329'        IIJA         11.b1
                                           2.04017       IIUS          0.661462
      I2CA        0.127049      I2F        U.01u317      1401.         U.U321s6
      1111        0.036875      I1JA       0.002064      1201.          0.364942
     1200        0.13714        12115      0.010057      I3CA
     131k                                                             —0.123952
                —0.7151u5      1301.       0.032901     131T            0.093963
     13JA        0.013094      1301.       0.277274
     13US                                               130K          —U.uou3l
                 0.002042      I4CA        0.179301     14F0          —0.494503
     1401.       0.014642      1411        0.295977     I4JA          —0.531693
     1405        0.042161      1401(       0.034769
     1bC.A
                                                        140S          —0.066497
                —0.332617      ISFS        U.tJ3'033    1501.         —U.U07b93
     1511       —0.040051      ISJA
     15Up
                                           0.010134     15b           —U.2101u4
                —0.53190       15110       0.036639     IbCA           0.640009
     161R        0.348802      16G1.       0.615650     161T           0.655704
     I6JA        0.29103       1601.       0.49751      lOOK           0.374ut3
     1606        0.052165      I'CA       —0.055634     I7fri         —0.041407
     I'GL        0.U53553      171T       —0.091501     17..IIt   —b.0bb4701.—05
     17141.     —0.014126      17111      —0.031901     10o           —0.000607
     IOCA        0.066109      IOFO        0.U1b12      Ib(..L.       —0.02884'
     IOIT
     10111
                 0.01614       IOJA       —U.U4IbbS     10141.        —0.04174
                 0.014522      1001,       U.Ou43øti    JOCA
     JUIK        0.000054      .JUCL
                                                                       U.UUU3
                                           0.005940     JUI'I
                 0.0110194     JIThL       U.U014b3-
     JIL3.       0.200009                               ..iuoIc       —u.uL317
     .J?CA      —0.009894
                               J1JA
                               J21h
                                           0.63,qS      JJ0            U.4U4u1
     J217       —0.046984      .1205
                                          —U.U01tj9     J0L           —0.101694
     .13145
                                          —0.020407     .1311         —0.030714
                —0.027252      J3UK       —U.03'745     .1401.
     KUCA       —0.03672       KUFA
                                                                      —0.092*71
     1011                                 —0.007933     KUGI.         —0.004100
                 0.030647      1(U,JA      U.U60L31     1(001.
     KOOK       —0.005905                                             —0.019439
                               KUL        —0.110647     KICA
     KilO        0.09510       K10         0.084403     KIlT        —70.1123 -
     K1JA       —0.28134       1(185      0.0'4312
     KIUS       —1.104         KIULA
                                                        1(10K        —U.1122b
     1(1061.
                                         —0.50794       KIUFR         0.10990
                —0.05558       KLUIT      0.1779        KIUJA
     K10E        0.11576       1(100K
                                                                     —0.05976
     K11CA
                                         —0.364917      1(1005       —0.266557
                 0.43356       1(1110    —0.205692
    1(1111                                              1(1101.       d.54UIj3
•
                 0.510230      K11JA      u.1u*7        1(1101.
    81111K       0.712146                                            —0.Isublj
                               1(1105    —0.011744      K12(.A
                —0.04162                                             —0.16197
                               1(1261.   21.9650
    KI2JA        0.1531'                                1(1211'       0.196400
    K12I0
                              1(1201.    —.00023        KI2LjI(      —0.40603
                 0.222        K13CA      —0.19053
    K13GL                                               KI3FO        —0.07So
                28.5363       1(1311'     U.1023u1     K13JA
    1(13111.    —5.70759                                              U.u343
                              1(130K      0.28404      K13US
    KL4CA       —U.2'53                                               0.02
                              K14FM       U.61u5       1(1401.        0.1074
    1(1411       0.1586       K14JA       0.2194
    114111      —0.211'                                1(14145       —0.252*
    11510       —0.1698
                              1(1405      0.27         K1SCA         —0.6962
                              1(1561.     0.5547
    K15A         0.4259
                                                       1(1511         0.6312
    1(1505
                              KlStiE      0.5430       8150K          0.5135
                —0.131'       K2CA       —0.04230      121k
    1(265       79.9Q45                                               U.2'5907
                              1(211'     —0.372853     K2JA           0.146*2
    1(201.      —0.064181     1(20K      —0.305548     K2Lss
    K3CA         U.066'6      K3FR                                    0.007633
                                         —0.34383      8305          —0.02164
    1(311      —10.1092       K3JA       —U.luU2o      131.5
    1(301        0.563988                                            —5.04602
                              K30S       —0.065193     K4CA           U.Ub4'S
    1(410        0.0020       1(405
    K4JA                                  0.130669     1(411'        —U.10542b
                —0.02574      K40E        0.243'43
    1405        —0.055842
                                                       1(40K          0.129007
    K5G5
                              KSCA        0.3455*      KSFO           0.05509
               —0.01241       1(511       0.0'162
    K51L       —0.04987                                KSJA           1.33237
                              1(501       0.02992      1(505
    K6CA       —0.51519                                               0.140337
                              1610        0.21o151     1601.          0.009455
    1611       —0.u04496      K6JA       —2.03841      1615           0.100302
    1(60K       0.14599       1(605      —0.038        K7CA
                0.00344       KG1.                                    0.01197
    II7JA                                 0.01*88      1(711        —0.03045
                0.056447      K'N1.      —0.03923      KW(            0.041818
                                                               68

          0.008      KbCA    —u.03'                 U.ullub
KbGL      0.01352    IbI1    —0.01914    IbJA       U.U043b
K9LA
         —0.02741
          U.4947     K91N
                             —0.028305
                              0.11732
                                         dU
                                         K9GL
                                                   —0.009
                                                    0.579013
K911     —0.15663    Ic9JA   —U.212'14   K9t       —U.39249
K9UK      0.350697   i9US     0.246549   LOCA      —0.000111
L0F       0.001753   LU(.L    0.001334   LOU1      —U.000lub
L0.JA    —0.000313   LONE    —0.00140'   L0U        U.UUlstl
L1CA     —0.044797   L1FR    —U.3b'38    LLGE      —O.b7213
LIII     —0.2118     L1JA    —0.579833   LiNE      —0.1362
L1UK     —0.5390     L2CA    33.9022     L2FN     131.S5
L2GE    —113.957     L211    17.655      L2JA     —40.)17
L2NL     10.9493     L2LiK   29.8704     L3CA      —0.0089
L3M       0.6546     L3GE    —0.2109     L3IT      —0.032609
L3JA      O.0'6104   L3NE    —0.192914   L3UK       0.1369
L4CA      0.510603   L4FR     0.916987   L4GL       0.238757
L4IT      0.910475   L4JA     0.142382   L4NI.      0.624358
L4UK      0.564549   LSCA    —1.         L5N       —0.036492
LSGE      U.01u6     LSIT    —1.         LSJA      —0.0779
LSNL      0.024793   LSLJK   —0.023716   LOIN      —0.65
L6G      —0.0086     L6JA    —0.3398     L7FN      —0.35
MOCA     —0.00314    MOFN     0.06315    MOGE       0.00064
MUll      0.0232     MOJA     0.00323    MONL       0.02739
NOOK      0.00597    MiCA     0.05183    Milk       0.13361
N1GL     —0.95133    Mill    —0.08097    M1)A      —0.03233
NiNE.     0.11611    M1UK     0.80037    N2CA      —0.00683
M21k     —0.06955    M2GE     U.U5'37    21T       —0.029
I2JA     —0.03956    M2NE    —0.07818    M2UK      —0.02808
M3CA      O.05o9     1431k   —1.13931    3GE       —0.7346.5
M3IT      0.76727    M3JA    —0.87177    $3tE      —0.66181
1430K     1.20971    M4CA    —0.30121    P4Fk
M4GL
                                                    1.425b0
          2.98731    $411     0.1553     M4.jA      3.92447
M4NE     —0.10364    M4UK    —2.03867    M5CA       0.18038
NSFN     —3.15593    M5GE    —0.13434    14511     —0.35833
N5JA     —0.02198    MSNE    —1.97462    1450K     —0.98978
M6CA      0.31538    146FR   —0.39385    146Gk,     0.18065
11611     0.15115    MbJA     0.20401    MONk.     —0.35b13
NOOK     —0.20116             4.         XNCA       0.u12
XIFk      U.013'9    XPGE.    0.01143    XI15       0.01210
XPJA      0.0228     XPNL     0.01161    MUK        0.0067
XPUS      0.00866    ZPCA    0.025                  0.025
ZkGE      0.025      IPII    0.025       Ik.JA      0.025
ZtNE      0.025              0.025                  U.4I
