NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW CLOSE TO AN AUCTION IS THE LABOR MARKET?
EMPLOYEE RISK AVERSION, INCOME UNCERTAINTY,
AND OPTIMAL LABOR CONTRACTS

James N. Brown

Working Paper No. 603

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
December 1980

This paper was presented at the NBER's 1980 Summer Institute
program in Labor Studies. This paper is drawn from my doctoral
work at the University of Chicago. It has benefited greatly from
the comments of Gary S. Becker, James J. Heckman, and Robert E.
Lucas, Jr. It has also been improved by the comments of my
colleagues at Princeton University. Financial support from
Princeton Universityts Industrial Relations Section and Econometric
Research Program is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported
here is part of the NBERtS research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #603
December 1980

How Close to an Auction is the Labor Market?
Employee Risk Aversion, Income Uncertainty, and Optimal Labor Contracts

ABSTRACT

Section I of this paper develops a model of income insurance in the

labor market. The model differs from those of previous analyses in its
focus on quantitative implications regarding the degree to which wages
diverge from marginal value products, both in time—series and in cross—

section data. Sections II and III present empirical evidence consistent
with these implications. The main empirical finding is that of short—
term divergence, but long—term equality between wages and marginal value

products. The labor market appears to differ from an auction market only
in the short run, but this short—run divergence considerably reduces the
potential variability of employees' realized wealth.

Professor James N. Brown
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
(609) 452—4042

I.

Ep1oyee Risk Aversion, Income Uncertainty, and Optical Labor Contracts

Recent efforts to explain the exIstence of layoffs and the cyclical
stability of real wages have focused renewed interest on the voluntary

nature of involuntary uneployent and on the equilibrium characteristics
1

of what appear to be non—siarket--clearng situations.

One result of

these efforts has been the development of a class of models focusing on

employee aversion to earnings variance as the root cause of these phencena.
Analyses within this class typically assume that employees are averse to
variability in their consumption, that employee consumption is not
iadependent of realized employee income, and that emnloyees are less able

than enloyers

are

simply more

to

diversify their sources of

inccme,

developed

variability

arraiements vhich

from cmployecs to rnpioycr, and th

is that these income—stabilizing arran;emer.ts entail

layoffs as a nes

According

value

emloyee3

risk—averse than ermlcyers. The implIcation ofthese

assumutions is that both parties can benefit fr

shift incone

or that

the

use cf

2

of

adjuotin employment.

to this argument, wages are allowed to dIverge from marginal

products in order to reduce earnings variance for employees. In periods

of high demand, fIrms pay employees less than the value of their marginal
product, while in periods of low demand, wages exceed marginal value products.
As a result, because wages do not equate employees' supply of labor with

fis' demand for labor in states of low demand, supplementary adjustment
of employment by way of layoffs becomes necessary in such states.
One partlculari', interesting Implication of most such analyses

is the optimali:y of contracts whIch soeclfy state—invariant earnings
3

for emPloyed workers.

At first glance this result is surprisIng, for

2

economists seldom find reason to argue that prices are better left
unresponsive to states oE demand, even when there exist costs associated

with price variability. On closer inspection, however, the result becomes
transparent, for while introducing costs of wage variabilit. through
employee risk aversion, these analyses introduce no counterbalancing
costs of wage rigidity.

A central assumotion in these analyses is the absence of any allocative

\function performed by wages once an initial sorting of workers across fir

has taken place. Specifically, this absence results from the assumption
that the costs of interfirm labor mobility are sufficiently high relative
to the value of moving between firms that no such iriterfirm movement ever

takes place. Clearly this assumption guarantees the optimality of state—
invariant earnings for emloyed workers, for it eliminates any reason for
wage variability after the initial sorting has taken place. By precluding
any effect of -ealized wages on the realized Interfirm distribution of the
labor force, that assumption precludes as well any. consideration of the

influence of that effect on the optimal wage policy. PerformIng no cx post
allocative function, wages are left free to be determined by other criteria
4
such as earnings variance.
While the absence of cx post interfirm labor mobility might be an
acceptable assumption for analyzing the optimal degree of insurance against
shifts in aggregate product demand when relative product demands are certain,
relaxing this assumption is essential for any study of optimal income insur—

ance in the presence of relative demand uncertainty. Clearly, it Is necessary
also for any study of voluntary labor ncbility or of the effect of income
insurance on voluntary labor nobility.

This section develops a model of the optimal income—insuring charac-

teristics of labor contracts which extends previous analyses in

one funda—

3

mental respect: the model considers relative changes in product demand among
firms

and relaxes the assumption that there is no wage—responsive interfirm

labor mobility after an initial sorting of workers across firms has taken

place. By allowing the ex post supply of labor realized by firms to depend
on the ex

post

wages offered by firms,

the

model developed in this paper

allows explicit consideration of the resource misallocation that is caused
by attempts to reduce the dispersion of employee earnings over states of

product demand. Consideration of this cost of wage rigidity leads to results
which differ from those of earlier analyses. In this model the exact wage
and employment policies offered by firms are determined by a tradeoff

between the value of variable wages and eoloyment in allowing efficient
resource allocation and the cost of variable wages and employment in

creatIng income uncertainty for employees. Variable wages become
necessary for optimal resource allocation, and because realized state—
contingent wages offered by firms may

once

again influence the ex post

interfirm distributIon of the labor force, ootimal wages may no longer

be determIned simply by employee aversion to earnings variance. This
extension is of more than theoretical interest, for it leads to explicit,
quantitative expressions for the optimal response of wages and employment
to variations in product demand that can be applied in scmeching more
than a loose, qualitative fashion and which can provide a basis for an
empirical test of the theory.
The, following analysis focuses on a single contractIng period,

during which firms experience random shocks to the demands for their
products, and during which firms employ workers who dislike the prospect of
5

uncertaIn earnings.

It assumes that workers sort themselves among firms

at the start of the period on the basis of the labor cctracts, explicit
or implicit, which firms offer.

These contracts are assumed to specify wages

4

and layoff probablities (arid imply quit probabilities) contingent on the
distribution of product demand among firms which is realIzed.

During the first part of the contracting period, each firm receives
a certain price for its product and pays certain wages to its employees.
After a given interval, however, all firms experience shocks to the demands
for their products and may respond to this new situation with layoffs,

additional hires, or wage revisions, leading to some level of quits aong
their employees. For simplicIty the analysis focuses on a single firm,
assumed to be insignificant in the market, and abstracts from general equilibrium
considerations.

The firm is assumed to maximize the value of profits expected over

all states of product deand by choosing the number of workers with
whom contracts are made at the start of the pericd arid by choosing values

for wages, layoffs, non—wage ayments to laid—off workers, and additional

hires corresponding to each possible state of product demand. The firm
is assumed to survive forever and to know the manner in which quits by
its employees and applications for employment from workers initially
at other firms respond to the wages which it offers in each state.
Constraining the firm's efforts to maximize expected profit are the
profit—maximizing activIties of other firms and the efforts of workers to

maximize their utility. In order to attract workers at the star of the
period, the firm must offer an expected value of earnings which, adjusted
for income uncertainty, is at least as great as that available at other firms.
And in order to achieve the desired level of employment once the new distri-

bution of product demand is kno, the firm must offer a new level of
earnings which is consistent with the efforts of workers to arbitrage ralizd
differences among firms in wages net of mobility costs.

5

It is assumed that after the new states of demand for firms'

products

become known, employees of the firm are given one drawing from the realized
distribution of new wages paId elsewhere.

If a firm is drawn which pays a

firm
wage exceeding the value to the employee of remaining at the initial

by at least the cost of interfirm labor mobility, a quit occurs. If an
employee chooses not to quit and if he is laid off, he is assurned to be
given some severance payment by the firm naking the layoff and to accept
the offer of the firm previously drawn but rejected,

or to be unemployed for

the remainder of the period if the firm drawn is not offering a wage
6

exceeds the

which

emaloyee'S value of leisure.

More specifically, the firm's severance pay policy is assumed to
guarantee a certain level of income for all employees laid off in a given
state.

level may var'; with the state of demand for the firm's

This

product, but given any partIcular

realized level of demand,the firm is

assumed to pay all employees laid off the difference between
which they realize at

their

the net earnings

next best alternative and the guaranteed income
7

for the specific state of demand realized.

More precisely, the firm is assumed to maxImize

(1) PF(N)—
+t

(P(s)F[N(s) (l-(s) )+h(s) 1-N(s) (1-2(s) )w(s)-N(s)(s) g(s)-(s) ]-h(s)

(s) ()

S

subject
(2)

to the

labor supply constraints

W+Z( fu(s)-L(w(s)) ]N(s) (l-(s))+N(s)Y(S) g(s)-L(g(s)) 1+(1-N(s(s)-L(S) I
N
q
q
N
N
s

(3) u(s)

j(h(s)), '>O

h(s)

6

by choosing N, h(s), w(s), J(s) and g(s)>0 for all s, where:

denotes

the

initial certain product price

PC) denotes

the

firm's production function, F'0, F"<O

P

fii•m's initial work force

N

denotes the

W

denotes

g

indexes the state of demand for the

P(s)

denotes the product price obtainIng in state s

the initial certaIn

wage paid

by the firm

firms product

8

N(s) denotes the number of employees who do not quit the

i(s)

firm in state s.

9

layoffs in state s, ecpressed as a fraction of workers ho do
quit in state

denotes
not quit in state s, and assumed to be randoly distributed among workers
who do not
s

h(s) denotes additional hires in state

t(s)

denotes the wage paid by the

g(s)

denotes tile

level

s

firm in state

s

of income guaranteed to employees laid off in state s

w(g)
I denotes the expected net
laid off in state s

10

level of earnings available else.'here to em?lo'ees

ii(s) denotes the wage paid to additional hires in state s
ir()

denotes

the probability distribution function for future states of demand

L() denotes the monetary value of the utility loss per employee caused by
deviations of realized inc6me in state s from its ex ante mean level 11

v(s) denotes the exected net level
who quit in state 3
q
L(s)
q

2

denotes the expected
who quit in state s

12
of earnings available elsewhere to employees

value of Ehe function L() for those

workers

13

denotes the expected value of risk—adjusted earnings available elsewhere to initIal employees.

7

Substituting labor supply constraints (2) arid (3) into the

objective

(1), the firm's

problem can be written in a

as choosing t, h(s), w(s), g(s) arid i(s)

(4)

to

fir&s

more revealing form

maximize

PF(N)—NcH-t(P(s)F(N(g) (—1(s))+h(s) ]—(s) (1—)(s))L(w(s))
S

[

(s)—L(g(s)) ]+(N—N(s)) (w (s)—L (s) ]—.i(s)h(s)r(s)
q

q

Expression (4) shows that the firm's maximization problem nvclves a
tradeoff between the effects

of

the firm's choIce variables •on the income

uncertainty associated with the firm's contact and the effects of those
variables on the expected net earnings of the firm arid its initIal emloyees
considered jointly, where the ecpeccation is taken over all possible future

relocations of the firm's initial work force. Roughly tated, the firm
can reduce income uncertainty for its employees by reducing the extent to

which wages reflect marginal value products. But it can do so only at
the cost of lower expected joint net earnings, because any gap between

rgInal value products and wages reduces the efficiency of volunca labor
mobility, and because layoffs or additional hires cannot eliminate this
inefficiency without creating greater costs of their own.

of

The implications

this tradeoff for the extent to which wages and en1oymenz respond to

changes in the dis:ribudon of product demand can be seen fran the first—

order conditions for the firm's maximization problem. The optimal neber
of contracts offered by the firm at the start of the period arid the fIrm's

optImal hiring, wage, severance pny,and layoff policies applying in any
State

s must

satIsfy:

8

(5) O>PF'(N)_±E((P(s)F'(s)—L(W(s))1(1—,(S)1L2.)
N

s

+ ,(s)N(s) (s)—L(g(s)) ]+(l—N(s) ] [w(s)—L(s) ] }r(s)
N
q
N
q

(6)

O>P(s)F'(s)—(.i(s)+h(s)du(h(S))]
dh(s)

(7) O>( (P(s)F'(s)—X(s)±LG\(S))L(W(s)fl [l_,((s)]+(s)[L(A(s))—L(g(S)fl ]d(s)

dw(s)

— N(s)

[1—.1(s) dL((s))
dw(s)

(8) O>[ [P(s)F' (s)—X(s)+L(X(s))—L(w(s))] l—,(s) ]±,(s) (L(A(s))—L(g(s)) ]dN(s)
dg(s)
—

N(s),(s)dL(g(s))
dg(s)

(9) O>(c(s)—?(s)F' (s)+L(w(s))—L(g(s)) ]N(s)

+

(

[P(s)F'(s)—X(s)+L(X(s))-L(w(s)fl [l_(s)]+(s)[L(X(s))—L(g(s))] ]dN(s)
d) (5)

where strict equalities hold for all non—zero values of the relevant variables.
Condition (5) is equivalent to the restriction that the narginal expected

profit from additions to the firm's initial work force be zero. More interestingly, this condition requires that the expected (over all possible future
relocations of the firm's initial work force) net risk—adjusted incone of
the firm and its Initial employees taken jointly be equal to that expected at
other

firms.

Applied more generally, condition (5) guarantees that the

initial sorting of workers across fIrms will be optimal in the sense that no

initial reallocation could increase the expected net risk—adjusted product

of all firms taken together.14
Given that

optimal

condition

(5) is satIsfied, condition (6)—(9) deter-mine

the

res:onse of income and erloyment to changes in the distribution of

product demand. Consider first condition (6). Condition (6) requires that

the

marginal value oroduct and marginal factor cost of additional hires in

state

s be equal if any hiring takes place in state s. Through this

condition, the availability of additional hires to the firm

optimal

influences the

characteristics of the firm's contract in r'o ways. First, the

elasticIty of the sucply curie of additional hires to the firm influences the
relation between the price of the firm's product and the margInal

of

the firm's employees. Second, variability in the

curve
the

OSit1Ofl

value product

of that supply

introduces an additional source of variation in the firm's demand for

services

of

its

initial work force.

If the s.pply curve of additIonal hires to the firm were perfectly elastic
and stable, then regardless of the volatility of demand for

there

the

firm's

product,

could be no uncertainty about the marginal value product of the firm's

employees. Alternatively, even if the price of the firm's product were perfectly certain, there stIll could be uncertainty about the marginal value
product of employees If variability in the demand for other firms' products

caused variability in the supply price of additional hires to the firm. in
general, for any given variability in the price of the firm's product, the
corresponding variability in the marginal value product of the fIrm's employees
would be less, the more elastic the supply curve of addItional hires to

firm

and the more the position of that

changes

curve varied

the

to offset the effect of

in product price.

ConditIon (6) can be seen as a determInant of the state dIstributIon

t

-

10

of the firm's demand for the services of its iniia1 work force. Given
this distribution, conditions (7)—(9) determine the corresponding state
15

distribution of income arid employment for initial employees.

The exact

mariner of this determination depends on the value taken by layoffs. Two
cases

are

possible. For states of product demand in which layoffs are

positive,conditions (6)—(9) jointly determine wages and employment. But
for states of product demand in which layoffs are optimally zero, conditions
(6) and (7) alone are determining.16

In states of product demand for which layoffs are zero, condition (7)
17

reduces to

(10)

0>[P(s)F'(s)—w(s)]dN(s)
dw(s)

The first term in condition

-

N(s)dL(w(s))
du(s)

the net effect of a marginal increase

in the state—s wage on the expected joint earnings of the fIrm and its

inItial employees. This term represents the value of the margInal reduction (increase) in resource misallocation brought about by Increasing the
wage when it is belcw (above) that value whIch leads the firm's employees
to allocate theraselves across alternative employments such that, net of

mobility costs, earnings available elsewhere to the marginal employee equal
the marginal value product of employees remaining at the firm.

Arty shortfall

of wages below marginal value products will cause some

workers to quit even though the value of their marginal product exceeds the

net earnings whIch they realize by quittIng. When such quits occur, the
firm loses (PF'—w) while

the employee gains (v—L(v)—c)—(w—L(w)). Similarly,

any surplus of wages over marginal value products will cause some workors not
to quit even though the value of theIr marginal product falls short of the

11

net earnings they could realize by quitting. .Then such quits fail to occur,

the firm loses (w—?F') while the employee gains (w—L(w))—(v—L(v)—c). In
either case, the difference——that par: of the loss to the firm for which there

is no corresponding emoloyee gain——is given by (PF'—L(w))—(v—L(v)—c)[. This
loss is solely due to the divergence of wages and marginal value products
resulting from efforts to stabilize etployee income.
For the marginal employee ,v is equal to w+c, and so the marginal value

of this distortion is (PF'—w). Given a positive (negative) distortion between
marginal value products and wages, a marginal increase in the wage will discourage some quits which would have resulted in a net loss (gain) to the

workers and the firm considered jointly. The contribution of this effect
to joint earnings in state s is (PF'—w)dN(v(s)), the first term in condition (10).
dw (s)

The second term in condition (10) is the (negative of the) effect of a
marginal increase in state—s wages on the risk premium which the firm must

pay to its employees. Given that employees are averse to variance Ln their
earnings, this term will be positive for values of w greater than the mean

of w, negative for values less than the mean, and zero otherwIse. Thus,
an implication of condition (10) is that wages will be set at values which
fall short of marginal value products in states of demand for which realized
earnings exceed their mean level, and at values which exceed margInal value
products in states of demand for which realized earnings fall short of their
mean.

In order to reduce income uncertainty for employees, the firm allows

wages to diverge from marginal value products. But this procedure leads t
a level of quits which is unprofitable for the firm and its employees taken

jointly. This fact limits the extent to which the firm can optimally reduoc
empicyce income uncertainty by reducing the extent to which wages reflect

r12

marginal value products. Optimal wages are too sticky to be fully efficient
in allocating labor, but too flexIble to eliminate income uncertainty for
employees.

To illustrate, consider the firm's response to an increase in product

price. An increase in the price of the firm's product will cause the first
term in condition (10) to increase without alterIng the second term.

ConditIon

(10) indicates that the firm's optimal response will be to increase its

wage. When product demand increases, it becomes profitable for the firm to
raIse wages in order to discourage quits among its em3loyees. The resulting

increase in the firm's labor force allows the fIrm to take advantage of
the initial excess of marginal value product over wages paid. As wages
and employ-nent are increased, however, this excess is reduced, and in addition

the firm must Increase the risk—premium paid to its employees. The optimal

wage for state s is deteined by margInal equality of the net gains from
additions to the firm's labor force induced by hIgher wages wIth the incremental effect of higher state—s wages on the risk

For states

premium paid by the fir-n.

of demand in which layoffs are zero, condition (10) implies

a relation between wages and marginal value products of the basic form shown
below in Figure 1.

/

—
w (s)

,
7

L I! • c: Lz

_( /'_

':

.1

—

-

P(s)F' (s)

Figure 1
Approximate Selacion Betcen Insured Wages and arginni
Val.ie Products When Layoffs are ero

7

_•),

__•-4,- —

13

The exact form of this relation can be seen more clearly by re—expressing
condition (10) as

(II) u(s) =

P(s)F'(s)
1+dL(w(s))/d1cN(s)

dw(s) / diogu(s)

It can be seen directly from condition (11)

that if

the marginal risk

premium associated with a wage increase, dL(w(s))/dw(s), increases in
absolute value as wages diverge from their mean value, or if the elasticity
of labor supoly to the firm, dlogN(s)/dlogw(s), diminishes as wages

diverge from their mean value, then wages will be less than

in

unit—elastic
18

response to marginal value products, as drawn in Figure 1.

Intuitively,

if successive employment increases recuire increasing marginal wage increases,

or if the margInal risk premium imp1ed by a wage ncrase rises as wages
are further increased, then firms will increase employment (and, by ipl±ca—
tion, wages) less readily in response to product price increases as wages

diverge further from theIr mean value. Similarly, firms will reduce employment (and, by implication, wages) less readily in response to product
price reductions if, as wages fall further below their mean value, either
the marginal wage reduction required to induce a separation or the marginal
risk premium implied by a further wage reductIon increases.

Similar reasoning suggests that firms with relatively inelastic
labor supply and relatively risk averse employees would have wage—response

schedules more closely approximating a horizontal line, while fIrms with

relatIvely
uculd

elastic labor supiy and relatively risk neutral employees

have wage—resDonse schedules more closely approXImating a 5' line

through. the origin in Figure 1. At
the

one extreme, with zero risk aversion,

fIrm's wage—response schedule would be given by the 450 lIne,

with

14

wages unIt—elastic

in

relation to .argina1 value products. It is thIs

special case chat auction models of the labor market are led to. At the
other extreme, with either infinite risk aversion or :ero labor supply
elasticity, the firm's wage response furtccion would be given by a horizontal

line, with wages zero—elastic in relation to marginal value products and

states of demand. It is this specIal case that previous analyses of
income—insuring labor contracts have been led to by the assumption of

zero ex—posc labor mobility. It is an advantage of the present analysis
that it supplies a framework broad enough to incorporate both extreme cases——

pure auction and complete insurance——and yet specific enough to suggest the

foi of the relazin beteen wages and marginal value products ifl the
presence of income insurance.

To investigate the role of layoffs and severance pay in the fi's
optimal contract, consider first the Implications of ccridition (8) for
the supplemental payments made by the.firm to employees laid off in State s.

Condition (8) requires that the firm guarantee all emoloyees laid off in
state s a level of income such that, at the margin, the benefits from such
payments in reducing income uncertainty equal the Implied loss in joint
net income resulting from the deterrant effect of severance pay on quits.
If quits were unaffected by severance pay, the firm would choose a level
of layoff benefits such that employees' expected income was unaffected by

the prospect of layoffs. That is, the firm would guarzntee all laid—off
employees a level of income equal to their ex ante mean level of income,
paying each employee the difference between the ex ante mean and that
19

emplovee1s realized level of income at his next—best alternative.
But to the extent that the

prospect of severance pay discaurages cults,

the firm's optimal severance pay policy will fail to elImInate the inccme

15

loss associated with layoff status. In states of low product denat-id,

some ep1oyees whose net earnings elsewhere exceed that a: their current
job will choose not to quit because the value to thern of renaming a:
the firrn, (l—,(s))w(s)+,(s)g(s), nay exceed the wage offered at their

next

best

alternative. As a consequence, the marginal effect of severance

pay on quits will lead to a net loss in expected joint incoe which must be
balanced against the marginal value of severance pay in reducing incone

uncertaInty. Higher values for g(s) reduce income uncertainty for employees,
but only at the cost of a lower mean level of income due to the negative
effect of severance pay on the efficiency of voluntary labor nobility.

The preceding discussion of condition (8) nay seen reminIscent of the

dIscussion of cond:ion (10) and the fIrm's optimal wage policy, for the
same tradeoffs are involved in both conditions. In fact, conditions (7)

and (8) together imply that the opti1 value for the level of income that
the firm guarantees all employees laid off in state s ts

sImply

w(s), the
20

level of income which it offers to those not laid off in state s.

This

characteristic of the optimal severance pay policy has important inpl1c—
tions both for the firm's optimal layoff strategy and for the optimal

response of wages to product price reductions. SettIng g(s) equal to w(s),
and noting that with g(s) equal to w(s), dN(s)/dJ(s) becomes zero,
conditions (7) and (9) reduce to

(12) 0>[P(s)F'(s)—w(s)]d(s) —
du(s)

N(s)dL(w(s))
du(s)

(13)

whIch reveal some interestIng aspects of the optInal respcnse of wages and

16

layoffs

to variations in product demand in states of demand for which layoffs

are non—zero.

Condition

(13) shows that the firm's

optimal layoff strategy is directly

determined only by efficiency cr1teria. Becase severance pay allows the firm
to compensate employees for the income loss associated with being laid off,
it

thereby allows the firm to choose its layoff strategy without being

directly
the

firm

constrained by

ermloyees' aversion to

income uncertainty. When

guarantees all emoloyees who do not quit in state s a certain

wage which is independent of layoff status, the direct relation between

layoffs and income uncertainty is broken. Also, quits are no longer affected
by the prospect of layoffs, since layoffs no longer affect raalized earnings.
As a result, the firm's layoff

strategy

involves only a comparison between

the marginal value product of employees at the firm and the expected net value
of what randomly

chooses

laid off employees could earn elsewhere. The

firm
22

a level of layoffs in state sso as to equate these two values.

By substituting condition (13) into conditIon (12) ,

conditIon

(12)

can be expressed as

(14)
•

0>[w(s)—w(s)]dN(s) —
dw(s)

N(s)dL(w(s))
dw(s)

which, although identical in form to
of the wage paid by the firm

in

condition (10), is a

state s. There is

function only

nothing in

condition (14)

to change when states of demand change. The imalication of this fact is
that once layoEfs bcccno positive, wages are made invariant to states of
product demand at a level given by

(15)

u(s)

u(s)
=

1+dL('.j(s) ) /d1ot Cs)
dw(s)

/ d.'(s)

- 'd
17

It is interesting to note the decerm.inants of this minimu income

which the firm guarantees to its ep1oyees. Condition (13) indicates
that in response to a price decline, the firm will lay off enough workers

to raise the margna1 value product of its employees to its es:imate of
their net alternative earnIngs elsewhere. By construction, the firm has
co knowledge of any particular employees' next—best alternative and so
cannot be selective in whom it chooses to lay off.

The best the firm can

do is to satisfy conditiori (13), realizing that some enployees not laid

off will have net earnings elsewhere which exceed those of some laid—off
employees.

In contrast, when the firm reduces its wage, it causes only those

workers who have the highest alternative net earnings to leave the firm.
However, all emplcyees must suffer the wage reduction necessary to induce

the marginal employees to leave the firm. Although adjustment of the
firm's labor force by way of wage cuts may be more efficient in terms

of the particular employees who are induced to leave the firm, it may
be more costly in terms of the income varIability which it entails.
In choosing the optimal level for the minimum income which it guarantees
its employees, the firm balances at the margin these efficiency costs
and in-come stability benefits to satisfy condition (14).

Because the marginal risk premium imp1id by a vage—induced spara—
tion increases as wages fall below their mean value, and because the
relative allocative inefficiency implied by a layoff dinishes as wages
are further reduced, layoffs may ultinately dominate wage reductions as

a means of employment adjustment, even though wage reductions are Initially
23

preferred.

Further, because the relatIve allocatiye inefficleriay cf

layoffs depends only on the wage paid by the firm, once layoffs become

the preferred means of em1ovment reductIon, they will remaIn preferred

is

for all further employment reductions. This point is illustrated below
in Figure 2.

MC

MFC

P0F'()
N(s) l—(s)
N3

N2

N* N1
Figure 2

Optimal

Income—InsurIng Responses to Reductions
in

Product

Demand

Figure 2 illustrates the fIrm's

choice of wages and layoffs in

responding to product price reductions. The downward—sloping curves are
marginal value product schedules correspondIng to different values of
product price (P <P <P ).

210

The upward—sloping curves are marginal factor

cost schedules corresponding to different assunptior.S about enployee risk

aversion

and different noans of separation.

The curie labeled FC

in

FIgure 2 Is the ox post recervatlon wage

19

schedule for the firm's initial employees, derived directly from the ex

osc

alternative wage distribution in the firm's initial work force. This curve
would be the marginal factor cost schedule relevant to the fi: in the

absence of employee aversion to income uncertainty. The curve labeled Cw
is derived from the MFC

curve

by subtracting from it the monetary value of

the utility loss suffered by all the firm's enployees as a result of the

wage reduction implied by that point on the C curve. This curve can be
interpreted as the marginal factor cast schedule relevant to the fi

when

employees are averse to income uncertainty and when separncions are wage—

induced. The curve labeled MFC plots the expected net wage available elsewhere to employees having alternative wages lower than that given by the

corresponding

point on the MFC

curve.

This curve generates the (horizontal)

marginal factor cost schedules that would be relevant to the firm's choice
of layoffs at dIfferent levels of wages.
Starting from an initial equillbriun at point E , consider first 'a
0
reduction in product price from P to P . Figure 2 illustrates that the
0

1

firm's optimal response will be to reduce wages to w

,

adjusting emloyent

1

entirely by voluntary se?arations. At point E , the marginal adjustnent
1

cost implied by wage—induced separation, E A, remains less than the narg±al
1

adjustment cost that would be implied by a layoff at that wage, AB. Even

though all employees must suffer the wage reductIon to W , this reduction s
1

small enough to be preferred to layoffs, given that layoffs inply relatively
great allocative ineEficiency when wages are high.

At lower values of product price, however, this need not be true.
Consider the firm's response to a price decline fron P to P . At point C
0
2
it is no longer true that the nargin! adjustrnent cost associated with

e—

induced

seoaratioa is loss than the narinal adjustrnent cost associated with

involuntary separation at that wage.

Indeed, for any level of enpiovnent

20

less than N, the reverse will be true. A.s the fir-n's wage falls toward the

minimum wage in the

market,

the difference between what the marginal voluntary

separation could receive elsewhere and what a randomly laid—off employee could

expect to receive elsewhere diminishes. As a result, because the marginal

allocatve inefficiency associated 'th

a

layoff depends positively on this

difference, these adjustment costs also decline as the wage falls.
In Figure 2, at a product price of P , the fi's equilibriu response
2
.s given by point E . The firm reduces its wage to w*, at which the
2

marginal adjustment cost implied by wage—induced separation comes to exceed
that marginal adjus:rent cost associated with a layoff at that

wage.

Given

w*, the marginal exected net alternative earnings of randomly laid—off

eplcyees is fixed

at the

value of w*, and so the fi lays off emloyees

to the point at which the marginal value product of employees remaining at

the fi is brouzht into ecualitv with that value. In Figure 2, the
optimal number of layoffs corresponding to product price P is given by
2

2

It is interesting to note that for sufficiently large reductions in
product price, the presence of income insurance nay actually increase the

employnent response to. product price reductions. Consider emloyent level
N .

At this level of employment, the fIrm's expectation of what an employee

3

randoo'iy laid off at a wage of w cquld receive elsewhere is equal to what
the marginal net alternative at that level of employment would have been

in the absence of inccme insurance. For lower levels of employment, the
margInal

factor cost relevant

insurance, *,

to

the fi n the presence of income

exceeds th marginal factor cost that would apply in the

absence of income insurance. Thus, for product prices low enough to make

employment less than N optimal, emlo',ent in the presence of Income ns'rance
3

21

be

will

less than

the level

that would have been optimal at the same price

in the absence of Income insurance,
in the presence of inccme insurance

absence

Correspondingly;' marginal value products

can exceed marginal value products In the

of income insurance for sufficIently low

product prices.

Combining these results with those for states of damand in which layoffs

are

of

cro, the implications of conditions (6)—(9) for the

optimal response

wages and employment to changes in prcduct price can be sumarized grahi—

cally as in Figure 3 below.
Figure 3 plots values of wages, marginal value

new hires, and emPloymant corresponding to

products, quits, layoffs,

alternatIve possible ex—post values

of product price. The curves labeled "contract" refer to a firm which
supplies income insurance to its employees, while for a point of referonce,
the curves labeled "auction" refer to a firm

which supplies no income insurance

to its employee but which is assumed to have the same initial level of enployment.
Panel (a) of Figure 3 shows thai, for states of demand in

which

layoffs

are zero, the presence of income insurance reduces the response of
wages to
variations in product demand, but correspondingly increases the response of

marginal

value products to variations in product demand. Because income

insurance reduces wages in states of high demand and increases wages in
states

of low demand, the responsiveness of quits to variations in product demand

is reduced, as shown in panel (b). To some extent, the firm can compensate
by increased additional hires in states of high demand and by reduced addi-

tional hires n states of low demand (panel (dJ). But so long as the
marginal supply price of

additional hIres

tional hires, the effect of income
not be fully offset.

24

is an increasing functIon of

insurance

addI-

cn voluntary separations 'iil

Thus, ir.ocma insurance wIll reduce the resonsjv,ess

of employment to varIatio n product demand when laoffs are zero
(pate1

[eJ),

22
(s)F'(s) (conrac:)
?(s)F'(s) (auc:iori)

w(s)

(corract)

(a)

P (s)

(b)

.(s)) (contract)
(..z(s))
I

I

I

(auction)
P(s)

I

f(s) 1(coritract)
(c)

iL.
I

?(s)

I

I

i

I

h() (contract)

I

h(s) (auction)

I
$

(d)
P (s)

N(s)+h(s) (auction)
N(s) (1-I(s) +h(s) (contract)
(e)

Figure 3
Chratcrtsrics ard Irip1icatots of Ictccm—Insurit'g L.bor Crtcracts:
A1tcrn.je V31u03 of Sejecte VarLi5es Corr-so jn

Ai'.'

1

of ?rui--

e

23

which implies the effect on

marginal value

products shown in panel (a).

For states of demand in which layoffs are non—zero, panel (a) shows

that

income insurance leads to locally fixed levels of wages and marginal

translates

value products. Panel

this effect on wages into a locally

fixed level of voluntary separations, and panel (d) translates the effect

on .arginal value products into a locally fIxed level of additional hires.

13

The firm's marginal response to changes in product demnnd takes place solely
by way of layoffs in such states, as shown in

are

panel (c). Because layoffs

chosen so as to maintain the marginal value product of the firs

employees

at a fixed level exceeding the minimum

of income insurance (?anel [al), emp.loyenc in

possible

level in the

absence

th presence of income insurance

ultImately falls below that in the absnce of income insurance (panel [efl.

II.

-

An Empirical Assessment of the Theory

The preceding analysis argues that if income—insurIng labor contracts
are present in the

marginal

can

wages should be less variable than

value products and firms should rely on layoffs as a means of

adjustr.ent in states of sufficiently low product demand. That

emploent

this

labor market, then

argument is at least broadly consistent with empirical observation

be sees from the data
Table

earnings,

presented below

in Table

1.

1 is based on annual values of residual income, production wor:er
value—added, and average monthly layoff rates for

industries,
real annual
production

.95 to 1976. The first

three

U.S.

columns of Table 1

manufacturing

list values of

residual income per production worker, real annual earnings of

workers, and

real

value—added per production worker, all exarcssec

relative to their te trends for the sample

period.

Column four lIsts similarly
26

constructed

relatIve values for annual averages of monthly layoff

rates.

24

TABLE 1
VALUES OF SELECTED

V3I3LES ERESSED RELATIVE TO TREND:

U.S. ANUFACTURINC, 1954—1976
Year

Residual Income
Per Production
Worker

Average Annual
Earnings of
Production
Workers

.

Valu e—Added
Per Produc—
tion worker

Average cnthly

Layoff

Ra:e

.923

.991

.964

1.031

1.096

1.012

1.014

.833

1958

.844

981

.930

1.314

1959

1.009

.999

1.019

1.040

1960—62

.914

.983

.989

1.207

1963-69

1.006

1.009

1.011

.871

1970-71

.875

.979

.962

1954

1955—57

1.162
'

1.044

.811

.977

.992

1.531

1.008

1.030

.956

1.031

1.013

1975

.903

1976

1.068

1972—74

•

Definition of variables and source: see Appendix

The data presented in Table 1 display two characteristics consistent

with the hypothesis that firms stabilize employee earnings. First, production
worker earnings arid

residual

income per production worker move together over

the cycle, but the variability of production worker earnings is substntia11y
less than the variability of residual income per production worker. The

mean annual absolute deviation from unity

for

the series underlyIng colun one

is .082, while the corresponding valuefor column two is only .014.

the

Also,

mean absolute vcar—to—year change for the relative values underlying

column one Is .098, ccnparcd to .017 for column two,

To put these nuiibers in conte:t, if f1rs' production fmcticnS
were Cobb—Dou1as and

25

if firms offered no income insurance to their empLoyees, then the percentage

variability of annual

eaings and annual residual income per employee would

equal, and equal also to the percentage variability or value—added per
employee. But if firms offered contracts that stabi1ied the annual income

be

of their employees, then the percentage variability

of

residual income per

.employee would exceed the percentage variability of value—added per

employee.27

For the data underlying Table 1 the standard deviations about trend for the

1ogarith of residual income per production worker, annual earnings of
production workers, and value—added per prcducton worker are .102, .013, and

.024,

respectIvely. The fact that the percentage variability of residual

income per production worker exceeds the percentage vnriab±lty of both value—
added per production worker and production worker earnings suggests the

presence of izcomo inurance. The non—zero variabIlity of annual earnings,
however, suggests that this insurance is not complete.

The second feature of Table 1 csistent with the presence of income
insurance is the existence and signIficant (counter—) cyclical variability

of layoffs. Although not evident from Table 1, layoffs coprise a significant fraction of total separations. The mean share of layoffs in total
separations——the mean probability or layoff conditional on separation——is
.402 for the sample period; ranging from a value of .196 in 1973 to a value

of .634 in 1958. Corresponding values of the average monthly layoff race
for those two years are .9 and 2.6, respectively.

As Table 1 shows, perIods during which residual income per productIon

wrker lIes belcw its trend

value

are characterized by small deviations of

annual earnings below trend and high values of layoffs re1atve to trend.
PerIods of relatively hIgh residual income on average display the reverse.

The averce year of relatively lcw

resIdual

income (.907 of trend value)

26

has production worker earnings equal to .984 of trend value and layoffs

equal to 1.199 of trend. In the average year of relatively high residual
income (1.065 of trend value), production worker earnings are 1.010 of
trend value, while layoffs are .855 of trend value.
These

characteristics

appear to be

irtconsistent

with an auction model

of the labor market in which wages adjust to clear the market at all times.
The auction model could explain the relative cyclical stability of earnings
by appropriate choice of labor supply and demand elasticities and by appro-

prIate assumptions about the blat distribution of shocks to labor supply

and labor demand. ut such a model would leave unexplained fis' reliance
on layoffs in reducIng employment. The data in Table 1 indicate a signi—

least

ficant departure, at

in form, from an auction market, a departure which
28

can be

rationalized

by an appeal to risk—shifting consIderations.

But while the data in Table 1 may be qualitatively consistent with the
rIsk—shifting explanation of wage rigidity and layoffs, they may at the same
tIme

be quantitatively inconsistent with that explanatIon. Of particular

interest in Table 1 is the fact that the cyclical behavior of production
worker earnings differs only

from the cyclical behavior of value—

added per production worker. If

production functions were Cobb—Douglas,

the relative variability of value—added per production worker would equal the

relative variability of production workers' marginal value product. Theref:re,
on the assumption of Cobb—Douglas production functions, Table 1 could
imply that wages do not differ much from marginal value products, and
so cast

doubt

More

on explanatIons of layoffs that rel-y on such a differonce.

generally, on

the assumption that firms' productIon Eunc:ipns are

of the constant elasticity of substItutIon (C5) for, the interretaticn of
the data in Table 1 would depend on the elasticity of substItution between

productIon workers and other factars of productian. Fcr the CS productIon

27

fuctiori, the
would

if

equal

percentage variability of residual income per production worker

the

percentage

variability of value—added per production worker
29

fircis supplied no incocie insurance to choir enployees.

Thus, coluns one

and two of Table 1 would continue to suggest the presence of incone insurance.
flowever, internal consistency would require that the elasticity of substituticn

between production workers and other factors of production be less than unity.

For values of the elasticity of substitution less than one, the ralatve
variability of marginal value products would exceed the relative variability
of average value products, while for elasticIties of substItution greater

than one the reverse would be true?° Thus, Table 1 would

difference
if the

indIcate a

in the cyclical behavior of wages and rginal value products

elasticity of substitution were

less than one. It would indicate

lIttle or no difference otherwise. Depending on the value of the elasticity
of substitution, then, the data in colunn tree of Table 1 could either

suport or contradict the hypothesis that the data in coluns one, two,
and four reflect the presence of incce insurance.
Many studies have estinated production functions for U.S. anufaceuring
industries using the CES fraraework. In general, studies using tine—series
31

data

have found elasticities of substitution less than unity.

ternpted,

One night

therefore, to conclude that the data in Table 1 support the

be

incone

insurance

hypothesis in a consistent fashion. However, because previous

estimates

have been based on the equality of wages and narginal value products,

and

because wages may not equal ciarginal value products in the presence of

incorne

insurance, it is not clear that previous estinates of the elasticity of

substitution are valid in the presence of income insurance. Accordingly, it

seens advisable not to rely on previously estimated elasticities of
tutlon

in interpreting the data In Thble 1.

ubs:I—

28

To develop an alternative method of estimatIon that can allow for the

presence of income insurance, consider equation (11), repeated here for
convenience

P(s)F'(s)

w(s) =

(11)

1 + dL(w(sfl/dloN(s)

du(s) / dlogw(s)
Interpreting

the "contractingt' period as being of one year's length, this

equazon would determine the relation between annual earnIngs and annual

marginal value products in the presence of income insurance. It is analogous

to the equilibrium condition PF' in the absence of income insurance
(equation [

reduces to this condition in the absence of aversIon to
income uncertainty or in the presence off infinitely elastic labor supply) ,
11]

it can play tLe same role in estimation.
By taking logarithms, equation (ll)can be re—expressed as
(16) log[w(s)J

log[P(s)F'(s)] — logfl+dL(w(s))/dlog;(s)]

du(s) /

dlogw(s)

log[P(s)F'(sfl — dL(w(s))/dlogN(s)
dw(s) / dlogw(s)
for values of w(s) near the ex—ante mean of w. On the further assumptions

that: (a) the supply of labor to the fIrm is of constant elasticity with
respect to annual earnings at the firm; and (b) the marginal risk premium,
dL(w(sfl/dw(g), is proportional to the logarithmic difference of w(s) from
the

e:—ante mean lovel

averro

of earnings (as might be the case If enDloyees are

to percentage uncertainty in their earnings) ,

re..:i::cr. as

equation

(16) can b&

and

29

(17)1og[w(s)J( c )log[P(s)F'(sfl --

[

e+R

)log[E

p.

c+R

where c again denotes the elasticity of labor supply to the firm, R is a easu:e
of employees' aversion to income uncertainty, and Ew is the ex—arite mean level

of earnings fo the firm's employees.

production

32

Finally, on the assu'.pt±on that fir's

functions are CES, equation (17) would take the particularly sizple

form of

(18) logw(s)]c±rj1c[p(s)i+[

____

N(s)

+R
33

where F(s) denotes output in state $ and c denotes a constant.

Interpreted in a time—series context, equation (18) suggests the following
estImating equation;

(19) log[w(t)]=c+ylog[p(t) ]+ylog[F(t) J+y[l—c] l—uJlogF(t)+(1—y) log [Ev(t) ]+u
o
N(c)
t

where u is a regression disturbance term, and where y can be interpreted as

an

t

elasticity
holding

of annual earnings with respect to

expected earnings constant. If

auction, with

emlovees

the

annual marginal value products,

labor market operated as an

always paid the value of their margInal

In

then estimates of equation (19)should result

product,

estimated values of r

near unity. In this case, equation (19)could be interpreted

as just a

renormalized version of the Art —Chenery—jnhasSolow equation, but without

the assumtjon of constant returns to scale

and without

the imposed restricticn

30
34

that y equal unity.

Alternatively, if firms offered contracts which stabilized

employees' income in the manner assumed by equation (11), then estimates

of y

should

be less than unity, with the difference from unity reflecting the

degree to which employees' income is stabilized by firms.

Thus,

at the price

of some additional assumptions about the form of employees' aversion to income
uncertainty arid about the labor supply curve facing the firm, CES production

functions can be estimated ma manner that allows for the presence of income
insurance. cre importantly for the purpose at hand, these assumptions allow
direct measurement of tho extent to which firms stabilize emloyee income.

Presented below in Table 2 are estimates from th following version of
equation (19)

(20)log[w(t)]=

0

1

2

t2+ylog(P(t) J+ylog(F
a

t)J±y{1-c][l-v]lcg [F(t)J+u
a

N(t)

t

where t denotes time measured in years.

TABLE 2
ESTDIATES OF EQUATION (20) FOR U.S. 1.1JFACTURING, 1954-1976:

t+

log[w(t)]=ci

0

Coefficient

1

a

2

C

0

Coefficient

N(t)

2.409

1

a

v

i/a

2

—.011

—.0003

(.008)

(.0001) (.111)

.221

a

\)

.787

.055

(.151)

(.039)

estimate

Standard error

R2

(1.452)

.9923

Durbiri

F(5,17)

'atoon

1.7792

433.158

Definition of var±5le and

source:

see Apocdix

31

The estimates presented in Table 2 are based on th same data as underlie
Table 1——U.S. manufacturIng industries, 1954 to 1976. In place of the varIable
Ew(t),the regression reported in Table 2 includes a quadratic tthe trend. Given
that Ew(t) is intended to reflect conditions of labor supply, which may be
ecpected to change only gradually over time, the use of a time trend in place

of Ew(t) seems reasonable. A quadratic function was chosen to allow for the
changing industrial, demographic, and skill composition of the labor fcrceover
the sample period.

The estimates in Table 2 were derived by an instrumental variables estimation

method in order t

allow

for pcssible endogeneity of the explanatory variables.

Auxiliary regressions were first performed for the 1ogarith of product price,
output, and output per production worker. Fitted values from these regressicns

were then used to estimate equation (20). In addition toa quadratic time trefld,
the auxiliarj regressions included, as explanatory variables the logarIthms

of the current and previous year's values of:

(a) net new orders for manu-

facturing establishments; and (b) an Index of helo—wanted newspaper advertisements.

All nomInal values were deflated by the Consumer Pice Index

(all items). The maintained assumption, of course, is that these variable are
uncorrelated with the error term In

equation (20), although correlated with

product price, output, and output per production worker. There is little
çuestion

about the latter5but the asspcion of zero correlation with the error tarm
in equation (20) is subject to some doubt. However, given that short
run,
cyclical deviations from trend are more lIkely to be demand—induced than
labor—supply_induced, it seems reasonable to assume that these variables

mainly reflect variation in product demand that iS

in mamufacturi

exogenous

to the wage paId

32

The diagnostic statistics reported in Table 2 are self—explanatory and

require little orrtnent. The only questionable statistic is the Durbin—atson
statistic, which lies toward the upper tail of the inoonclusive region for a

test of positive autocorrelation in the residuals. Equation (20) was also
estimated by a Cochrane—Orcutt procedure to account for the possibility of
autocorrelatd errors, but the resulting estirnate of the auto—correlation

coefficient was only .l19, with a standard error of .211. Further, the
estiaces of all coefficients were virtually unchanged and the standard
errors were ncrcased only slightly when the presence of autbcorrelated
disturbances was allowed for.

If autocorrelation is present In true regression

disturbances, it is ncc significant enough to alter an'; conclusions based on

the estItes in Table 2. Therefore the following discussion will focus only
en the estirates shown

in

Table 2.

Conditional on the naintained assunotions underlying equation (20),
the estimates in Table 2 offer support for the Incone insurance hypothesis.
Contrary to the predictions of an auction nodel of the labor narket, percentage
changes in product price do not translate into equal percentage changes in

annual earnings when annual narginal products are held constant. Indeed,
accordIng to the estjnatcs in Table 2, the elasticity of annual earnings with

respect to annual narginal value products is only .221. Thus, for the data
underlying Tables 1 and 2, annual earnings appear to be roughly only one—fifth
as responsive to annual tharginal value products as an auction rnodel of the
36

labor narket wu1d suggest.

This estiiated

relation between annual earnings and annual arEir.a1

value

the relative variability of employees' annual

products

can be used to neasure

rginal

value products over the sample period. The fitted values f:a equation U)

provide

yearly

crtIatcs

o log?F' + (l—i)lcgEw, where Ew is a quadratic functtn

33

of

tine. Thus, if these fitted values are regressed on a quadratic function

time,

the residuals from that regression will measure the percentage de'rLatlon

of

argina1 value products from

If

these error teris are then divided by the estiiated '? arid exonentia:ed,

the

of

result

(quadratic)

trend, multIplied by the factor .

will be an estimated serIes for employees' marginal value products,

expressed relatIve to trend as in Table 1.
Table 3 below lists these estinated rnarginal value product relatives

for production workers in U.S. manufacturing, 1954 to 1976. For purposes of
comparison, the corresponding relative values of annual earnings of production
workers are reprinted from
two

series'

Table

1. Table 3 also lists the ratios of the

yearly values, which can be interpreted as measuring the relative

difference between annual earnings and annual narginal value products over the
37

sample period.

TABLE 3
VALUES OF ANNUAL EARNINGS AND ANNUAL MARGINAL VALUE PRODUCTS

ERESSED RELATIVE TO TREND: U.S. t.NUFACTURING
PRODUCTION OERS 1954—1976

Year

Annual Marginal
Value Product

Annual Earnings

Annual EarninEs +
Annual Marginal
VR1UC ?rc'du-r-

1954

.963

.991

1.029

1.038

1.012

.975

1958

.904

.981

1.085

1959

1.049

.999

.952

1960—62

.956

.983

1.028

1963—69

1.032

1.009

.978

1970—71

.913

.979

1.072

1972—74

1.053

1.013

.962

1975

.902

.977

1.083

1976

1.025

1.008

.983

1955—57

Defini:ion cf

v3ricis and mrr c'

34

Taken together, Tables 1 and 3 offer consistent support for the

income insurance hypothesis. Annual earnings and annual narginal value
38

products are related in the nner suggested by Figure 3.

relation

Also, the -

between layoffs atd the excess of annual earnings over

annual

marginal value products is as shown in that figure. At this aggregate level,

the data are strongly consistenc with the hypothesis that firns reduce the
extent to which wages reflect marginal value products and, consequently, rely
on layoffs to induce separations in periods of low product denand.

More detailed evidence related to this phenonenon is presented below

in Table 4. Table 4 presents estinates of equation (20) for eighteen two—
digit U.S. Manufacturing industries. The estimates again are based on annual
data for the period 1954 to 1976. In basic form, the method of estimation
used for Table 4 was the same as that

used

for Table 2. There are thrne diE—

ferecces, however. First, In addition to net new orders and an index of help
wanted newspaper advertisements, the regressions reported in Table 4 included
as first—stage instrumental variables the logarithms of value added and average
annual production worker earnings for all manufacturing industries other than
that for which estimates were being derived.

Second, many of the regressions

reported in Table 4 were estimated by a Cochrane—Grcutt procedure to allow for

autocorrelated disturbances. The decision to correct for first— or second—
order aut0000relation was based on an F—test with significance level of .05.
Third, in order to conserve degrees of freedom, the

equations underlying

Table 4 imposed the restriction of constant returns to scale, except where
estinated values of (l—a)(l—') were statistIcally non—zero a: a signIficance
39
u
c
level .05.

The estInaes of equ:Ion (20) prcser.:od

in

Table ,

like

those in

Table 2, support the hvpo thesis that firms insure emloyees' earnings. in

fourteen

of the eighteen Industries studIed, the estImated elazzcIy of

.334

(.104)

0.085

(.189)

21*

•/99

.785
(.253)

.045
(.052)

27A

28

.9959

.420

(.054)

.9700

.9938

.9905

.9918

.9709

.9945

.9929

.9940

+cz

.536
(.151)

.535
(.087)

.607
(.003)

2

R

0
Ic

2.2133

1.8078

2.0217

1.8089

2.0562

1.8253

1.8393

1.8652

2.2525

Durbin-Watson

2

•

•

a

.

37

.

36*

35

34*

33*

32*

31

30

29*

In dustry

N(t)

y

v

.577
(.123)

.622
(.068)

.661
(.104)

(.205)

—.141

.103
(.058)

(.100)

.•

.9315

.8728

.9)52

.565
(.069)

to.

.9914

.9892
(.088)

.823

8393

.9922

.9981

.

2

R

.9886

t

.707
(.098)

(.474)

—.399

.744
(.107)

.310
(.172)

(.271)

.298

1.284

(.245)

(.265)

1.155

.595
(.133)

y/u

1.084

(.313)

1.044

(.045)

—.051

a

t+e t2+y1og[P(t)]+-y1og[F(t)]+y[1—o1[1—u11og[F(t))-4-u

'1EjtfinaLi for all Industries other thtin 22, 32, 33, 34, and 37 assume constant returns
of an F—test with slgultlcance level .05).
*denot
Cochrane-Orcutt correction for first—order autocorrelatIon of resIduals.
Adt.ot c; Cochr:tne—OrcutI eorre'tJoi1 for second—order autocorrolar Ion of res (duals
I)E In! ti in ul van abl..ea and source: see Append Lx

.126
(.039)

(.063)

26**

25**

.575

(.084)

.417

(.043)

(.336)

(.198)

24*

1.102

1.122

23

.135
(.089)

.458
(.079)

22**

(.128)

.695

yb

—.019
(.1510

y

1og[i(t)]'cz

20**

Industry

4

ESTIMATES FROM EQUATION (20) FOR SELECTED 1140—DIGIT INDUSTRIES, 1954_1976a

TABLE

8cale (on

1.9946

1.9710

2.1038

1.5112

2.0776

2.1663

1.7804

1.8682

2.008?

the basis

Durbin—t4atson

36

lies

earnings

with

standard

errors below unity. For six of those fourteen,

respect

to rginal value products, 1,

more than t-o

the

estimated

value of y lies within two standard errors of zero. Th remaining eight
industries' estimates of '

are fairly uniformly distributed over the ur.i

interval.

It

is interesting to note the diversity in the estImated degrees of Income

insurance present In the industries listed in Table 4.

In the absence of any

recognition of labor mobility, one would have to explain this diversity by an
apceal to inter—industry differences in risk aversion on the part of employees

or employers. .Then labor mobility is recognizd, however, these differences
can, at least potentially, be related to

According

to equation (11),

the

observable variables.

response of wages to changes in marginal

value products will be smaller as the elasticity of labor. supply to the fi Is

smaller. In :h.

presence

of highly inelastic labor supply, the marginal benefit

from a wage reduction will be low, since the marginal labor supply response to

that wage reduction will be low. Therefore, the firm will be discouraged from

varying

wages in response to changes In product demand.

A special case of this general principle occurs when there exIst
fixed costs of interfirm labor mobility which are significant in relation to

the potential benefits from such mobility. For reductions in product demand
sufficiently limited or temporary in nature that the present value of the
benefits from

labor

mobility remain less than the cost of Intorfirm mobility,

the relevant elasticity of labor supply to the fi would be determined by

the

distribution of employees' values of leisure. If

that discributian

were

very dense over some small range considerably below the firm's mean wage and
were of

small density in the region of the fIrm's rean

wage, then:

(a) the

37

relevant, local elasticity of labor supply to the firm would be near zero;

and (b) the potential efficiency loss from laying off an employee would be
small, sInce the difference between employees' values of leisure would be small.
For temporary, limited reductions in product demand or extensive fixed costs

of interfi mobilit,, therefore, layoffs would dominate wage reductions as a
means of employment adjustment. It follows that, for any given distribution

deteining the siae and duration of

fixed cost of interfi labor

shocks

to product demand, the larger the

nobility, the less likely would be a wage—

induced em?loyment response and the more likely would be a response by way

layoffs.

of

Also, given any dIstribution of mability costs among fis in an

industry, the larger the average cost of mobility, the smaller would 1e the
average

response of wages to changes in marginal value products.

This
specific

of

argument can be extended to the presence of firm—

or

human capital as well. Interpreting the mobility—induced depreciatIon

human capital as a fixed cost of labor mobility, the above

that

indust,—

reascning suggests

industries with a greater degree of specificity in the human capital of

their employees should have lower estimated values of y. Further, given
any
positive

relation between

the specIfIc and general components of human capital,

reasoning- suggests also that industries with hIgher average annual
earnIngs should have lower estimated values of y. 40
this

the

Although the evidence is not conclusive, it is interestIng to
estlmated values of y in Table 4 are

negatively related to the

earnings

(over the sample

period)

note that

mean annual

of prcduction workers in those industries.

A simple regression of the estimated values of y in Table 4 on the
average reni

annual earnings of production workers in the corresponding
the results shown

below

in Table 5.

industries yields

38

TABLE 5
ESTIMATES OF THE RELkTION SETEEN ESTIMATED VALUES OF ' FRC TABLE 4
AND MEAN ANNUAL EARNINGS OF PRODUCTION .'ORKERS IN THE
CORRESPONDING INDUSTRY

a
0

+ a Mean Earnings
1

Coefficient

a0

Coefficient Estimate

1.460

Standard Error

(.396)

R2

a1

—1.812
(.692)

.3133

F(1,15)

•

.

6.845

DefInition of variables and source: see Appendix

More directly, Lot the seven industries having estimated values of

-y

less than .15, the average real annual earnings of production workers is equal
to 6173, in comoarison with an average of 4191 for the three Industries
with estimated values of '

remaining

greater

than .83, and an average of 5457 for the

eIght intermediate industries. Thus, on the hypothesis that general

and specific human capital are positively related, the estimates in Table 4
suggest that the extent of income insurance Is greater in industries employing
more highly specific human capital.

This suggestion is made even more strongly when inter—industry variation

in employees' education is accounted for. Holding average annual earnings

constant, an increase in the median level of education In an Indust can be
interpreted as reflecting an increase In the generally marketable component
of employees' human capital relative to the more specific, less easily

marketable comoncnt.

41

On this interpretation, therefore, Industries vith

higher median levels of education should have hIgher estImates of Y

39

average

earnings are held constant. Correspondingly, because inter—industry

nean

variation in

earnings nay reflect differerces in

either

the general or

specific component of enployees' hunan capital, and because controlling for

education

would nake inter—industry variation

in

rrean earnings nore reflective

of inter—industry differences in specifIc hunan capital, any negative relatIon

between mean earnings and es:iated values of y should be strengthened when
education is controlled for.

As can be seen fron the regression results in Table 6 below, the
estImates in Table

are consistent also with this stronger set of hypotheses.

The estited coefficient on nedian education in the above regression is
positive and, although statistically significant only at a level of .10,

fairly large relative to the coefficient on nean earnings. Moreover, the
inclusion of nedian education considerably strengthens the es:ia:ed negative
relation between nean earnings and estinated values of y. By focusing oLly
on education and earnings, alnost forty percent of the inter—industry varia—

ton in estimated values of ' can be accounted for.
TABLE 6
ESTIMATES OF THE RELATION BETE:; ESTIMATED VALLTS OF Y FROM TABLE

AND MEAN ANNUAL EAF..NINGS AND DIAN YEARS OF SCHOOLING
OF PRODUCTION ;ORzRs IN THE CORESPONDtNC INDUSTRY

I

a +
0

a

Mean

a Median

Earnings

1

Coefficient

a
0

CoefficIent Estinate
Standard Error
R2

Years of Schooling

2

—.043
(1.149)

a

a
1

—2.527
(.847)

.3964

F(2,14)

4.597

DefinitIon of vnriablcs and sourco: see Appondix

2

1.608
(1.158)

4

40

Evidence of the relation between income insurance arid specific human

capital also can be seen in the relation between the estimated values of '

in

Table 4 and the median job tenure of male emoloyees in the corresponding

industries. On the assumption that inter—industry variation in median job
tenure reflects inter—industry differences in human capital specificity,
the previous discussion would suggest a negative relation between estimated

values of y and median job tenure. The estimates in Table

4 are

clearly

consistent with this hypothesis, as can be seen from the regression results

Over one—fourth of the inter—industry varIation in

shown below in Table 7.

estimated values of y can be explained by inter—Industry variation in median
job tenure.

TABLE 7
ESTIMATES OF THE RELATION BETWEEN ESTIMATED VALUES OF r FROM TABLE 4
AND MEDIAN JOB TENURE OF MALE EMELOYZES IN THE
CORRESPONDING INDUSTRY

= a +n Median Tenure

01

Coefficient

Coefficient Estimate

Standard Error

a
.920

(.223)

—.779
(.339)
.

R2

.2604

F(l,15)

.

5.282

Definition of variables and source: see Appendix

The estimated values of y in Table 4 reflect also on the relevance of
equation (11—8) in explaining inter—industry differences in layoff rates..

As discud i Section
use

of

1 the presence of income insurance implies the

layoffs as a means of reducing employment in perIods of

sufficInly

41

low product dernand.

Further,

the greater the degree of incone insurance, the

higher would be the critical state of dear.d

below which layoffs becone Dositive.

Consequezitly, for any given interfjrn distribution of

produc demand, industries

with higher average degrees of income insurance also would have higher
average
layoff rates.

With reference to Table 4, the irplication of these considerations is
that estimated values of y should be negatively related to average layoff
rates,

ceceris paribus. Marginal evidence of this relation can be seen below in

Table 8. As the estlates below suggest, industries in whch.1ayoffs corprise
a larger share of total separations tend

insurance (lower estina:ed values of r).

to have higher degrees of income

Equivalent'y,

industries with high

degrees of incone insurance tend to rely more on layoffs to achieve a
given level of separations.

TLE

8

ESTIMATES OF THE ?L.TION BETEN ESTIMATED VUES OF '

FROM

AND AVERAGE MONTHLY LAYOFF AND SEPARATION RATES IN THE
CORRESPONDI.NC INDUSTRY

=

Mean

layoff rate +

e2Mean

TA3LE 4

Separation Rate

Coefficient
1
Coefficient Estinate
Standard Error

R2

2
•

.092

-2.217

1.606

(.321)

(1.704)

(.996)

.1506

F(2,15)

1.330

DefinitIon of variables and source: see Appendix

for a given average level of layoffs, industries wIth higher
average levels of se'aratjons tend to have hIgier estImated values of y.
Also,

42

In part, this may

reflect the

fact that industries with hIgher average levels

specificity
fact that industries

of voluntary separations are those with relatively low degrees of

in

employees' human cooltal. Eut it may also reflect the

with higher values of y.are more likely to respond to
demand

reductions

in product

by the use of wage reductions and so have higher average levels of

voluntary separations.
The estimated values of y

are entirely consistent
with the income insurance hypothesis. In absolute value, they are as the
presented in Table 4

thoory predicts, and perhaps more importantly, they vary across industries in

a manner implied by the theory. Further, they appear to be related to inter—

industry differences in layoff rates as the theory suggests they should be.
In conjunctIon with Tables 1, 2, and 3, the evidence contained in Table 4

appears to warrant acceptance of the hypothesis that flrms stabilize the
income of theIr emoloyces in a manner sImIlar to that described by equation (ll)."

The empirical analysis in this section suggests that firms supply
income insurance to their employees by reducing the extent to which

wages reflect marginal value products, and that firms consequently rely

on layoffs to reduce employment in states of sufficiently low product
demand. However, these results are based on a sequence of within—year

comparisons of earnings and marginal value products. The analysis In
this section has not considered either the dynamic or longer—term

implications of the theory developed in Section I. The following section

considers these imolicatlons and Interprets the previous results within
the broader context vhich these implications provide.

43

III.

How Close to an Auction is the Labor Market?

Perhaps the most striking empirical finding of the' previous sectcn
is the low estimated response of

low response
from

earnings to

marginal

value products. This

seems to indicate that the labor market differs considerably

an auction, at least on a year—to—year basis. Whether the labor market

differs

from an auction on any longer—term basis remains to be seen, however.

In part, the low estimated values of I in Tables 2 and 4 can be actri-

buted to the inclusion of a tine trend in equation (20). With a time
trend included in the regression, the estImated value of I reflects the move—

ment of wages relative to trend that is induced by movements of marginal value

products relative to :rend. it does not reflect any longer tern relation
between wages and marginal value products that night be Impounded in the tine
trend.

Thus, the low estimated values for I in equation (20) arc not

tecessarily ir'consistent with a longer—tern, trend equality of wages and

marginal

value products.

This

distinction between short—run and long—ran suggests that while

estimates of equation (20) may reflect the presence of income insurance,

they may not adequately describe the long—run characteristics of income

insurance. Equation (20) assumes that employees' wage expectations are
exogenous. However, with any sort of endogenous, lagged adjustment of wage
expectations, such an assumption requires estImates of that equation to be

interpreted only within an explicitly short—run context. Given enough

to adjust,

or

given

tIne

enough forewarning, the utility loss suffered by eplcyees

as a result of initially unexpected changes ifl

income iht be expected to

approach zero. Thic fact ugostc that the recoonsc of ves to chane
in marginal value products might be distributed over tine, and that the

long—run response nigh: differ substantially from the short—tern res?onse.
Indeed, ecuatton (19) ossumos that the "long—run" elasticity of

ges

44

with respect to (fully anticipated) changes in .arginal value products Is
unity. So long as expected wages change In proportion- to marginal value
products, wages also will

change

in proportion to nargirial value products.

Defining the long run as a period long enough for exoectatlons to
the estimated "short—run" values of y

in

with a long—run view of the labor narket

adjust

fully,

Tables 2 and 4 are entirely consistent

as

an auction.

To elaborate with a specific exanple, assurne that eoloyees' wage
expectations evolve according to the adaptive schene

(21) Ew(t) = Aw(t—l) + (l—X)Ev(t—l)

In this case, by using equation (19) to express Ew(t—l) as a function

of

PF'(t—l) and w(t—l), and then substituting this expression into

equation (21) to express Ew(t) as a function of those sàe varIables,
equation (19) can be rewritten as

(22) log[w(t)J =

ylog[P(t)] +log[ F(t) J +
N(t)

y(1—)(l—vJlogEF(t)]
v

—y(l—X)log[P(t--l) ]—(l—X)logF(t—1) ]—y[l—] [1—.] (l—X)logfF(t—1)]
C

N(t—l)

o

+(l—Xy)logfw(t—l)]+u

It can be seen fron equation (22) that, so long as neither y nor A
is equal to unity, the effect on wages of a change in narginal.value products
will be distributed over ti'e.

of

wages with

For equation (22) , the short—te elasticity

respect to rginal value products is

equal

to y, whIle the

long—run elasticity (found by setting w = E; in equation [19]) S equal
to unity.
ly in the case where y or A ecuals unity will shorz—run and
long—run elasticItIes coincide.

45

If the labor market operated as art

then

aucti.n

for all time intervals,

estimates of y from equaion (22) should be near unity, while estimated

coefficIents on lagged variables should be near zero. Alternatively, if
the labor market operated as equation (20) implies, with no endogenity
of wage expectations, then estimated values of y from equation (22) should

be less than uqicy, while estirnated coeffients on lagged variables again
should be near zero. Finally, if employees' wage expectatiris were ertdcgencus,

so that employee aversion to initially unexpected income changes dinished
with the extent of forewarning, then estimates of y from equation (22) should
be less than unity, while estimated coefficients on lagged variables should
be non—zero and indicative of the time—distributed pattern of wage adjustment
in response to changes in marginal value products.

Presented below in Table 9 are estimates from equation (22) based
on the same data as underlIe Tables 1, 2, and 3.
TABLE 9
ESTIMATES OF EQUATI0 (22) FOR U.S. MA1JPACTTRINc, 1954—1976

log[w(t)] c

4-ylog[P(c))+ylog[ FCt) )

o

a

—

N(t)

—(l—X)log F(t—l)
N(t—l)

3

+ (l—Ay)logfw(t—1) +
I

Coefficient

y(l-A) - (1-A)

Coefficient Estimate

—.634

.402

.766

Standard Error

(.680)

ç.255)

(.131)

.9863

Durbjn—Watscn
F(5,16)

u

1.8451
239.224

Defint1o of virjab1es and source:

see Appendix

(l-)

—.116

a
—.588

.714

(.252)

(.162)

(.170)

46

I is interesting to note that, although there is no a priori justi—
fication for equation (21)as a description of employee' expectations, the

estinated coefficients on current price, lagged price, and lagged wage in
equation (22) come very close to satisfying the restrictions
equations (19) arid (21).

implied by

According to equatIon (22), the sun of the

coefficIents on current price, lagged price, and lagged wage should be equal

to unity. The sun of the estlates of those coefficients from Table 9 is equal
to 1.0005. Hoc.'ever, the estimated coefficients on current and lagged output

per production worker are less consistent with the restrictions in1ied by

equation (22). According to that equation, the ratIo of the coefficients
on currant price and current output per production worker should equal the
ratio of the coefficients on lagged

price and lagged output per production

worker. For the estimates in Table 9, the foer ratio is equal to .52, while
the latter ratio is equal to .197.

However, an increase n the estimated

coefficient on lagged price of less than threefourths of its standard error
would equate the two ratios. Thus, although the estimated coefficients in
Table 9 are not exactly consistent with the

interpretation given them by

equation (22), they are close enough to suggest that equation (21) might provide

a reasonable apProximation to the evolution of employees' wage expectations
over tine.

147

This interpretation of the estimates in Table 9 is subject to two

questions. First, it is possible that the estimated coefficents on
lagged varIables simply reflect the effects of aucocorrelated disturbances.

Second, the general fo of equation (22) is consistent with interpretations
other than that suggested by equatIons (19) and (21)
To address the fIrst question, r.ocice chat if the prover cpecficacion

of equatIon (10) were ivcn by

47

(23)log(w(t)) —

C +y1og[P(t)1+y1og[

F(t) 3

+

u(C)

0

ou(-l)

where: u(t) =

+

v(t)

then, written in autoregressive form, equation (19) would become

(21) logw(t) =

ylog[P(t)] + y1og
—p'flog[ F(t—1) I

F(:) I
N(t)

—

pylog(P(t—lfl

+

N(t—l)

which is identical in form to equation (22), but which iplias different

restrictions on the estimated coefficIents. In particular, If equacion(23)
is true, the product of the estimated ccefuicients on current price and
lagged wage should equal the negative.of the coefficient on lagged price, -

and the product of the coefficients on current
output per production
worker and lagged wage should equal the negative of the coefficient on

lagged output per produduccion worker. Thus, the estimated co€fficients in
Table 9 can provIde a basis for distinguishing between equations (22) and (2).

But on this subject, the evidence provided by Table 9 is mixed. In
absolute value, the

product

of the coefficients on current price and lagged

wage exceed the coefficient cn lagged price by .171, a difference which is
almost exactly consistent with equation (22).

In contrast, the product O

the coefficients on current output per prcducticn worker and lagged
wage differ from the coefficient on lagged output per production worker by
only .041, a difference more consistent with equation (24) than with

equation (22). Further, any use of the ectimates in Table 9 to dIs:ingush

is

48

between equations (22) and (26) is hapered by the fact that the inplicacions
of the two equations are too similar for the data underlying Table 9 to allow
a test with rnuch power. However, a Durbin h—test for serial correlation

yields a value of .602, which is significant only at a level of .275. Thus,
although the estimates in Table 9 should be interpreted with cautIon, it
appears reasonable at this stage to interpret thei as iore than the result of

isspecificacion, and to interpret th•e as they stand.
The second question rentioned above is less easily addressed. There
is rio guarantee that estiriated coeffIcients fron equation (22) do not sinoly

reflect costs of wage adjustnent that have nothing to do with eloyees'
aversion to income uncertainty. Thus, although the estir.ates frc equation (22)

(and equation [20, for that macter) are consistent with the inco insurance
hypothesis, they cannot be taken as conclusive proof that incoe insurarca
exists.

50

Nevertheless, regardless of the true underlying structure of wage

adjusenent and employees' wage ecpectat±ons, equation (22) an be justIfied

on the 'ore general grounds that it is caable of approxiating a wide
variety of distributed lag patterns for the effect

value

of changes in rginal

products on current and subsequent wages. Ex post, it can be justified

on the grounds that

It

fits the data as eli as do nodels which allow for

tore complicated lag structures. Thus, one need not accept the interpretation of equation (22) iolied by equations (19) and (21) in order to
accept equation (22) as a reasonable basis for estizating the t1e—distrIbu:ed

response of wages Co changes in nargil vzlue products, and for testing
whether the long—run resoonse
fron the short—run rosDonse
hypothesis.

of

in a

wages to arginai value oroducts differs
n3riner consistent with the incoc irsuronco

49

Therefore, consider the implications of the estinates in Table 9 for
the time-distributed resoense of wages to changes in m:ginal value products.
The estimated coefficient of .402 on current product price indicates that,
holding the previous year's wage and marginal value product constant, a
ten percent increase in product price would lead to a four percent increase

in wages. In the following year, assuming that product price remained at

its current level and assuming for siz1jjy that marginal products
remained constant, wages would rise by an additional .171 percent (equal

to w(t+l) + w(t÷l) w(t) ).
3w(t)

the sane assumptions, wages would inarease

P(c)

in the next period by a further .714 of .171 percent (equal to

w(t±2) [3w(t1)+w(t+l)..(t)])
3w(t+l)
?(t)
3w(t) ?(:)

,

and so on. Ultimately, the complete

long—run response of wages would be given by fw(t)±3w(t)
which for these data is ecual to 1.0015.

]![l—w(t

P(t) P(t—1)
That is, the escated coefficients

from equation (22) imply that the long—run elasticity of wages with respect
to marginal value products Is unity, just as an auc:on model of the labor

market would predict. The short—run elasticity of .402 is sigrif.cant1y
lower, however, and is consistent with the income insurance hypothesis.2
The question "How close to an auction is the labor market?", then,

is perhaps better posed as "How long does it take wages to respond to changes
in marginal value products as they would res?ond in an auction market?" The
estimated coefficients from equation (22) provide an answer to this question.

Listed below in Table 10 are various

Table 9) of th effects of

measures (implied by the estImates in

changes in annual marginal value products on

current and subcequenc annual earnIngs.
Column one of Table 10 LIsts the estimated

effect on earnings at time t

of a permanent, unit increase in margInal value products at tIne
zero. Column

50
two lists the cumulative totals of these effects at tine t,

divided

by the

niber t+l. Colunn three is der±ved fron colunn one by nul:iplyin the
elenents of colunn one by the factor (1+r)_t, where r is assuned equal
.10. Colunn four lists the curaulative totals of colunn three, divided by
t

the factors

(1+rYi, where r is again assuned equal to .10.
•j =0

TABLE 10
ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF A PERNENT, UNIT INCREASE IN NUAL RCINAL
VALU: PRODUCTS ON SUESEQtJENT ANNJAL EARNINCS ?XD REALIZED

WEALTH: U.S. MANUFACTURINC 1954—1975

Period

Direct Effect

Curulated Effect
as a Percentage
of Auction
Market Effect

Discounted
Direct
Effect

Cunulated Discountd

Direct fect as a
Percentage of
Market Effect

0

.402

.402

.402

.402

1

.573

.488

.521

.483

2

.695

.557

.574

.547

3

.782

.613

.587

.598

4

.844

.659

.576

.638

5

.888

.697

.551

.670

10

.979

.814

.378

.762

15

.996

.869

.238

.801

.900

.149

20

—

.998

Auctian

.

Defirtion of variables and source: see Appendix

As colunn one of Table 10 shows, alnost eighty—fIve percent of the

unit—elastic resonse of wages to changes In narginal value products is
achieved within five

years

of the initial shock. Alnost ninety percent is

achieved withIn six years. The nean lag for the effect of a change in nargicl
value products on wages is equal to 1.811 years, and, as colunn one clearly

51

shows, the distributIon of lagged effects is heavily weighted toward short

lags. Thus, although the labor narkec appears not to operate as an auctIon
in a short—run sense, these data indicate that, at the nargin, it nay be
reasonably toodeled as an auction for tine Intervals on the

order

of five

years' length.

But while the "narginal" deviation of wages fran narginal value products

dininishes fairly rapidly, the cunulative deviation renains. Thus, while a
pernanent ten percent increase in rnarginal value products would lead to an

8.8 percent increase in wages by the end of those six years (column one), the
cu.ulacive effect on wages over those six years would be only seventy percent

of the cunulative increase in narginal value products (colunn two). Discounted at a rate of ten percent, the

present

value of the cunulated effect

on wages would be only sixty—seven percent of the cu.ulated increase in

rginal value oroducts (colunn four). Cunulating over a twenty year period,
the present value of the futue wage changes induced by a peanent, tiie—
zero Increas.e in narginal value products would be equal to ninety percent of
the auction result at a zero rate of interest (colunn two)

,

and equal to only

eighty—two percent of the auction result at a ten percent rate of interest
(column four).

As the estinates in--Table 10 show, the labor narkac returns fairly

rapIdly to the equality of wages and narginal value products. But the interin
period of inequality between wages and narginal value products reduces the

wealth effect corresponding to any given peranent change in narginal value
products by ten to twenty percent. Although the effects of incone Insurance
on enployee incone and the allocatIon of labor disappear in the long run, r"e
stabillzjr.g effect on eplovecs' realized wealth renains. In ans;;er to the

52

question posed by this sectIon, the analysis indicates that the labor market
does operate as an auction, but with

an

adjustment Derlod of around six years.

This period of partial adjustcnz reduces the potential variability of
employees' realized wealth by approxirnately ten to twenty percent. In the
short—run, the

labor

market appears to differ from an auctIon market both in

terms of factor rewards and in terms of factor allocatIon. In the long—run,
it appears to differ only in terms

of

realized wealth.

53

Appendix. Sources and Definitions of Variables Used in the Enpirical Analysis
Listed below by table are sources and definitions for the variables
referred to in the text.

Table 1, oae24
Relative values for profit per production worker, annual earnings of
production workers, and value—added per production worker were constructed
by regressing the logarithn of the variable in question on a constant, tine,

and tine squared, averaging the deviations within the given periods, and then

exonentiating those averages. The relative values for layoff rates were
constructed by regressing the layoff rate on a constant, tIne, and tine scuared,

exoressing the actual values relative to fitted values, and then taking a

geoet:ic average of those relative values within the given periods.
"Real" values were formed

by deflating nominal values by the Consuner

Price Index (all iters).

Data

for production workers (as opposed to all employees) were chosen

to avoid possible biases due to cyclical changes in the composition of
manufacturing employment.

Annual values of residual income (before taxes) were

taken from various issues of U.S. Federal Trade Comission, Quarterly

FinancIal Reort for nufacturin, inin2, and Trade CorDorations,
Table Al, "Income Statement for CorporatIons Included in:"
Annual

earnings,

values of production worker ecploent, productIon worker

and value added were taken from

Bureau of the Census 1972 Census of

Annual Survey of nufactures,

the U.S. Departcnt of Ccerce,

-anufactures and from the

1974 and

175

General Statistics for Industry Groups and

54

Industries. Annual averages of monthly

layoff

rates were taken frcn U.S.

Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics Enolo-nent and Earnirvzs,

1909—1975 and recent issues of Eolov-en: and Earnings.
These

sources apply both for two-digit industries and for the aggregate

of all nanu.facturing industries.
Table 2, page 30

The variable w(t) was formed by taking the ratio of annual wage paynents
to production workers and annual eploynenc of production workers (sources

listed above for Table 1).
The variable P(t) was foed by taking the ratio of annual value—added
of

to an index

industrial production, (F(t))

(sources listed above for Table 1)

Annual indices cf industrial production were taken fran: Board off

Governors of the Federal Reserze Sysce, IndustrIal Product±cr: 1976 revision.
Annual values of net new orders for nanufacturing corporatiofls and n
index of help—wanted newspaper advertienents were taken fran Business

Statistics: 1977 Suc1ement to the Survey of Current Business.
Table 3, paze 33

Sources and definitions are listed above for Tables 1 and 2. The

derivatIon of colunn one is discussed in the text.
Table

4, ae 35

Sources and definitions are
5, Daze

Table

Moan

averagIng

38

annual
the

listed above for Tables 1 and 2.

earnings for each industry (except 21)

variable

w(t) for

were conputed by

the years 1954 through 1976.

Table 6, ;ae 39
Values of nedian years of schcoilng for each

industry (except 21,

for

55

which data

were not

available) were taken from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

SDecial Labor Farce Reort ff103: Educational Attainent of Workers, March

1568.

Other sources and defintons are listed above for Tables 1, 2, and 5. Education
is measured in 10—year units.

Table 7, page 40
Values of rnedian job tenure of male ecloyees for each industry (excapt 21,

for

which data were not available) were taken fran

U.S. Bureau of Labor

Statistics, Special Labor Force ReDor: p112: Job Tenure of Workers, January

1968.

Other sources and definitions are listed above for Tibles 1, 2, 5, and 6.

Tenure is measured in 10—year units.

Table 8, pate 41

nual averages of ncnthly layoff and searation races were taken f:o
U.S. Departnenc of Labor, Bureau of Labor StatIstIcs, E:lo'ent and Eanins,
1909—1975 and recent issues of Enplo'rnerit and Earnns.

These

annual averages

were then averaged over the period 1954 through 1976.

Table 9, rage 45

Sources and definitIons are listed above for Table 2.

Table 10, page 50

These estlnaces areip1ied by the esc!ced coefficients in Table 9.
For sources and definitions of the underlying varIables, see

the

listing for Table 2 above. For a description of the nechod by which these
estinates

were foed, see the text.

56

FOOTNOTES

1
See, for exanole, the work of Azariadls (1975, 1976, 1978), Ba1y (1974),
1977, 1977), Feldsccin (1974, 1975, 1976, 1978), Gordon, Grossn..an, Pole—
marchakis, and Polemarchakis and Weiss.
2

In thIs context, see the papers by Azariadis, Sally (1974), Grossn,
Gordon, •Polenarchakis, and Polenarchakis and Weiss, listed above.
3

See, for example, Azariadis (1975, 1976), Sally (1974), and Poiearchais.
though these authors recognize chat state—invariant wages might not be
optimal where wages influence the ex post allocatIon of labor among firms,
their analyses do not relax the separation of cx post intcrfi
wage differences and cx cost interfirm labor mobility, and do not explore ch
determination of optimi wages and layoffs in situations where completely
state invariant wages are not optimal. Some previous authors have allowed
for ex post interfirm labor mobility and ex cost wage variability (see, for
example, Grossman, and Akerlot and iyazaki), but as yet the optimal extent
of ex post vage variability has not been analyzed.
4

Akerlof and Mlyazaki also have made

this

point.

-

5

No credit can be claimed for the basic structure of the odel that

is developed in this section. In major respects it is identical to that
developed by Sally (1974) and Azariadis (1975). However, the extension of
this model to allow for cx post interfirm labor nobility is original to
this author. For a first analysis along these lines, see Brown (1976).
6

Although identical in productivity at their current employment, emloyees
of the fi may differ in ptoductive characteris•tics of value elsewhere. Consequently, there may b a distribution of best alternative employments and
alternative earnings among the firm's enloyees. If the firm's employees are
assumed to be identical in all respects, this distribution should be inter—
preted as a short run phenomenon due to limited information.
The presence of severance pay in this model constitutes a second !mortant
departure from the assumptions standard in previous analyses of income—insuring
labor contracts. Non—wage pavrzents to laid—off workers are a widespread prac:ce,
but their inclusion in the model does more than sim1y add realism to the ana..ysis.
The existence of such state—contingent suc1enen:ary payments significantly
alters the implications of the model with rosect to both the extent and mix of
wage reductions and la'offs which the firm makes in states of slack product
demand. It can be shown, in fact, that such pavmn:s are necessary if layoffs
are to be an element of the oo:imal contract. Further, the model crovides a

justification for such payments in theIr effect cm the cctimal derre-2
of efficiency in oroductic: and resource allocation. The absence of such payen3
in previous analyses is scmewhat puzzling, given that such aymcn:s nov cm—

natural

siderably reduce
of

the degree of

employment umccr:ainv.

inccme uncertainty implied by any given degree

57
.7
An alternative assumption would be that the firm pays all employees
laid off in a given state some fixed payment independent of the value of the
nextbest alternative which is realized. This alternative assummtion was rejected for two reasons. First, it would not allow the firm to stabilize emloyee
income as effectively as does the separation pay policy assumed in the text.
It therefore appears that this alternative policy would be dominated by a

policy of the sort assumed in the text, at least within the context of the assurao—
tioris underlying the present analysis. Second, given the limitations irapcsed by
the single—period framework of the model developed in the text, the separation
pay policy assumed does a better job of approximating the manner in which paments
made to laid off workers depend on those workers' realized alternatives (e.g.,
on how long workers remain unemployed before being reemployed).
8

For simplicity, the analysis assumes that a unique distribution of
demand at other firms exists, and that the realized state of dend for the
firm's product is simply a drawing from this distribution. This assumption
makes the supply of labor to the firm
deterministic within each state of
demand for the firm's product, and it insures that maximizing over all states
of own product dem.and is the same as maximizing over all distributions of
demand.

Letting f(v) denote the probability density function for alternative
earnings within the fi's initial labor force, N(s) would be given by
A (s )

+c

I f(v)dv, where A(s) = (l—.(s))w(s)--.A(s)g(s), where c denotes a
0
fixed cost of interfirm mobility, and where ,(s), u(s), and g(s) are as
defined below.
10

Again letting f(v) denote the probability density function for
alternative earnings within the firm' initial labor force, w (s) would
be given by

I

(v-c)f(v)dv

0

A(s)+c
I f(v)dv, where A(s) is as defined above.
0

11Given the utility function U(w), the level of utility corresponding
to any given level of income can be approximated by
2
1.1(w) U(Ew) + U'(EwXw—Ew) +1U"(Ew)(w-Ew)
2
Dividing by U'(Ew) yields
2
IJ(w)

1J'(Ew)

[

U(Ew)
U'(Ew)

— Ew

J

+

w

+

1

U"(Ew) (w-Ew)
2 U'(Ew)

Interpreting equation (2) as an expected—utility—constant constraint, it can
be seen from this last expression that L(w(s) is equivalent to 1 ______
2 U'(E')
The expected value of this term can be interpreted as the risk premium
which the firm must pay its employees in order to attract them at the
start of the period, given the wage and employment schedule :hich it offers
its employees. Employee aversion to income uncertainty implies that L(w)
will increase as w diverges from its cx ante mean level. Thus, the firm's
risk premiwa will increase as the uncertainty of the incce prospect
which It offers its eamloyces increases.

58
12

Defining f(v) and A(s) as above, w (s) is given by
q

f

(v—c)f(v)dv

+

I

f(v)dv

Again defIning f(v) and A(s) as above, L(s) is given by

/ L(v-c)f(v)dv

f f(v)dv

14

This implication follows from the fact that the expected marginal value
product of employees is diminishing in N, while expected costs of future relocation are increasing in N. Because the expected net risk—adjusted joint income
of fIrms and employees is diminishing in N, equality at the margin will maximize
the expected value of current and future aggregate net risk—adjusted income.
15

More precisely, conditions (6)—(9) joIntly deteine state—s income and
employment for initial employees, but condition (6) does so only indirectly
through its effect on employees' marginal products. The
following analysis
abstracts from randomness in the supply curve of new hires and assumes that
the supoly curve of new hires is not infinitl'j elastic.
16

Condition (6) is, of course, only trivially operative for states of
demand In which additional hires are zero. In such states, if layoffs also
are zero, condition (7) alone determines the optimal wage and, imülicitly,
optimal employment. If layoffs are positIve, conditions (7)—(9) are determinin&.
17

Condition (10) is derived from condition (7) by setting ,(s)
equal to
zero in condition (7) and by noting that A(s) is equal to w(s) when )(s) is
equal to zero.
18

These conditfons are not extreme. Tne elasticity of labor sup1v
to the firm will diminish as the firm's wage diverges from its mean value
if the density of the alternative wage distribution among the firm's employ—
ees
the mean wage and falls as the firm's wage approaches
extreme values. The marginal risk premium, dL(w(s))/dw(s), i11 increase
in absolute value as the firm's wage diverges from its mean ir employees
are averse to income variability or uncertainty, since dL(w(s))/dw(s) is
equal to —U"(Ew) (w(s)—Ew)
U' (EwY

Is greatest at

19
This result follows from the fact that, defIning L() as
is equal to zero only if g(s) is equal to Ew.

dL(g(s))/dg(g)

above,

59

20
It is easily seen that conditions (7) arid (8) both reduce to condicon (10)
when g(s) is set equal to u(s).
To understand this result, notice that the firm's payments to its eriloyees
are made responsive to product price only because of che effect of those payments
on the labor supply realized by the firm. Now, after all quits for the period
have occurred, and given the assumption embodied in the model that supplemental
payments made to laid off workers do not influence those workers' search behavior,
supplemental payments to laid off workers induce no labor SuPply response.
Consequently, there is no reason not to eliminate that income uncertainty uhicri
results from being laid off, given that state s has occurred arid given that the
employee has riot quit in state s..
The optimal poiicy therezore makes employees
indifferent to being laid off in any particular state.
This result rests on the assumPtion that severance payments de to laid
off workers do no: influence those workers' search behavior. In the absence of
thi.s assumption, it would not generally be profitable for severance
payments
Co eliminate the income loss associated with layoff status.
21

Because this result rests on the ecuality of g(s) with u(s), it rests
also on the assumptions underlying that equality.
22

The optimal layoff policy in the presence of fully co.pensating
severance payments provides an interesting contrast to the optimal layoff
policies in models for which severance pay is riot an element of the labor
contract (see, for example, Sally (1976) and Azariadis (1975, 1976).
If severance pay is assumed not to exist, then the firm's layoff strategy
will be directly inf1unced by employees' aversion to inéome uncertainty.
In the absence of severance payments, the firm will hoard labor in periods
of slack product demand in order to mke work at the fi more attractive
to current and prospective employees. The firm's layoff strategy will
therefore be less efficient from the standpoint of production and resource
allocation, sacrificin; some productive efficiency Lu ordor to reduce
income undertainty for emoloyees. It uill not generally be profitable
for the firm to eliminate the risk of layoff, however, and so the fIrm
will have to pay some premium to its employees in the form of higher
mean earnings in order to compensate for whatever risk reains. This
premium would be reduced if the fIrm were to make severance paents
to its employees. It could be eliminated if those severance payments
were fully compensating, as assumed in the text.
The relative allocatjve inefficiency implied by a layoff diminishes
as the firm's wage is reduced because the difference u—E(vlv<w} dimInishes

as thefirms wage is reduced.
24

In the absence of income insurance, the following equality would
hold in equilibrium

_______

= P(s)F'(s)

=

u(s)

dh(s)

Now, suppose that u(s) were reduced (e.g., in order to reduce the extent
of unexected wace incronscs in states of high demar.d) and c(s) ncroasod
so as to keep employment
the following would be

true

i(s)+h(s)d(h(s)) >
,, 1.-.

constant. In this case

P(s)F'(s)

,

60

and h(s) would be reduced to restore equilibrium. Alternatively, if w(s)
were Increased (e.g. in order to reduce the extent of unexpected wage
reduction in states of low demad) and h(s). reduced so as to keep employ—
ment constant, the following inequality would result
-

ii(s)+h(s)du(hCs))
dh(s)

<

P(s)F'(s)

,

and h(s) would be increased to restore equilibrIum. In either case, it would
not be optimal to fully offset the effect of a change In the wage paid to
initial enployees. Only If i(s) were independent of h(s) would complete
offsetting be optimal.
25

Panel (b) assumes a stable distribution of alternative wages among
the firm's employees, while panel (d) assumes a stable supply curve of
new hires to the fim.
26

i

A precise descrIption of the manner in which the numbers presented
1 were derived ca be found in the appendix.

Table
27

KN,

For the Conb—Douglas production function, F(,N) —.
z

annual

residual income per emnlcyee in the absence of income insurance would be
given by (l—e—)( )/N, and annual earnings per employee would be given by
PF( )/N. Taking the coefficient of variation as a neasure of percentage
variability, it can be seen from these expressions that in the absence of
income insurance, the percentage variability of annual earnings and annual
residual income per employee would be ecual, and equal also to the percentage variability of value—added per employee. At the opposite extreme, if
firmscompletely stabilized the wage income of their employees, residual income
denotes the stabilized level
per employee would be given by (l—g)PF( )/N — , where

of wage paents per em1oyee. It is easily seen from this expression that

in the presence of such complete Income insurance, the percentage
variability of residual income per emloyee (again measured by the
coefficient of variation) would exceed the percentage variability of
value added per employee by a factor equal to one plus the ratio of
labor earnings to residual income.
28

For an alternative explanation which focuses on the role of unemplovnent
Insurance and imperfect experience rating in encouraging layoffs, see Belly (1977a,
l977b),Srechling, and Feldsteiri (l974 1975, 1976, 1978).
29

For the CES production function given by
_9

F(K,N) =

—p--v/p

A[fK ÷(l—) ]

the marginal value products of labor and capital are given by

61

—p/v

PP — (1—d)vA

PF()

(p+v)/v —(l+)
N

N

PF A —p/v
PF() (p+v)/v —(l+p)
K

K

Using these expressions in the definition of profits yields
PF(K,N)—PF K—PF I = (l—v)FF(K,N).
K
N
Residual income in the absence of income insurance would be DrOortiOna1 to
value added. Thus, residual income cer production worker would be proportical
to value added per production worker in the absence of incomo insurance, and
both would have the same percentage variability.
30

This is not a general result, but it is true- for
Table 1.

For

the data underlying

a discussion of this sublect, see Nerlove and the works cited therein.

Also see Criliches (1967), Lucas, and Mayor.
32

Expression (17) is derived from (lô)bv substituting Rlcg[w(s)/Ew] in
place of dL(w(s))/dw(s), and c in place of dogN(s)/diogw(s). For an
example in which the assumption of dL(w(s))/dw(s) = Rlogf(s)/Ew] would be
approoriate, consider the logarithmic utility function U K1ogwj. Recall
that L(w(s)) is equal to —i U"(Ew)[w(s)—Ew}2. For the logarithmic utility

function

2 U'(Ew)

this term would be equal to 1 fw(s)—Ew]2, and so dL(w(s))/dw(s)
-

2Ew

would equal [w(s)—EwJ/Ew, which
In

this case, R is equal to one.

is approximately equal to logfw(s)/Ew}.

33
Approximation (18) results from substitutIng into approximation (17)
the logarithm of the expression for PFN in footnote29.
34

The Arrow—Chenery—Minhas—Solow equation estImates the elasticIty
of substitution in the following fashion:
log(F(t)/N(t)) =

constant +

This formulation follows from setting w =

for

in fcotr.ote 29. For

?F

u

alog[w(t)/P(t))
PF

t

and v=l in the expression
N

a more detaIled discus1cn of t.s suect,

U

see Arrow, et a!.

3
This statement is basad on an F—tcsc wtth

a

significance level of •o

62
36

This limited degree of response applies to annual averages of hourly
and weekly earnings as well. Empirical evidence of this fact is available
from the author upon request.
37

The ratio of the relative values of annual earnings and annual marginal
value products will equal the ratio of their absolute values if annual earnings
and annual marginal value products follow the same trend. Equation (20) imolies
that they do follow the same trend.
38

This statement interprets the "contracting period" of Section I
to be of one year's length.

-

39
The estimated coefficients presented in Table 4 do not differ significantly
from those that allow for non—constant returns so scale in all industries. Also,
they do not differ significantly from estimates based on annual averages of
hourly or weekly earnings. The complete set of estimates from which those
presented in Table 4 are drawn is available from the author upon request.
40

See Mincer for evidence that general and specific human capital are
positively related.
41

See Parsons for a development of this argument.
It is interesting to note that the estimated values of ' in Table
bear no systematic relation to the percentage of workers unionized in the
corresponding industries. In contrast, empirical work from Lewis to 4edoff
suggests a negative relation.

These conclusions are not altered when different sets of estimated
values of y are chosen. Alternative versions of Tables 5— corresponding
to different sets of estinated values of y are available from the author
upon requcst.

For example, if the time—series behavior of marginal value products
were given by
PF'(t) = a

+a t-f-a

01 2

t2+u

,

t

Eu

t

= 0

and if employees' wages in the presence of income insurance were given by
=

a +a t+a

01 2

then estimates of equation (20) would indicate non—ecuality of wares and
marginal value products even though longer—term, trend ecuality existed. I:
iS worth repeating shic the following analysis interprets the "contracting'
period as being of one year's length, and thus equates "wages" with annual
earnings.

63

No claim of origInality is made here. For a previous example of
framework, see Cagan. This expectations model is assumed only for
the purpose of illustration. It will not generally be an unbiased
predictor of future wages. For a discussion of this point, see Muth.

this

The estimates presented in Table 9 assume constant returns to scale
in order to conserve degrees of reedo.
current and lagged output in

An F—test for the significance of
a value of only .581.

L7

At this stage, one could

re—estimate equatIon (22) wIth the Implied
restrictjorjQsed on the coefficient
estintes, and then oerform an F—test
for the consistency of the restrjctjowch
the data. Because this analysis
is
not directly concerned with

the exact s:ructural description of en1oyees'
wage expectations, but rather is concerned nly with the
reduced—form discribued
lag relation between wages and marginal value

products, such an elaboration

is bypassed.

See Griliches

(l967) for a discussion of this point. flotIce that
constant returns to scale.

equations (22) and (24) assume
49

Strictly speaking, the h—test is a large sample test; therefore, the
h—statistic should be inter?reted jth some cautIon in this context. It
should also be floted that the coefficient
estimates in Table 9 are not
unbiased and will be inconsistent in the presence of autocorrelated
-

disturbances.
50

For

a discussjc related to this

point, see

ayers and Thaler.

51

equation (22) does
equation.

Introducing additional lags Into
increase the explanatory power of the
52

In

not significantly

-

comparison with the estimates presented in
Table 2, those in Table 9
indicate a larger
response of wages to changes in
marginal value
products. However,within—year
the qualitative implicatIons of
the two equations are the
same. Regardless of the
specific assumptions maintained about the form
of employees' exPectations wages aDpear to
differ substantially from marginal
value products in the short—run.
Iotice that if equation (22) were the
true model, and yet equation
were estimated, the coefficients on
(20)
time and time squared would pick
the effects of the omitted lagged variables. If
up
these omitted variables
were well—described
by a quadratic tine trend (they are), then the estimated
values of y from such a misspecjfjed
equation would not differ too greatly
from those of a correctly soecified ecuacion.
Although the estimated
values of y from
to suggest that their difference from
they are sImilar enough
unity is not the result of nisspeci—
fication.

equatic5 (0) and (22)

differ,

614.

REFERENCES

Akerlof,

G., and H. Miyazaki.

(Jan. 1980), 'The Implicit

Contract Theory of Uriemploymen-t Meets the Wage Bill

Argument," Review of Economic Studies l4.7:32lJJ8.

Arrow, K. J., H. 3. Chenery, B. S. Minhas, and R. M. Solow
(Aug. 1961), "Capital—Labor Substitution and Economic
Efficiency,' Review of Economics and Statistics
14.3:225—35.

Azariadis, C. (Dec. 1975), HimpliCit

Contracts

and Under-

employment Equilibria," Journal of Political Eccnoy
83 1183—12 02.

______ •

(Feb.

1976), '40n the Incidence of Unemployment,"

Review of Economic Studies 43:115—125.

______ •

(June, 1978), "Escalator Clauses and the Allocation

of Cyclical Risks," Journalof Economic Theory 18:119-155.
Baily, K. N.

(Jan. 1974), "Wages and Emoloyment Under Uncertain

Demand," Review of Economic Studies 14.U37—50.

_____•

(July

1977), "On the Theory of Layoffs and Unemployment,"

Econome-trica 45d043—1063.

_____•

(July

Workers,"

1977), "Unemployment Insurance as

Industrial

and

Insurance

for

Labor Relations Review 30:495—504.

65

Brechljng,

F.

(1977), 'The Incentive Effects of the tJnep1oy_
ment iflSurance Tax," fl Research in Labor

Economics,

R. G. Ehrenberg (ed.), New York, JAI Press.
Brown, J. N.

(1976), "Employee Risk

-tainty, and

Optimal

Aversion,

Income tJncer-

Labor Contracts," University of

Chicago Workshop paper (unpublished).
Cagan, P.

(1956), "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyper-Irifj.a-tjons,"
in Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, M. Friedman
(ed.), Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Feldstejn, M. 3.

(Oct. 1976), "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory

of Unemployment," Journal of Political Econo, 8Lk937_957
______•

(Dec. 1978), "The Effect of Unemployment Insurance

on Temporary Layoff Unemployment," American Economic Review

68834846,
______•

(June 1974), "Unemployment Compensatjoni Adverse

Incentives and Distributional Anomalies," National Tax
Journal 27i231-244.
(1975),

"The Importance of Temporary Layoffs An

Empirical Analysis," Brookjns Paoers on Economic Actj',rj

3z725—745.

Gordon,

D. F.

(Dec.1974) "A Neo—Classjcai Theory of Keynesian

Unemployment," Econoj.c Incuirv l2:L.Jl_L.59,

66

Grilliches,

Z. (Jan. 1967), "Distributed Lags: A Survey,"

Econometrjca :35: l6—+9.

_____• (1967),

"Production Functions in Manufacturing:

Theory

Some Preliminary Results," in

Eirical

Analysis o± Production, Studies in Income and Wealth,
NBER.

Grossman, H. I.

(Nov. 1978), "Risk Shifting, Layoffs, and

Seniority," Journal

_____•

(1977), "Risk Shifting and Reliability in Labor Markets,"

Scandjnava Journal

_____•

Monetary Economics L:661_686.

(

a Theory

), "The

of conomics 79:137-209.

Nature of Optimal Labor Contracts: Towards

of Wage and Employment Adjustment" read at the

Third Reisenberg Symposium on

the Stability of Conteniporary

Economic Systems.

Lewis, H. G.

(1963), Unionism arid Relative WaEes in the United

States, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Lucas,

R. E.

in

C

), "Substitution Between Labor and Capital

U. S. Manufacturing, 1929—53," Ph.D. dissertation, Uni-

versity of Chicago (unpubji.shed).

Mayers, D. and R. Thaler, (Oct. 1979), "Sticky Wages and Implicit

Contracts: A Transactional Approach," Economic Inouirv
17: 559_57L..

67

Mayor, T. H.

(June 1969), "Some Theoretical Difficulties in the

Estimation of the Elas-ticity of Substitution From Cross-

Section Data," Western Economic Journal 7:153—163,
Medoff, J. L.

(June 1979), "Layoffs and Alternatives under

Trade Unions in U.S. Manufacturing," Arnerican Economic

Review 691380—395.

Mincer, J. (Oct.1962), "On the Job Training, Costs, Returns,
and Some Ip1ications," Journal of Political Economy
70, pt. 2:50—79.
Muth, J. F.

(June 1960), "Optimal Properties of Exponentially

Forecasts," Journal of the Arnerican

Weighted

Statistical

Association 55299—3O6.
Nerlove, M.

(1967), "Recent Empirical Studies of

the

CE and

Related Production Functjcs," in The Theory and EmDiricaj
Analysis of Production, Studies in Income and Wealth, NEER.
Parsons, D. 0.
tion

(Dec. 1972), "Specific Human Capital: An Applica-.

to Quit Rates

Economy

and Layoff Rates," Journal of Political

80:ll20—1lL3.

Polemarchakjs, H. M.

(Jan. 1979), "Implicj Contracts and

Employment Theory," Review of Economic Studies L6:9?_lo8.

_____ and L. Weiss.

(Dec. 1978), "Fixed Wages, Layoffs, Unem-

p1oyent Compensation, and elfare," American Economic
Review 68:909—917.

