NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ff1

REAL PRICE OF OIL AND THE 1910s

WORLD INFLATION

Michael N. Darby
Working Paper No. 629

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
February 1981

The research reported here is part of the NBERts research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #629
February 1981

The Real Price of Oil and the l970s World Inflation

ABSTRACT

This paper shows that the effects on real income and the price level of
the 1973—1974 oil price increase are quite ambiguous on both theoretical and

empirical grounds. The theoretical analysis reviews standard results and
extends them to analyze the steady—state equilibrium and endogenous monetary

policy reaction functions. It is shown that standard models and parameter
values imply trivial reductions in real income and ambiguously signed

changes in the price level. It is noted, however, that other special

models can rationalize empirical findings of large effects. Direct real—
oil—price effects in an extended Barro—Lucas real income equation are esti-

mated for eight countries. Although statistically significant and substantial direct effects are found for about half the countries, it is noted
that these coincided with countries undergoing price decontrol during 1973—

1974. Thus price-control biases in real GNP data provide an acceptable

alternative explanation for the estimated effects. Simulation experiments
in an international model illustrate the wide range of real income and

price level effects which are consistent with the data. Further research is
proposed to narrow the range of possible effects.

Michael R. Darby
Department of Economics
University of California,
Los Angeles

Los Angeles, California 90024
(213) 825—3343

Not for quotation without
the author's permission.
D.3: January 16, 1981

THE REAL PRICE OF OIL AND THE 1970S WORLD INFLATION

Michael R. Darby*
University of California, Los Angeles
National Bureau of Economic Research

The increase in the real price of oil during 1973—1974 is widely believed to have been a major cause of inflation both in the United States

and abroad. In part, this belief is based on a partial equilibrium (or
adding—up) approach which explains the inflation rate as the weighted sum
of the inflation rates of individual goods and services without making due
allowance for the general equilibrium effects on factor prices of an increase

in the relative price of an imported factor. But theoretically acceptable
arguments can

be made which attribute inflation —— or at least an upward

price level shift ——

to

factors decreasing the real quantity of money de-

manded or increasing the nominal quantity of money supplied by the central

banks. This paper reports an empirical investigation of the magnitude of
these possible effects consistent with general equilibrium.

*The author acknowledges the able research assistance of Michael T.

Melvin and Andrew A. Vogel and the generous support of the National Science

Foundation (grants APR 78—13072 and DAR—7922874). The calculations were
performed on the TROLL system at M.I.T. The research reported here is part

of the NEER's research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

2

First a theoretical analysis of the long—run and short—run effects of
an oil—price

long—run

change is

effect

presented in Section I.

It is seen there that the

on real income and the real quantity of money demanded may

be quite small if not negligible, particularly when real income is measured
in terms of real GNP and money is deflated by the corresponding implicit

deflator. While this result may be due to the use of a three—factor Cobb—
Douglas production function in the context of a neoclassical growth model,

it certainly illustrates that a long—run reduction of real GNP of even 1 or

2 percent is very much an empirical question. Short—run effects on real
income and prices associated with shifts in aggregate demand and supply

appear to be similar in magnitude to those for the long run. Central banks'
reaction to the short—run real income and inflation effects may offset or
reinforce these effects once monetary policy is allowed to be endogenous.

Tests of significance of oil—price variables in an extended Lucas—

Barro real income equation are reported in Section II. The results are mixed and
confounded by price control and decontrol programs which were widespread

at nearly the same time as the 1973—1974 oil—price change. Much future
work is required to definitively disentangle the effects of these two
factors.

Section III reports simulation experiments on the effects of the 1973—

1974 oil—price change. These experiments are conducted using the Mark IV
Simulation Model presented in Darby (1980b). This model —— a simplified
version of the Mark III International Transmission Model' ——

is

a quarterly

macroeconometric model of the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, France,

Germany, Italy, Japan, and the Netherlands. In addition to the basic Mark
IV

Model, an extended Mark IV—Oil

Model is used which incorporates oil—price

3

variables in the real—income equations for those five countries for which

the variables were found to be significant in Section II. Using the basic
model, some notable effects are found as a result of induced movements in

exports, exchange rates, money supplies, and the like. Stronger effects
are simulated using the Mark IV—Oil Model, but the price—control caveat of
Section II again applies.
The concluding section sunimarizes the results of this paper and sug-

gests areas for future research as international data on the effects of the

1979—1980 oil—price increase come available.

4

I. Theory
The price level, measured in dollars per basket of goods, is the in-

verse of the price of money, goods per dollar. So it is convenient to
classify the forces determining the price level according whether they influence the supply of or demand for money.

A standard (long—run) money—demand function explains the real quantity
of money demanded

by real income y and the nominal interest rate R. The

nominal quantity demanded Nd

is

the product of this real demand and the

price level:

(1) Nd = md(y,R)

P

Equating money supply MS to money demand and solving for the price level:

(2)

P

d

m (y,R)

That is, the price level equals the ratio of the nominal quantity of money
supplied to the real quantity of money demanded.

Although the inflationary impact of an oil—price change is generally
analyzed given an exogenously determined nominal money supply, this may be

misleading or at least counterfactual. That is, to the extent that the oil—
price change increases the price level and unemployment (at least temporarily)
and decreases real income for a given nominal money supply, the inflationary
effect would induce central banks to reduce M5 while the recessionary effect
tends to increase MS.

Which effect is dominant would depend on the relative

weights which the individual central bank puts on inflation and unemploy-

ment. In addition, other factors —— discussed below — may

influence

central

bank policy response to an oil—price change. With this warning, let us

5

proceed for now to analyze the effects of an oil—price change for an
exogenous monetary policy.

Long—Run (Full Employment) Effects

Consider first the long—run effects of an oil price change on real

output. For illustrative purposes suppose real output y is produced according to a 3—factor Cobb—Douglas production function using domestic
capital k, labor £,

and imported petroleum

(3) y =

(4) cx++y=l
Let

us assume that output is produced by competitors who treat all prices

as parametric including in particular the real price of oil O. In equilibrium, one of the first order conditions requires that the marginal product
of petroleum be equated to its real price:

=

(5)

yki'

= 0

It is straightforward to solve for the equilibrium usage of petroleum as a
function of 0, k, and £:

(6)

=

If we now substitute this equilibrium 4

into

the production function (3) we

obtain equilibrium real output as a function of the real price of oil and
given, fully—employed resources of capital and labor:

(7) y =

6

Taking logarithms and differentiating, we find the elasticity of equilibrium
output with respect to the real oil price for given capital and labor resources:

(8)

dlogy __
d log U

l—y

k,i
If for example, y were on the order of 0.01, a 1 percent increase in the
real oil price would decrease real output by only 0.01 percent (1 basis

point) for given resources and given the assumptions of this illustration.4
The full, long—run equilibrium effect would be slightly larger due

to a reduction in the steady—state capital—labor ratio for a given growth

path of labor. To see this, suppose that saving and investment k is a

of

constant fraction 0

domestic factor income:

(9) I=o(y—O)
Dividing both sides of (9) by k and noting that y —

(10)

=

= (a +

)y,

V

o(a +

Thus the growth rate of capital is a fixed proportion of the output—capital

ratio. In view of (7), this latter ratio is

(11) • = fy\a+6
k

6)

fi\a+
kJ

The simple neoclassical growth model can therefore be applied which, after
tedious manipulations, yields the result that

(12)
d1ogy
diogO
This effect which allows for the (proportionate) reduction In the capital
stock would be about a third larger than that in (8) for given resources

7

and a labor share equal to three quarters of value added. We should note
that since income and capital fall proportionately in full steady—state
equilibrium, there is no long-run effect on the real interest rate.5
A curiosity of national income accounting proves important in applying

the analysis to empirical data. Gross national product is a value—added
concept so that imported inputs are subtracted from total output to obtain

GNP. This works fine for nominal GNP or Q:

(P6)

(13) Q = Py —

P(l

—

y)y

So nominal GNP is simply the price of output P times real domestic factor
income (1 —

y)y.

However, in computing real GNP or q, imported inputs are

valued at base—year relative prices e:
0

(14)

Thus measured real GNF rises relative to factor income (1 —
y)y when the
real oil price 0 is increased. Nominal aggregate demand as measured by
nominal GNP is not affected sinc there is an offsetting measurement error
in the measured GNP deflator D:

—
= P(1

D =
q

(1 -

(15)

D=
0
We can differentiate (14) to find the elasticity of real GNP with

respect to the real oil price as:

(16)

d log g =

dlog0

+

d log y

O—y diogO

For small changes In e before the capital stock adjusts,6

8

(17)

dlogg

___
l—y l—y
—

dloge

—

—o

Thus we see that in the neighborhood of the original oil price, the output

effect is completely masked in measured GNP. However, for large changes in
e

relative

to 0 such as those occurring in 1973—1974, there would be a nega-

tive effect on measured real GNP.7 Using t for the change relative to base
year prices we have

(18) Liog q =

log

_

+

log (0Th

is from (8) or (12) depending on whether or not the capital

where

stock is presumed to have adjusted.8 Note that the deflator is decreased

relative

just as real GNP is increased

relative to real factor incomes.

In summary, an increase in the real price of oil is predicted to decrease real output by the logarithmic change times
adjusts or times

1

before

capital

when capital is fully adjusted. However, such an oil

price change will cause a partially offsetting overstatement of measured
rca]. GNP (and understatement of the GNP deflator).

Obviously the values of y and

are of considerable interest. For

current illustrative purposes, only petroleum imports will be considered.9
To the extent that petroleum imports are for resale to consumers rather
than used in production they have no effect on output or measured GM' (real

or nominal). Thus the ratio of the value of petroleum imports to GNP
serves as an upper limit on y. If we use pre—change U.S. data, this upper
limit would be about 0.003 for 1970. In 1976, this share had risen to 0.02.
This rise in the share could indicate inelastic consumer demand for imported

petroleum products, a problem with the Cobb—Douglas production function, or

9

both. So while 0.003 should be an upper limit for y if the Cobb—Douglas
function is correct, 0.02 will also be considered as an upper—upper limit.

Finally suppose that a/Ca + ) and

/(a + ) have their traditionally

estimated values of 1/4 and 3/4. Then the multiplier —y/(l —

y)

is —0.003

or —0.020 depending on y. The corresponding multipliers allowing for
capital stock change are —0.004 and —0.027. The real price of a barrel of
crude oil increased some 3.57 fold from 1973 I to 1974 I (a logarithmic in-

crease of 1.273). This is surely an upper limit on 0/0 for all petroleum
products. Table 1 presents estimates of the maximum effects on output and
measured real GNP. We see that the maximum full adjustment effects on real
output range from a decrease of 0.5 to 3.5 percent according to whether

one takes a pre—change or post—change estimate of y. For measured real GNP
the corresponding decreases are only 0.3 to 2.0 percent. Even smaller
changes correspond to the intermediate period corresponding to full—employment of resources but no adjustment of the capital stock.

Rasche and Tatom have long argued for much larger real—income effects

of the oil—price change. They rely upon regression estimates of the quasi—
production function (7) and find much larger values of

than considered

here. Part of that difference is illusory: They use a much broader energy
price index which has a logarithmic increase of only 0.408 from 1972 to
10

1974

compared to the 1.273 increase for a banel of oil used here; so the

larger elasticity is offset by a lower value of log (0/0). Further they
do not take account of the biases in reported real GNP so that their esti-

mates may refer to the output effect rather than the GNP effect. Finally,
in their (1980) paper, they report an equation (6) in which they estimate
the production function (3) directly (after taking logs) and also add

10

log 0 separately. The estimated y is 0.05 while the coefficient on log 6

is —0.07. Using '

0.05,

0.70 (as reported), and log (0/6)

0.408,

we get an output change of —0.0215 with no capital adjustment and of —0.0291
with capital adjustment, which is in the same ball park as the figures in

Table 1. It is the things other than in the production

function ——

cap-

tured in the log 0 coefficient of —0.07 —— which permit such big estimates.
These other things may have to do with cyclical factors, induced monetary
policy, or fortuitous removal of price controls at roughly the same time

as discussed below. Further the 0.05 estimate of

may be biased upward if

energy usage (relative to capital and labor) serves as an indicator of

whether the economy is in a boom or recession. Thus the Rasche and Tatom
conclusions may have weak empirical foundations.
This exercise has shown that even a huge change in the real price of

oil such as in 1973—1974 may result in very small if not negligible effects
on real output and especially upon measured real GNP.

Different assumptions

would result in different results, but the model used is surely a standard

one in practice. Thus it would appear to be an empirical question as to
whether the oil—price change had any significant long—run effect on measured
real GNP.

We can now return to our original question of the long—run effect of
the oil—price change on the real quantity of money demanded and hence,
given the nominal money supply, on the price level.

First we note that in

long—run equilibrium real income is reduced by a constant fraction but the
growth rate of real income is reduced only temporarily during the transi-

tional period. Second we note that the real interest rate is unchanged.
Under these conditions, in long—run equilibrium the real and nominal interest rate will be unchanged and the real quantity of money demanded will

11

behave similarly to real income —— a downward parallel shift in

its

growth

path. The logarithmic downward shift will equal to the elasticity of real
money demand with respect to real income times the logarithmic shift in

real income. Thus, if this income elasticity is around 1 there will be a
long—run increase in the price level equal to the long—run decrease in real

income. If during the early part of the adjustment period the price
level effect exceeds this long—run effect, then the inflation rate must be
reduced (ceteris paribus) below what it would otherwise be to reach long—
run equilibrium.
Two

problems

may arise in econometric work based on real GNP as

measured in the national income accounts. First, the reduction in measured
real GNT will understate the output reduction which actually occurs. A
second problem arises only if the income elasticity of the demand for money

differs significantly from unity: Then the offsetting measurement errors
in real GNP and the GNP deflator would cause an apparent shift in the money—
demand function equal to the product of the measurement error and the dif-

ference of the elasticity from 1. This latter problem is a second—order
matter which will not be pursued further in this paper.

Short—Run Effects

Short—run effects of the 1973—1974 oil—price shock have been analyzed
in terms of induced shifts in aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves
under the assumption that nominal wages are predetermined (or at least

sticky) in the short run. As with the long—run analysis, the analysis of
the short—run effects proceeds on the assumption that the government's
monetary and fiscal policy is unaffected by the unexpected oil—price increase.

12

The aggregate demand effects of an oil—price shock can be viewed as
analogous to that of an increase in taxes.'2 Assume for simplicity that in
the short—run both producer and consumer demands for imported petroleum are

perfectly inelastic. For producers, this means that higher import prices
will be paid out of reduced quasi—rents, reducing private income. For
consumers, higher oil prices would directly reduce expenditures on other

consumption goods for given private income and these expenditures would be
further reduced by the reduction of private income.'3 Thus, at initial

levels of real income and interest rates, aggregate expenditures would fall
unless increased demand for exports by oil exporters equals or exceeds the

induced reduction in consumption. When we allow for some elasticity of
demand for imported oil and for increased exports of goods to oil producers,
the plausible magnitude of these basically distributional effects is sharply
reduced and could even be reversed.14 In what follows, we shall nonetheless
consider the possibility of a small decrease in aggregate demand.

The aggregate supply effect would appear more substantial and has been
analyzed on varying assumptions by Bruno and Sachs (1979), Hudson and Jorgenson (1978), Nork and Hall (1979), Norsworthy, Harper, and Kunze (1979),
Phelps (1978), and Rasche and Totoni (1977a, 1980). Following the latter authors,
suppose that the short—run conditions underlying the aggregate supply curve are
fixity of the capital stock, the nominal wage W, and the real price of oil.
Using the aggregate production function (3), one can readily derive output as

(19) y =

()() k

On comparing (19) and (7), we note that for a given price level there is a
much greater output effect with nominal wages fixed than when labor is assumed

13

to be at its natural unemployment rate.

d lo&j

(20)

-

diogO

Specifically

- --

a +adloge

k,W

Note that the elasticity of the aggregate supply curve is

(21) dlogy =

dlogp

a

It is convenient to plot

aggregate supply and demand curves in terms

of log y and log P so that slopes and elasticities have a simple
correspondence.
The logarithmic aggregate supply

(22) log y =

log (/W) +

curve corresponding to equation (19) is

log

y +

This is plotted as S in Figure 1 for

log

kj —

log e +

log

p

given values of k, W, and the base—

year relative price of oil 8. The slope of S is the inverse (a/s) of the

elasticity of aggregate supply. An aggregate demand curve D is also drawn
to determine short—run output and the price level, y and
As can be seen in equation (22) an increase in the real price of oil

shifts the aggregate supply curve horizontally by —

log

(8/0) as illustrated

in Figure 2.16 This can alternatively be described as an upward shift
equal
to minus the slope of S times the horizontal shift
(23)
(_

)(

log (0/0)) =

- log

If any shift in the aggregate demand

(6/)
curve is negligible, the new equilibrium

output and price level are y and P. The short—run displacement in output
from that corresponding to the base real oil price 0 is

(24) Llog y =

a •l

log (0/)

14

where riD is the elasticity of the aggregate demand curve so that cx/ and
1/riD are the slopes of the aggregate supply and demand curves respectively.

Suppose that the aggregate demand curve is unit elastic

(25) tlog y =

— lJ

—1),

then

log (6/0)

which is identical to the long—run effect implied by (8) before the capital

stock adjusts. The increase in the price level,

(26) Lilog P =

L.1og y =

log

(e/),

reduces real wages just sufficiently to maintain employment at the natural
level. Thus, absent a shift in the aggregate demand curve, employment rises
or falls (and output is greater or less than the given—capital long—run
level indicated by (25)) according to whether the elasticity of aggregate

demand is smaller or greater than 1 in absolute value. If aggregate demand
were inelastic, increased employment would lessen the short—run decline in

output. In Darby (1976c, pp. 161—163) I have argued that short—run and
hence transitory movements in output will induce much less than proportionate
movements in money demand, which suggests that the short—run aggregate

demand curve is in fact elastic.17 This would imply a short—run reduction
in employment, which would accentuate the initial fall in output predicted

by the full—employment analysis.18 Once expected nominal wages are reduced,
this difference would disappear. In addition, the aggregate demand curve
may shift to the left as previously argued if there is a distributional
effect due to faster decreases in consumer spending than increases in oil—
exporter spending, this is illustrated in Figure 3.

15

Again it must be emphasized that these calculations are only illustra-

tive of the sort of effects which might be expected. If, for example, we
assumed partial adjustment of nominal wages to their equilibrium values,
the aggregate supply curve would be less elastic and the output change would

be more closely tied to the change in the given—capital long—run level of
19
output.

The aggregate demand curve is derived using our price level equation
(2) so the short—run price level effect

(28) Alog P =
D

log

y

is valid for the short—run period in which IS—LM analysis is applicable. If
—

1/nD

is less than the long—run elasticity of demand for money with respect

to output, the short—run increase in the price level would be less than
that associated with an equal long—run decrease in output.

Note that the same accounting problems in relating output and the price
level to real GNP and the deflator apply in the short run as in the long
run.

Endogenous Monetary Policy
The time has now come to consider possible effects of the oil shock

upon monetary policy. Suppose that we can write the money supply reaction
function of the monetary authorities as

(29) log N =

log

N* + h• log (y/y*) + h log (P/P*) +

In logarithms, actual money equals expected money as predicted by lagged
variables systematically affecting central bank behavior plus negative

1.6

coefficients

times the innovations in output and the price level and a

random disturbance.2° Write the semi—reduced forms for output and the
price level as:

(30) y =
(31) P = rr(k,W,O,M,N*,c)

Denote the real—oil—price and money elasticities of these equations by

fe, ' 're'
(31)

and

and solving for ilog N yields

(32) Elog N =
We

Then taking the log changes in equations (29) through

h f0 + h
1— h f

yN

h

Llog 8

pM

have seen above that f is negative and
0

Tr

0

is positive while h and h
y

p

are both negative. Whether money is increased, decreased, or left unchanged
by the central bank depends both on the relative sizes of the output and
price effects and

upon the relative aversion of the central bank to reces-

sion and inflation. The denominator of (32) allows for attenuation of
money changes to the extent that there are within—period (positive) responses

in output and prices. Finally, the price level effect is obtained by substituting (32) into the log—change form of (31):
/

(33)

Here

L1ogP=

\

\

(hf0+hlT0)1T
)log0
yM
pM/

is the value of

LdogP
slog 0

such as is computed in (28) for a given

nominal money supply and the ratio term is the additional (ambiguously
signed) effect due to endogenous nominal money supply changes.

17

Simulation

experiments which allow for such endogenous movements in

the nominal money supply are reported below in Section III. It is perhaps
understandable why most analyses assume that the ambiguously signed change

in nominal money must be negligible and proceed on that basis. One can at
least explain the effect if the central bank were to hold money supply
unchanged.

Conclusions from Theory

Considering first the results of our analysis conditional upon a given

monetary policy, with resources at their natural employment levels, the
output elasticity with respect to the real price of oil is —y/(l — y) before

capital adjusts and —'/

with

full capital adjustment. The parameter y, the

value share of oil imports used in producing domestic output, may be quite

small, certainly less than 0.02 for the United States for example. The
labor share

is on the order of 0.7 to 0.8, so the long run elasticities

vary from about y to l.3y or 1.4y. In the short—run, unemployment will
increase slightly (if aggregate demand is elastic), but the short—run output

elasticity seems to lie in the same range as for the long—run. The price
level is shifted up in the long—run by the long—run income elasticity of

money demand (around 1) times the output elasticity. In the short—run the
price level shifts less than in proportion to output since the short—run
aggregate demand curve is elastic.

These shifts in the levels of output and prices affect their growth

rates only during the transitional period. They may be reinforced or offset
by endogenous money supply reactions of the central bank. These reactions
depend on the relative aversion of the central bank to decreases in output
and increases in prices and so are ambiguous in sign a priori.

18

Biases in the calculation of real value—added imply smaller elastic-

ities in absolute value for real GNP and the implicit price deflator than

for real output and the price level. Indeed, an increase in the real oil
price of the size which occurred in 1973—1974 implies that the logarithmic
change in real GNP would be less than half that for output.

19

II. Tests for Structural Change in the Real—Income Equation

The behavior of the real price of oil is dominated by a downward
secular trend from the 1950s until the early 1970s as illustrated for the

United States in Figure 4. There was a small upward movement in 1971—1972,
but the major increase occurred in the second quarter of 1973 and especially

the first quarter of 1974. Widespread recessions in 1973—1975 provide the
major empirical evidence in support of a large real—income effect of oil

price increases. However, several alternative hypotheses focus on other
major events occurring roughly coincidentally.

The first of these alternative hypotheses points to the final breakdown
of pegged exchange rates in 1973 which permitted (previously) nonreserve
countries to regain control of their money supplies and to stop the infla-

tion imported from the United States. In the United States, meanwhile, the
Fed reduced money supply growth in mid 1973 and again in mid 1974. The
average reduction in the growth rate of the money supply in the eight

countries in our sample exceeded 5 percentage points. Obviously any estimate
of the effect of oil—price changes must account for the effect of these restrictive monetary shocks.

A second alternative hypothesis points to the widespread adoption of
price controls, following the U.S. lead in August 1971, and their subsequent

dismantling in the period 1973—1975. Such controls may have caused overstatement of real GNP (and understatement of the GNP deflator) compared to

true values.21 When the controls were relaxed during 1973—1975, measured
real income fell back to its true value giving an illusion of a deeper
recession than was actually occurring or the occurrence of a recession when

there was none. Although it is possible to develop corrected estimates for

20

real GNP and the deflator using physical unit series such as employment, car—
loadings, and components of the industrial production indices, that is a very

large job. The present paper will only examine whether estimated effects of
oil—price changes appear to be larger in those countries with coincident

price control relaxation. If so, future research will be indicated to dis—
entangle these oil and price control effects.
In examining the empirical data, it is also important to note that the

normal or natural growth rate of output has declined generally in the postwar period. In the late 1940s, after a decade and a half of depression and
war, the world capital—labor ratio was very low relative to its balanced—

growth or steady—state value.22 As the capital stock approaches its steady—
state level, the growth rates of capital and hence real income decline

toward their steady—state values. If we were to impose a constant natural
growth rate, a spurious negative coefficient might be estimated for oil to
account for slowing growth in the 1970s.

The real GNP equations of the Mark III International Transmission Model
provide a convenient starting place for estimating the effect on output of

changes in the real price of oil.23 These equations were derived, following
Barro (1978), by combining a standard Lucas (1973) aggregate supply function
with an aggregate demand function with nominal money, real government spending,

and real exports as arguments. Specifically, they express the rational—
expectations/natural—rate approach as
3

•

(34)

log y —

A

log y_ a1 — a2(log t—l — log _) + Z a3+M_j
I =0
3

3

+ E a7+j + E a11÷j +
i—0

1=0

where the time subscripts are made explicit,
level of real output In quarter t, and

is the natural—employment

are the innovations in

21

the aggregate demand variables log M, logarithm of real government expenditures for goods and services, and exports divided by GNP, respectively.24

Thus in the absence of innovations or stochastic disturbance £,

log y ad-

justs toward its natural level at the rate a2 per quarter. Innovations in

the determinants of aggregate demand affect log y with an unconstrained
four—quarter distributed lag to allow for any inventory adjustment lags.
To estimate the effect of the real oil price, it remains to specify
log

appropriately. A form which allows for both declining natural out-

put growth as just discussed and for an oil price effect is

(35) log y b1 + b2t + b3t2 + b4 log O
A positive b2 and negative b3 implies a declining natural growth rate. The

parameter b4 estimates the full long—run value of Og .

If the expression

(35) were simply substituted in equation (34), an oil price change would
implicitly be assumed to have no immediate effect and then a partial adjust-

ment effect at the rate a2 per quarter. This is inconsistent with the
analysis of Section I in which it was shown that the short—run effect is

similar in magnitude to the long—run effect.25 So, as with the aggregate
demand variables, a four quarter distributed lag on the first difference of
log 0 to capture a rapid short—run adjustment process.

Substituting equation (35) in (34) and adding the short—run adjustment
process yields the estimating equation
— 1)2
(36) log y = a1 + a2(b1 - b2) + (1 — a2)log tl + a2b2t + a2b3(t

+ a2b4 log

+

Zc(log

+ Za3+jN. + Ea7÷jj +
0t+1-i —

log 0t-i +

22

This equation has been estimated using the 1957—1976 quarterly data set and
instruments for the eight countries in the Mark III International Transmission

Model. The regressions are based on the two—stage—least—squares—principal—
components (2SLSPC) technique because of the large number of predetermined

variables in the model.26 The coefficients of the aggregate demand variables
are not at issue here, are substantially the same as those discussed in Darby
and Stockman (1980), and so are omitted for the sake of brevity from the
present discussion.27

The regression results are summarized in Table 2. The coefficient of
log O is negative in every case although only 4 of the t—statistics meet
conventional levels of significance. The implicit estimate of the long—run
oil effect is reported in the ninth column as ranging from a 2 basis point
decrease in real income per percentage point increase in the real price of

oil for the U.S. to 19 basis points for Japan. Table 3 indicates the implied long—run reduction in real income for the eight countries based on
the 19731—19761V increase in

the real price of oil. Rasche and Tatom

(1980, Table 7) prepared similar estimates for their model (discussed in
Section I) based on 1973—1977 energy price increases, and those estimates

are reported for comparison. Despite some differences in detail, the calculations here tell broadly the same story as that of Rasche and Tatom. However,
this strong story does not do so well under closer examination.

Let us first consider the possibility that the share of imported oil in
total output is so small that any effects are in fact negligible.. This is
tested by computing the F statistic for the hypothesis that all the oil co-

efficients are zero (He: a2b4

c1

c2 = c3 = c4

0). As reported in

Table 2, only five of the countries have any statistically significant oil

23

effect at the 5 percent level28 and for one of these (the United States) the
significant response is due to short—run movements which might be related
to various panic policy responses, briefly adopted here and abroad, to the

temporary OPEC embargo at the end of 1973. Further, the significant French
effects imply that French income was higher throughout 1973 as a
result of rising oil prices and so does not support the hypothesis.
Since experience indicates that the French, Italian, and Japanese data
may be quite unreliable,29 let us focus on the results for the United States,

United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, and the Netherlands. Of these five, the
F statistic is insignificant for Canada and Germany and significant for the

United States, United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. Interestingly these
three countries with significant F statistics all removed general price
controls coincidentally with the 1973—1974 oil price increase while Canada
30
and Germany had no price controls during the relevant period.

If, as I

have argued elsewhere (l976a, 1976b), the decontrol process results in the
elimination. of overstatement of real GNP built up during the control period,

then the spurious drop in reported real GNF relative to true GNP will be
captured as part (or all!) of the effect of the coincidental increase in

real oil prices. Certainly the pattern of significant oil effects only
where simultaneous decontrol occurred strongly indicates the value of
research to formulate real CNP estimates unbiased by price—control evasions
which overstate quantities and understate prices.
In summary, these empirical results give a rather ambiguous answer to
the question of whether or not a large increase in the real price of oil will
reduce significantly real income for given nominal money supplies, real

government spending, and real exports. Such a reduction is estimated for
half the cases, but this may be a spurious result due to the simultaneous
removal of price controls in those countries.

-

24

III. Simulation Experiments

To assess the effects of the 1973-1974 oil price increase on real income —— and ultimately the price level

we must allow for induced changes

in nominal money supplies and real exports aside from any possible direct

effects such as examined in Section II. To take account of these indirect
effects, one must resort to a simulation model of some sort, and this section reports results from the Mark IV Simulation Model described in

Darby

(1981).31 The results of any one simulation model cannot be taken too
seriously except as they illustrate the possible importance of channels not

inconsistent with the data which might otherwise be overlooked. So with a
spirit of healthy scepticism, let us turn to the specific experiments.
To assess the effects of the oil price increase we compare the results
from simulating the model in one case with the actual real price of oil and
in another case with the real price of oil held constant at the 1973 I price.
The assumed difference in the logarithm of the real price of oil (log (ole))

is

plotted in Figure 5. The dynamic simulations begin in 1973 II and con-

tinue for two years thereafter.32
In view of the mixed evidence for direct oil price effects on real in-

come as reported in Section II, the basic Mark IV model does not incorporate

such effects. An alternative simulation model, the Mark IV—Oil, was therefore estimated. It differs from the basic Mark IV model only in the addition to the real income equations of the variables listed in Table 2 above
for those 5 countries for which the oil variables were significant (United

States, United Kingdom, France, Japan, and the Netherlands). These five
equations are listed with their estimated coefficients in Table 4.
Figures 6 through 10 illustrate the simulation results for the five

countries with reliable data, Each figure displays the simulated effect of

25

the oil price increase on six major macroeconomic variables for one country.
The effect is estimated as the difference between the simulation values
based on the actual real price of oil and the values based on a constant

post—1973 I price. The effects simulated by the basic Mark IV model are
plotted with a square while those for the Mark IV—Oil are plotted with a
diamond.

Examining first Figure 6 for the United States, we see a considerable
difference depending on whether or not direct oil price effects appear in

the real income equation. In the basic Mark IV Model without those effects,
the simulated effect of the oil price increase is to increase real income by

stimulating exports. The price level rises a bit to a peak effect of 2.5
percent, despite the slight decrease in nominal money supply, because the
large rise in interest rates (due to increased exports) dominates the income

effect to produce a significant decline in the real quantity of money de-

manded. That is, the denominator in equation (2) above falls by more than
the numerator. The situation is much different for the Mark IV—Oil Mode].

with direct real income effects: Real income ——
increase ——

is

following

a brief initial

reduced by up to 3 2/3 percent at the trough. This reduction

is caused both by the direct real income effects and ——

in

the second year ——

by the reversal of real export growth. The price level increase is almost
double that simulated in the basic model although simulated nominal money is

only a little higher. This is so because of much lower simulated y which

would much reduce mC(y,R) and hence increase p /mC(y,R) as compared to
the basic Mark IV Model simulations.

The simulated effects for the United Kingdom (see Figure 7) tell a

story similar to that for the United States. The main differences lie in
the simulated behavior of the nominal money stock and interest rates in the

26

Mark IV—Oil Model. Because the estimated U.K. money—supply reaction function is responsive to unemployment but not inflation increases, unlike the

U.S., falling output induces substantial increases in nominal money. In the
U.S. Mark IV-Oil simulations the downward pressure on the interest rate due
to lower exports was roughly offset by upward pressure from increased infla-

tionary expectations. Inflationary expectations are much less important in
the estimated U.K. interest rate equation; so the lower level of exports in

the Mark IV—Oil Model case is reflected in lower interest rates. Nonetheless,
the much higher nominal money supply and lower real income dominate the some-

what lower interest rates in increasing p J,/mC(y,R). A minor difference
between the U.S. and U.K. simulations appears in the scaled balance of pay-

ments variable: For the U.S., this variable largely represents intervention
by other countries while for the U,K. it mainly represents minimal net intervention in the floating exchange market by the British government.
The Canadian sectors of the basic Mark IV Model and of the Mark IV—Oil

Model are identical since the oil variables were found insignificant in the

Canadian real income equation in Section II. The differences in the simulated
effects thus represent the effects on Canada of lower foreign real income in

the Mark IV—Oil case. Thus the peak real income is only about 2 percent in
this case compared to about 3 2/3 percent with the basic model and so, given
the small simulated movements in nominal money and interest rates, prices
fall a bit less than in the basic model.

Like Canada, no direct oil—price effects are included in the German real—
income equation. The German real—income equation does display an anotnolous
cumulative negative impact of higher exports, however, so real income is

lower with the higher estimated exports in the basic Mark IV Model. Since more
than complete real crowding out of increased export expenditures is inconsistent
with a priori notions, the German

simulations

are viewed as uninformative for

27

this experiment.

The Netherlands real income equation in the Mark IV—Oil Model includes
direct oil effects and the real income simulation yields results similar to

although much larger than those obtained for the U.S. and U.K. The price
effects differ, however, for several reasons: (1) There is an anomolous, insignificant, but negative coefficient on transitory income in the real money
demand equation; thus lower simulated real income implies higher simulated

real money demand. (2) The estimated interest rate coefficient in the real
money—demand function has the right sign but is trivial in magnitude.
(3) Nominal money is trivially lower in the Mark IV-Oil case due to some

simulated balance—of—payments effects. Thus the price effects simulated for
the Netherlands occur only because of coefficients which are consistent with
the data but not standard a priori notions.

These simulation results illustrate the large difference it makes

whether or not we take at face value the estimated real—oil—price effects in

the real income equations. We cannot say whether or not the 1973-1974 increases in real oil prices caused price level increases on the order of 0 to

3 percent or of 4 to 8 percent and upwards. Similarly real income effects
might range from slightly positive to about —10 percent for the countries

examined here. It is both the sorrow and challenge of our nonexperilnental
science that other things were not held constant when the oil price change

occurred. One

factor

which may explain the estimated real income effects in

1973—1974 was identified in Section II: the coincidental removal of price
controls in those countries for which real effects were found. Only much
further research can show whether the large simulated effects in the Mark
IV—Oil Model have a basis in reality or are the result of other changes ——

such as price decontrol —— occurring in the same period.

28

IV.

Conclusions

The effects on real income and the price level of the 1973—1974 In—
creases in the real price of oil are the subject of strongly held but

diverse opinions.33 Unfortunately the results of this paper indicate that
a wide range of opinions is indeed consistent with the data. Perhaps we
should not be surprised that with effectively one degree of freedom it Is

difficult to have much confidence in estimates of both an oil price coefficient and its standard error.

The Iranian hostage crisis of 1979—1980 will provide us data soon on a

second major move in the real price of oil. But these data are unlikely to
resolve the empirical question. It seems to this author that a more fruitful avenue may be to develop quantitative measures of the biases in official
real output data due to price controls and then see what oil—price effects

are estimated using these corrected data. This approach is feasible because
price controls were generally imposed much before the oil price change.
Thus historical relationships between labor input, electricity production,

carloadings, and other physical unit series can be used to estimate the
biases up to the oil price change.
If this paper has demonstrated that the effects of the real—oil—price

increases in 1973—1974 remain an open question and thus stimulates research
towards answering it, then the author will be amply recompensed for having
to report such inconclusive conclusions.

29

REFERENCE S

Barro, Robert 3.,

"Unanticipated

Money, Output, and the Price Level in the

United States," Journal of Political Economy, August 1978, 86: 549—580.

Berner, Richard, Clark, Peter, Hernndez—Cat, Ernesto, Howe, Howard,
Kwack, Sung, and Stevens, Guy, "A Multi—Country Model of the Interna-

tional Influences on the U.S. Economy: Preliminary Results," International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 115, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, December 1977.

Bruno, Michael, and Sachs, Jeffrey, "Supply versus Demand Approaches to the
Problem of Stagflation," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 382, August 1979.

Carr, Jack, "Wage and Price Controls: Panacea for Inflation or Prescription
for Disaster," in N. Walker, ed., The Illusion of Wage and Price
Control, Vancouver: Fraser Institute, 1976.
Christensen, Laurits R., and Jorgenson, Dale W., "U.S. Input, Output,
Saving and Wealth, 1929—1969," unpublished paper, Harvard Institute of
Economic Research, December 1978.

Darby, Michael R., "Price and Wage Controls: The First Two Years" and
"Further Evidence," in K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer, eds., The Economics

of Price and Wage Controls, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, vol. 2, supplement to the Journal of Monetary Economics,

April 1976. (1976a)
____________

"The U.S. Economic Stabilization Program of 1971—1974," in

N. Walker, ed., The Illusion of Wage and Price Control, Vancouver:

Fraser Institute, 1976. (1976b)

____________

Macroeconomics:

The Theory of Income, Employment, and the

Price Level, New York: McGraw—Hill Book Co., 1976. (1976c)

30

Darby, Michael R., Intermediate Macroeconomics, New York: McGraw—Hill Book
Co., 1979.
_____________

"Sterilization

and Monetary Control under Pegged Exchange

Rates: Theory and Evidence," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 449, February
1980.

_____________

"International

Transmission under Pegged and Floating Exchange

Rates: An Empirical Comparison," in J. S. Bhandari and B. H. Putnam,
eds., The International Transmission of Economic Disturbances under
Flexible Exchange Rates, forthcoming circa 1981.

___________ and Stockman, Alan C., "The Mark III International Transmission
Model," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 462, February 1980.

Hall, Robert E., "Investment, Interest Rates, and the Effects of Stabilization Policies," Brookirigs Papers on Economic Activity, 1977(1), pp. 61—
103.

Hudson, Edward A., and Jorgenson, Dale W., "Energy Prices and the U.S.
Economy, 1972—1976," Natural Resources Journal, October 1978, 18:
pp. 877—897.

Kopcke, Richard W., "Potential Growth, Productivity, and Capital Accumulation,"
New England Economic Review, May/June 1980, pp. 22—41.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation

Tradeoffs," American Economic Review, June 1973, 63: 326—334.
Mork, Knut Anton, and Hall, Robert E., "Energy Prices, Inflation, and
Recession, 1974—1975," N.B.E.R. Working Paper No. 369, July 1979.

Nosworthy, J. R., Harper, Michael J., and Kunze, Kent, "The Slowdown in

Productivity Growth: Analysis of Some Contributing Factors," Brookg
Papers on Economic Activity, 1979 (2), pp. 387—421.

31

Perloff, Jeffrey N., and Wachter, Michael L., "A Production Function ——

Nonaccelerating Inflation Approach to Potential Output: Is Measured
Potential Output Too High?," in K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer, eds.,
Three Aspects of Policy and Policymaking, Carnegie—Rochester Conference
Series in Public Policy, vol. 10, supplement to the Journal of Monetary
Economics, 1979.

Phelps, Edmund S., "Commodity—Supply Shock and Full—Employment Monetary

Policy," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Nay 1978, 10: pp. 206—
221.

Purvis, Douglas D., "A Comment on 'The Use of the Aggregate Demand Curve',"

Journal of Economic Literature, June 1975, 13: p. 474.
Rasche, Robert H., and Tatom, John A., "The Effects of the New Energy Regime
on Economic Capacity, Production, and Prices," Federal Reserve Bank of

St. Louis Review, May 1977, 59 (5): pp. 2—12. (1977a)
____________________________________ "Energy Resources and Potential GM',"
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, June 1977, 59 (6): pp. 10—24.
(1977b)

____________________________________ "Energy Price Shocks, Aggregate Supply
and Monetary Policy: The Theory and the International Evidence," paper
presented at the Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,
April 1980.

Selden, Richard T., "The Inflationary Seventies: Comparisons among Selected
High—Income Countries," paper presented at Conference on Inflation
through the Ages, Brooklyn College CUNY, March 10—12, 1980.

Shenoy, Sudha R., ed., Wage—Price Control: Myth and Reality, Turraxnurra,

Australia: Centre for Independent Studies, 1978.

32

Tatom, John A., "Energy Prices and Capital Formation: 1972—1977," Federal

Reserve Bank of St Louis Review, May 1979, 6]. (5): pp. 2—11. (1979a)
"The Productivity Problem," Federal Reserve Bank of St.

Louis Review, September 1979, 61 (9): pp. 3—16. (1979b)

33

Footnotes

'See Darby and Stockman (1980) for details.
fuller specification would include a factor eTt on the right hand
side, but it simplifies the notation without loss to choose labor units
such that the etS is eliminated and to incorporate technical progress T into

our measurement of labor in efficiency units. The basic results (8) and
(12) below are stated in Tatom (1979a, pp. 10—11) and Rasehe and Tatom (1980)

starting from the same production function (3). Their longest—run results (l2),
however, are derived from the simple assertion that the marginal product of
capital is fixed in the long—run by supply conditions rather than as the

result of a growth analysis as is done below. Their assertion ——
it is correct in this case ——

is

although

generally false. They erroneously interpret

the gross "rental price of capital" which is equated to the marginal product
of capital as "the relative price of capital" (e.g., Tatom (1979a, pp. 10—11)) and
argue that this will equal its fixed supply price in the long—run.

In the

appendix to Rasche and Tatom (1980), they instead have attempted to relate
changes in output to changes in capacity of individual firms, but this seems
to neglect the fact that the number of firms is not fixed.

In the main body of the paper they present evidence supportive of the

usage of a Cobb—Douglas production function of this form (3). Kopeke (1980)
argues that it is improper to include energy as an argument in the aggregate
production function since energy is itself an intermediate product produced

by capital and labor. This objection does not apply to imported petroleum
which is produced by foreign labor and capital. Care must be taken, as seen
below, however in going from the domestic output concept appropriate to the

34

production function (3) to the value—added concept of real GNP. Unfortunately
this last step has not been made in the three—factor analyses of the effects
of oil-price changes.

3This assumption is arguable also. For example, Phelps (1978) treated
the quantity of imported oil

as determined erogenously; the nominal price

of oil is assumed fixed by Mork and Hall (1979) and by Berner, et al., (1977)

in their Multi—Country Model. Rasche and Tatom (1980) argue persuasively
that neither of these representations capture the meaning of OPEC's ability
to set an optimal real price of oil.

4The value of y is discussed at some length below. To the extent that
capital is in the form of existing machines which cannot be readily modified
and which require fixed petroleum inputs, the quasi—rents of existing

machines will fall without any reduction in output or petroleum usage. A
possibly offsetting factor would be the premature obsolescence of machines

on which the quasi—rents fall below zero. Neither of these factors is
operative in full long—run equilibrium discussed imeediately below, and are
taken as negligible on net here.

5Before capital adjusts, but with resources fully employed the marginal

product of capital ka)' falls (slightly) with

and hence so does the

real interest rate.
6That is 0
7klthough

0 so that

0—yO l—y

= 0 initially as seen at (17) as 0 increases, the

positive BBS term in (16) decreases while the negative BBS is unchanged.
The negative effect is yet greater if capital is allowed to adjust.

35

8Note that the first RHS term in (18) is approximately equal (for
small y) to y 1 —

- which

illustrates that as 0 becomes large the adjust—

merit for imported inputs in measured GNP

becomes trivial and all output is

included in measured GNP.

9it is possible to apply the analysis to energy more generally, but
the increase in y is largely offset by a reduced logarithmic change in 0.
10Rasche and Tatom (1980), Table 6.
formal solution to this problem is presented in Darby (1979, Chap.

tax analysis is given little if any

Rasche and Tatom (1980),
that

weight

in recent analyses.

for example, term it "the 1974 view" and belief

aggregate demand shifts were important appears

ephemeral

5).

phenomenon. It is

to have been an

included here for the sake of completeness.

13The exact amount of these reductions depends on consumer expectations,
but the direction is unambiguous.
14There is no long—run effect on output or interest rates via this
channel

unless

differences between foreign and domestic propensities to

save cause a shift in the domestic investment—output ratio.
'5The aggregate demand curve

is

derived by solving the IS relationship

for R and substituting in equation (2).
.
.
A negative sign indicates a shift to the left.

16

.

17Purvis

(1975) displays the correct formula for
—l

1ogm
1ogy

d
'

1ogmd

logR

which is

36

is

where i

or the elasticity of the interest rate with respect to
d

output on the IS curve. For a normal negatively sloped IS curve, J
will be positive but insufficient to bring the denominator of

up to 1 if

short—run interest elasticity of money demand is small and the IS curve is
rather flat as argued by Hall (1977).
Rasche and Tatom (1980) make a convoluted version of Ganib's error
(which

Purvis corrected) to conclude that the aggregate demand curve was

inelastic. Rather than accept the implication of increased employment, they
repeat their (l977a) assumption that nominal wages rise freely once the
natural

unemployment rate is reached. I can see no justification for this

appendage to a basic search view of the labor market. It is of course
irrelevant if

<

—1

or the aggregate demand curve shifts to the left

sufficiently to reduce employment despite an inelastic aggregate demand
curve.

18If the elasticity of aggregate demand is less than —1 but greater
than —

(about

—1.5), the short—run effect will be greater than the

full—employment effect for a

given capital stock but less than the long—

run effect allowing for capital adjustment.

That is, in the absence of

significant shifts in aggregate demand, the long—run effects with full
capital adjustment such as calculated in Table 1 exceed the short—run effects
unless

<

—/(

—

a)

—1.5.

19More wage flexibility implies less employment variation, so output
would be lower than indicated by equation (24) if
<

> —l

and less if

-1.
20The lack of a term in the balance of payments implies that we are

either dealing with a reserve country (the U.S.), a freely floating country,

37

or with a country which can and does sterilize balance of payments effects

in the relevant period; see Darby (1980). By the time of the first oil
shock (1973—1974) this is probably a reasonable characterization although
current balance of payment effects will also be present for some countries
in the simulations reported in Section III below.
21See Darby (1976a, 1976b).

22Even for the relatively unscathed United States, capital grew by
only about 0.4 percent per annum from 1929 through 1948 compared to a normal
growth rate of 3.2 percent; see Christensen and Jorgenson (1978, p. 56).
This implies that by 1948 the actual U.S. capital stock was less than 60
percent of the steady—state capital stock.
23See Darby and Stockman (1980) for a description of the model.

24The scaling of exports as a fraction of income rather than in

logarithmic terms was done to permit application ofthe balance—of—payments
identity in the model. In the results reported here all the innovations are

defined as residuals from optimal ARIMA processes applied to log M, log '

and (X/Y), respectively.
25lmmediately after an increase in the real oil price, the capital
stock is greater than in full long—run equilibrium while labor utilization

'

is less. The net effect depends on the elasticity rj of the aggregate demand
curve, but approximates the full long—run effect on plausible assumptions.

26The only current endogenous variables in equation (36) are '

and log U. Time t and government spending shocks are exogenous in the
model, but Mt and

are endogenous. The price of oil in base—year dollars

38

is exogenous so log 6 is exogenous for the U.S. For the other seven
countries endogenous movements in the purchasing power ratio make the real
price of oil in base—year domestic currency units endogenous, but they are
dominated by movements in the U.S. real price.
27To the extent these aggregate demand variables were correlated with
any significant oil variables added here, their numerical values were of

course affected. However, the general pattern and conclusions remained unaltered from the earlier discussion cited in the text.
280n1y France is significant at the 1 percent level.
29See discussions in Darby and Stockman (1980) and Darby (1981).
30The United States took the lead in imposing price controls in August

1971 which Darby (1976a, 1976b) argues led to an increasing overstatement
of real GNP (and understatement of the deflator) through the first quarter

of 1973. Controls were then relaxed in phases through the third quarter of
1974 with progressive elimination of overstatement in real GNP. That is,
real income growth was overstated from 1971111 through 19731 and then under-

stated from 197311 through 19741V. According to Parkin in Shenoy (1978,
pp. 150—151) the United Kingdom followed a similar pattern with controls
instituted with a freeze in November 1972, peaking in their effect on the
data with the end of Stage II in August 1973, and eventually abandoned

entirely after the Conservative loss of February 1974. Shenoy (1978, pp.
132—135) reports a similar albeit more complex pattern for the Netherlands

beginning also with a 1972 price freeze. Carr (1976, p. 40) points out that
Canada was free of general price controls until October 1975, too late to

cause any biases in the oil—price coefficients. West Germany imposed no

39

price controls on the ground that such policies distract attention from the
real problems; Shenoy (1978, pp. 138—141).
31The Mark IV Simulation Model is a simplified simulation version of

the Mark III International Transmission Wdel described in Darby and Stockrnan
(1980). The main simplifications involve (1) deletion of insignificant
variables except where they are required a priori to permit international
transmission and (2) combining variables to reduce multicollinearity where

a priori hypotheses on equality of coefficients were not rejected by the

data. The resulting model is thus both consistent with the data and
tractable for simulation. The Mark IV Model exists in versions corresponding
to pegged and floating exchange rates, but only the latter (Mark IV—FLT) is
used in this paper.
32

In

.

a dynamic simulation, the input series are the exogenous variables

plus the initial conditions (endogenous variables at the beginning of the

simulation). The values of endogenous variables within the simulation
period are assigned their predicted values. As is common for a large model
with few exogenous variables, the cumulative errors in the endogenous vari-

ables eventually take the simulation off track. For the Mark IV Simulation
Model, this dynamic instability is not a significant difficulty until after
the first two years.

33Taking two of the best studies for the long—run U.S. real—income effect as examples: Nosworthy, Harper, and Kurize (1979, p. 412) report an
average reduction in productivity growth of 0.18 percent per annum for 1973—

1978 which implies a total reduction in real income of 0.9 percent. By
contrast, Rasche and Tatom (1980), as reported in Table 3 above, estimate a
7.0 percent long—run effect.

40

TABLE 1

Illustrative Calculations of Maximum Long—Run
Effect of 1973—1974 Real Oil Price Increase

No Capital Adjustment

y=O.O03

-y=O.O2

Full Capital Adjustment

-y=O.O03

y=O.02

change in
log output
(Alog y)

—0.0038

—0.0260

—0.0051

—0.0346

change in
measured
real GNP

—0.0017

—0.0114

—0.0029

—0.0200

0.0022

0.0146

0.0022

0.0146

(log

q)

difference
(Mog q — Llog y
Llog P — Alog D)

E

Netherlande

Japan

Italy

Germany

France

Canada

United
Kingdom

United
States

Country

0,180

(0.049)

2.529

2.446

0.00236

(0.00116)

2.035

(0.120)

0.176

(0.080)

2.205

1.293

2.711

Notes:

3.850

(0.087)
1.560

(7.465)

11.646

—2.246

—1.782

8•
1

(0.016)

—1.672

—2.862

—0.027

—2.711

(0.018)

—0.048

0.749

(0.014)

0.010

0.074

(0.026)

0.002

1.823

(0.021)

0.038

—0.304

(0.016)

—0.005

—2.602

(0.018)

—0.047

—1.897

(0.011)

—0.021

c

Mog

(0.0138)

—0.0396

—0.0393
(0.0178)
—2.205

—0.0092
(0.0073)
—1.252

—0.456

(0.015)

—0.0068

—3.655

(0.0168)

—0.0581

—0.0081
(0.0073)
—1.097

—2.717

(0.0093)

—0.0253

—0.732

(0.0052)

—0.0038

a b
2 4

log

Coefficient Of

2

1.839

(0.019)

0.035

0.345

(0.020)

0.007

0.333

(0.015)

0.005

0.678

(0.020)

0.013

(0.026)
3.167

0.083

0.273

(0.015)

0.004

1.489

(0.017)

0.025

—2.074

(0.011)

—0.022

c

Effrtq

3

(0.017)

0.536

0.967

0.009

0.562

(0.018)

0.010

0.073

(0.014)

0.001

—0.492

(0.020)

(0.018)

0.018

0.788

(0.018)

0.014

0.617

(0.015)

0.010

1.187

(0.019)

—0.010

0.373

2.576
0.022

(0.023)

0.009

—0.260

(0.016)

—0.004

0.433

(0.017)

0.007

—1.650

(0.011)

—0.018

4

c

3.34.

—0.118

—0.191

—0.035

—0.039

—0.095

—0.047

—0.057

—0.021

Long—run
011 Effect
a b /n
2 4
2

2.38*

2.27*

0.56

0.56

4.40*

0.49

3.32

2.54

F(5,59)
Statistic

Income Equatlon (3)

Alog 0t—3

n Real

(0.024)

0.062

—0.642

(0.015)

—0.010

1.127

(0.016)

0.019

—0.092

(0.010)

—0.009

c

Mog 0t2

of 011—Price

l\log

Etfatpg

0.9981

0.9994

0.9982

0.9975

0.9976

0.9982

0.9963

0.9986

0.0122

0.0135

0.0120

0.0131

0.0159

0.0121

0.0120

0.0082

S.E.E.

1.59

—1.76

—2.02

0.26

12.331

—3.40

1.10

—0.53

h

pj

by

0)

requires

F >

2.23. The

0.01 significance level (indicated by 0*)

requires

P >

1. Period: 19371—19761T, Standard errors are reported in parenthese belay coefficient estimates, t—etatistica are be1 the standard
errors. The biased Durbin—Watson statistic is reported in square brackets in those cases in-which Durbin's h cannot be computed
(is imaginary). Coefficient estimates for the constant and the aggregate demand shocks
(a3,.,.,a14) are not reported for brevity's
sake.
2. Note that the reported coefficient estimates for t2 are multiplied by 106
3. In the headings the syirbol A is used for first differences rather than deviations from the base year.
4. The F(5,59) statistic is for the test of the hypothesis that
—
—
—
a2b4
C1
c2 c3 c4 0. The 0,05 significance level (indicated

3.418

0.00284
(0.00083)

—0.371

0.00485

(0.00179)

0.206

(0.082)
2.529

0.334

(6.043)

2.785

3.127

(6.440)

—11.474

0.00404

(0.00145)

0.260

—0.827

(6.748)

—5.581

—0.210

(7.316)

—1.977

0.245

(5.283)

(0.083)

5.089

0.00892
(0.00173)
5.163

0.613

0.00203

(0.00080)

0.171

2.978

(0.070)

0.402

(0.00095)

(0.112)
3.985

2.469
(6.089)

0.00284

—0.949

(3.389)

—3.215

(t—l)
a b xlO
2 3

2

0.448

3.656

0.00196

(0.00058)
3.349

2

t

a b
2 2

a

Adjustment
Coefficient

2SLSPC RegresRion

TARLE 2

42

TABLE 3

Implied Estimates of Long—Run Decrease in Real GNP
due to 19731—19761V Increases in Real Price of Oil

Ras the—Tat om

a
Country

log 019761V

Long-Run

Long—Run

—log 019731

Decrease in qb

Estimate c

—0.021

1.2119

—2.5%

—7.0%

United States

—0.057

1.2749

—7.3%

—3.5%

United Kingdom

—0.047

1.1045

—5.2%

—4.4%

Canada

—0.095

1.1477

—10.9%

—4.1%

France

1.1101

—4.3%

—1.9%

Germany

—0.039
—0.035

1.3995

—4.9%

—0.191

1.1402

—21.8%

—0.118

0.9856

—11.6%

Italy

Japan

Netherlands

Notes: a. This is the ratio of the estimated values of a2b4 to a2

NA
—17.1%

NA

from Table 2.

b. Product of the previous two columns.
energy—price increases.
c. From Rasche and Tatom (1980), Table 7, for 1973—1977

43

TABLE 4

Alternative Real—Income Equations for Mark IV—Oil Model

EQUATION FORM

+

alog

log

+

2)1og

+ Z0a,11+±,_1 +

+

iO

Note:

+

+

+ a 21(t—1)2 + a,2210

1E0a,23+1

The country index is j, log y is permanent income, and log

E

log

+ log RO where E is the exchange rate and RO is the index of
the

real price of a barrel of Venezuelan oil in

1970 U.S. dollars.

COEFFICIENTS

Coefficient
Name

Values by Country (j)

United

States

United

France

Japan

Netherlands

Kingdom

—0.0016

—0.0148

0.0843

0.2335

0.0668

a.

0.1472

0.4631

0.5351

0.2116

0.2869

a.J3

0.8335

—0.1410

—0.2414

a.j4

0.4271

a.jl

a.j5
a.

——

——

0.0679

——

0.2211
0.9220

——

——

——

0.1464

0.0487

0.1542

—0.0676

——

—0.1044

——

0.0625

——

—0.0239

a17
a.8

0.1320

ci

E

44

TABLE 4 (Continued)

Coefficient
Name

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Japan

Netherlands

0.0960

0.0959

0.0531

—

0.0222

0.0852

——

——

—0.0536

0.0398

1.4624

——

—0.8258

0.0352

1.0743

0.5147

——

——

——

——

—0.6406

0.1660

——

——

——

—0.8563

—0.0236

0.0005

0.0005

0.0007

0.0006

—0.0004

—0.0000

—0.0000

—0.0000

—0.0000

+0.0000

0.0003

—0.0188

—0.0447

—0.0351

—0.0307

—0.0187

—0.0294

0.0089

—0.0481

—0.0269

—0.0231

0.0236

0.0500

0.0018

0.0257

—0.0064

0.0213

0.0402

0.0104

0.0096

—0.0200

0.0073

0.0084

0.0024

0.0032

aj9
a.
j,l0

n

a.
j

,l2

a.

—0.1536

——

—0.0231

J,13

cx14
ct20
a,21

a22
a,23
a,24

a25
a 26

Note:

The Mark IV—Oil Model differs from the Mark IV—FLT Simulation Model
only in these five equations.

A coefficient for a suppressed

variable (t statistic less than 1 in absolute value; Qj3 through
only) is indicated by

45

s
log P

log y

Figure 1

Determination of Base Output and Price Level.

46

So

S
log P
log P

e

logy

log;;:

Figure 2

Determination of Change in Output and Price Level
from Base Values with No Aggregate—Demand Shift

47

So

log P
log P

I

I

I

I

logy

logy

Figure 3

Determination of Changes in Output and Price Level
from Base Values with Shift in Aggregate Demand

48

60

L

Th,-

—L•cL

19E5

1

1

1959

1951

1

jgq

1

1

1

1967

1970

1973

Figure

1976

4

The Logarithm of the United States Real Price of Imported Oil

Source: The dollar price index of Venezuelan crude oil is
taken from various issues of International Financial
Statistics and rebased to 1.00 in 1970. This is
then deflated by the U.S. GNP deflator (1970 = 1.00)
to obtain 0 (01970 = 1.00).

1979

49

C--

—C.. IC

I

iP7

I

1

197q

I 975
Figure 5

Logarithmic Increase in U.S. Real Price of Oil from 1973 I

I7

50
—,)

x 10

>: i(J

F

-

--:

—

/
N

22

97
(a) Price level ——

log

--.

:273

P

(b)

Real Income ——

2

197

log US

io_2

--

____

—-—-----—5'

73
(c)

2

2

197'

Nominal Money ——

log

Ms

(d) Short—Term Interest Rate ——

FIGURE 6

Simulated Effects in the United States of the 1973—1975
Increase in the Real Price of Oil

i:

FIGURE 6 (Continued)

x 1O

51

--_ //
-7-

(e)

Scaled Exports ——

Key:

197E

(X/Y)us

a

/

I

0. '.

2

197

1973

H7

t'

Effects

1973

(f)

I97
Scaled Balance of Payments

simulated using basic Mark IV Model
Effects simulated using Mark IV—Oil Model

2
i57E

(B/Y)

52

io2

io_2

\\

TT1 /
-I/

2'

N
-3

C

\

-

/7

--

2

2

Price Level ——

log

P

2

973

j97L

(a)

/

(b)

io2

1 97E

197L

Real Income ——

y

log

x lO

/

___

77
//
/7

//

:

173

Cc)

::J
2

•

Nominal Money ——

log

M

1273

(d)

/

)7
2

Short—Term Interest Rate

FIGURE 7

Simulated Effects in the United Kingdom of the 1973—1975
Increase in the Real Price of Oil

——

\

FIGURE 7 (Continued)

xlO—5

x102

,
//
1

\\

/

L_

/

\\
\\

2

I 97

(e) Scaled Exports ——

Key:

\

(X/Y)

2

2

2

1974

(f) Scaled Balance of Payments ——

Effects simulated using basic Mark IV Model
Effects simulated using Mark IV—Oil Model

(B/Y)

54

io2

—2

x 10

\

\

2

\

//

/

N /

2

2

I 7E

(a)

Price Level ——

log CA

(b)

Real Income ——

log cA

\,
\\

x

/\,

\ 7/

-C.

\\

-ic:

-;

2

173

(d)

197w

Short—Term Interest Rate ——

FIGURE 8
Simulated Effects in Canada of the 1973—1975
Increase in the Real Price of Oil

RCA

55

FIGURE 8 (Continued)
X 1

:

,/

L

\____
\

/

7
/ ,/..

.-'— 3

C. .C

I

U. cc

I_/
-C.

-C. C

2

2

(e) Scaled Exports —— (X/Y)CA

Key:
*

2
1973

2

I 97tJ

(f) Scaled Balance of Payments ——

Effects simulated using basic Mark IV Model
Effects simulated using Mark IV—Oil Model

1975

(B/Y)CA

56

x 10

io2

—2

/
C.

2
I

!

2
1975

97L

(b) Real Income -—

(a) Price Level ——

10

3. OC

2. DC

,,__/h\\

•

2

1973

log

/

-3.00

LW

2

MGE

\\

-2.00

1975

Nominal Money ——

DC

C. DC

\

-2. 2

(c)

—3

x

N

log GE

1973

2
I97

Cd) Short—term Interest Rate ——

FIGURE 9
Simulated Effects in Germany of the 1973—1975
Increase in the Real Price of Oil

1975

RGE

FIGURE 9 (ContInued)

x

1o_

rr
. 5.

.r
3. c
{

2.

r

/1/

//

—

1973

(e)

j

7

//

2. (C

1.

57

2

2
1974

Scaled Exports ——

Key:

1

(X/Y)GE

(f) Scaled Balance of Payments —— (B/Y)GE

Effects simulated using basic Mark IV Model
Effects simulated using Mark IV—Oil Model

58

.

....

h\N1
._.i_i_i

C. C2C

I

C. DCC

.-C.

N

N

-2. ui.

-C.

U:L

N
C___ \\\

\ :::____
- C'.

-C.

-C;

UL

-

2
19

(a) Price Level ——

1975

log NE

!
1973

(b) Real Income ——

2
1975

197'

log NE

-V

x'102

5

4L,

\\

\\

C. i)A

C.

C.

c.Uc2
1973

(c) Nominal Noney -—

log

NNE

2

197's

(d) Short—Term Interest Rate—— RNE

FIGURE 10

Simulated Effects in the Netherlands of the 1973—1975
Increase in the Real Price of Oil

2
1975

FIGURE 10 (Continued)

59

x
C-i

C,. CC,

C. [5

N

-C.

N

-

1

:i

C. cs

C.

C•

\\\
\

ucf::://
1973

(e)

2

2

197w

I 975

Scaled Exports ——

Key:

(X/Y)

1973

/

F

2
197M

(f) Scaled Balance of Payments ——

Effects simulated using basic Mark IV Model
Effects simulated using Mark IV—Oil Model

(B/Y)NE

