                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MONETARIST PRINCIPLES AND THE MONEY STOCK
                           GROWTH RULE


                       Bennett T. McCallum


                     Working Paper No. 630




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           February 1981




This paper was presented at the American Economic Association
meetings in Denver in September 1980. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                     NBER Working Paper #630
                                                               February 1981



                 Monetarist Principles and the Money Stock Growth Rule



                                          ABSTRACT



      The main purpose of thi.s paper is to reconsider two antimonetarist

"messages" that have been prominent in recent writings on that doctrine.             One

of these claims that economies are likely to be unstable if a constant money

growth rule. together with noncyc1ica1 fiscal behavior. is followed.           The
                  ,
second suggests that long run effects of government deficits on aggregate

demand are stronger when bond-financed than when money-financed.         It is here

argued that support for the second message relies upon an unjustified

presumption of stability in certain macro models, when the appropriate

conclusion is that instability prevails under the constant money growth rule.

But the instability conclusion is also misleading as it depends upon an

assumed absence of economic growth.        Thus, neither message has analytical

justification.        The paper also stresses the importance of the natural rate of

unemployment hypothesis for monetarist policy proposals and argues that some

currently popular supply formulations are inconsistent with that hypothesis.



                                                     Bennett T. McCallum
                                                     National Bureau of Economic
                                                       Research
                                                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                     Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                                     (617) 868-3918
Revised November 1980


I.     Introduction

       Given the influence of Milton Friedman, it is hard to keep from identifying

"monetarism" with the advocacy of a policy rule that would require the money

stock to grow at a constant rate and prohibit cyclical adjustments in government

spending or in tax schedules.    1/ This identification is somewhat inaccurate since
Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer, the other two leading proponents of monetarism,

have not always been advocates of a constant money growth rate.         It may never-

theless be useful to relate one's thoughts about monetarism to Friedman's rule,

as will be done in this paper.       But the question that immediately arises is, what

more fundamental beliefs about the economy give rise to the idea that such a rule

would be socially desirable?     At this more basic level there may be more agree-

ment among monetarists than about the rule itself.         In any event, it appears that

there are two basic monetarist propositions that are of crucial importance, as

follows.     (i) Cyclical and secular movements in nominal income are primarily

attributable to movements in the stock of money relative to capacity output.

(ii)    There is no permanent tradeoff between unemployment and inflation or any

other characteristic of the path of the price level -- i.e., the natural rate

of unemployment hypothesis is valid.      Of course, another belief is essential --

that the monetary authority can exert      reasonab~y   accurate control over the stock

of money if it sets its mind to that task -- but it is not a major source of

dispute with non-monetarist economists, so I will not include it on my list.        1/

II.    The Natural Rate Hypothesis

       Let us begin with a brief explanation of the importance of the second of

these propositions, the natural rate hypothesis (NRH).        To appreciate its

significance one needs only to note that, alone, proposition (i) has nothing to

say about the division of nominal income fluctuations into price and output

components.    Thus alone it can have no implications concerning the behavior of
                                                  -2-


an economy's inflation and/or unemployment rates, magnitudes that are of much

more inherent importance than nominal income.              The crucial nature of proposition

(ii) is certainly clear from the writings of Friedman -- especially              (1968~    1971)

-- and is stressed by Franco Modigliani, but has been neglected in              ma~y   discus-
 .
S10ns    0   f t h e sub·Ject. -3/

        The other point concerning the NRH that needs to be emphasized is that its

conditions are, in fact, not satisfied by numerous specifications which claim

to permit no long run tradeoff.              As Robert Lucas pointed out in 1972, an expect-

ational Phillips curve -- one that relates unemployment to only the unexpected

part of the inflation rate --               implies the possibility of "unlimited real output

gains [unemployment reductions] from a well-chosen inflationary policy" (p. 53)

unless expectations are taken to be rational.              With adaptive expectations, for

example, unemployment could be kept low forever if the inflation rate were made

to accelerate forever.               Of more significance for current debates, given the

acceptance since 1972 of the rational expectations hypothesis, is the use of

unemployment-inflation relationships not of the expectational variety.                 A prom-

inent example is provided by the class of formulations that involves the concept

of a "nonaccelerating-inflation rate of unemployment," sometimes abbreviated

NAIRU.       ~/   If there exists a stable relationship between the rate of unemploy-

ment and the acceleration of the inflation rate, as is presumed by the NAIRU

concept, then evidently there are acceleration magnitudes that will yield a

permanently lowered rate of unemployment.               Under such formulations, therefore,

an argument that rapidly accelerating monetary growth is undesirable needs to

be justified by reference to some welfare criterion expressed in more detail

than is usual in the monetarist literature.               It seems, therefore, that NAIRU

formulations should be regarded as inconsistent with monetarist doctrine.                  They

are certainly inconsistent with the NRH itself.
                                       -3-


III.    Monetary vs. Fiscal Policy

       Having emphasized the importance of proposition (ii), let us now turn to

(i) and the sizable body of literature that constrasts monetarism with "fiscalism."

A prominent strand of this literature was initiated in the 1973 paper by Alan

Blinder and Robert Solow, which emphasized the continuing effects -- in a model

with wealth terms appearing in IS and LM functions -- brought about by the on-

going issuance or retirement of government bonds required under the money growth

policy rule by the government budget restraint.    Significant contributions to

this strand have been made by Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer, Carl Christ, Ettore

Infante and Jerome Stein, and James Tobin and Willem Buiter.    In a later piece,

Blinder and Solow (1976) suggested that there are two significant "messages,"

both of which are very robust to model specification.    These are "that the economy

is more likely to be stable if deficits are financed by printing money than if they

are financed by floating bonds" and "that the long-run effect of government spend-

ing on aggregate demand is greater when deficits are bond-financed than when they_

are money financed" (1976, pp. 505-06, italics in original).    As these messages

constitute a direct challenge to monetarist proposition (i), they   warran~   scrutiny.

The following paragraphs will argue that neither message is persuasive.     Because

the crucial relevant effects have to do with the nature of tax schedules and the

government budget restraint, not the workings of the economy, it will be possible

to conduct the argument in a setting that is almost model-free.

       The claim that deficits have larger long run effects on aggregate demand

when bond financed -- or, equivalently, that an open-market purchase is    contrac~


tionary~   -- is somewhat misleading even at the terminological level.   In partic-

ular, it refers not to the comparative extent to which equal changes in the stocks

of money and "bonds cause shifts in the aggregate demand schedule, but rather to

system-wide reduced-form effects on nominal income in complete systems that
                                        -4-


include aggregate supply functions, government budget restraints, income tax

schedules, and specifications regarding capital accumulation, as well as aggre-

gate demand (IS-LM) relations.     In addition, "long run" does not mean after lags

in consumption, investment, and portfolio behavior have worked themselves out --

there are no such lags in the models in question -- but rather that constraints

requiring money and bond stocks to be constant are imposed on the system.

     Terminology aside, the substantive validity of this second message is highly

dubious.    The evident basis for its belief is the following implication of the

models of Blinder - Solow (1973), Christ (1979, p. 533), Infante - Stein (p. 490),

and others:     unless an implausible condition is satisfied, the system aannot be

dynamically stable under the Friedman rule unless bond finance is more expan-

sionary.   ~/   So a presumption of stability would justify the second message.    But

reflection upon the meticulous analysis of Christ (1978, 1979) suggests that the

correct conclusion is not that the second message is valid, but rather that in-

stability (of certain variables) obtains under the Friedman rule.

     To develop an understanding of this result, let us first consider a special

model in which it does not quite hold, namely, a purely "Ricardian" model in

which the current asset value of government bonds to private agents is precisely

offset by agents' recognition of future taxes implied by bond interest payments.

As is argued in my cited paper, the stock of bonds does not, in this case, appear

as a variable in any of the behavioral equations of a macroeconomic model of the

IS, LM, expectational Phillips-curve variety.     Nor do tax variables or parameters.

Consequently, the system dichotomizes into two distinct blocks.     The first of

these includes the model's behavioral relations and explains movements in output,

Y, the price level, P, and the nominal interest rate, r, conditional upon time

paths of the (high-powered) money stock, M, and real government purchases, G.

The second block includes tax-transfer schedules and the government budget
                                                      -5-


identity; it explains             given Y, P, r, M, and G -- movements in tax receipts

and the nominal stock of bonds, B.                  If we combine these last relations we can

summarize the second block with the following equation, in which T and                        ~


(0 <   ~   < 1) are the intercept and slope parameters in a nominal tax-transfer
schedule:


(1)            DM + DB     GP + rB - T -        ~   (YP + rB),                     Dx - dx/dt .


Using (1), it can easily be see that the behavior of B is unstable under the

monetary rule.        In view of the dichotomy described above, (1) can be expressed

with DM    =   0 as


(2)            DB     (1 - ~)rB   +   ~,



in which ~~ is exogenous. ~/               Thus, with r exogenous and positive, we have an

explosive differential equation in B.                  The stock of bonds explodes in a positive

or negative direction if a deficit or surplus ever occurs. -7/

       In the pure Richardian case just considered, the explosion of B has no

effect on the variables of primary interest -- Y, P, and r.                         But suppose that

capitalization of future tax liabilities is incomplete, so that the real financial

wealth of the private sector is (M + r/>B)/P, with                  r/>   "small" but greater than zero.

In this nearly Ricardian case, which I henceforth assume to be empirically rel-

evant, the system does not dichotomize.                     Consequently, if B explodes, there will

be effects on Y, P, and r that tend to impart explosive behavior to those vari-

abIes.     The question, then, is whether feedback behavior of Y, P, and r into (1)

will keep B from exploding.

       It seems highly unlikely that such feedback will impart stability to B for

the following reasons.        With the usual behavioral specifications in which bond

wealth r/>B/P is relevant for expenditure (IS) and portfolio (LM) relations, its
                                                      -6-

effects on aggregate demand are positive in the former and negative in the latter.

Thus the quantitative importance of B on the instantaneous equilibrium values of

Y and P would be relatively small even in the absence of future tax capita1iza-

tion.       And with substantial but incomplete capitalization, as herein presumed,

these effects will be substantially reduced.                   Thus functions relating Y, P, and

r to current values of B will involve weak relationships; the partial                     derivative~


Y1'   PI'    and r
                     1
                             of the reduced-form functions Y    = Y(B, M, n), P = P(B, M, n) and
r   = ¥(B, M, n) will be small in magnitude. ~/ Therefore, when these functions
are used in (1) to obtain the dynamic representation of B in the near-Ricardian

case, as in


(3)            DB            [G - ~Y(B, M, n)]p(B, M, n) + (1-1)r(B, M, n)B + constant,


the implied behavior of B will be well-approximated by (2).                     Thus the behavior

of B will be explosive for a wide variety of specifications of the mode1 1 s be-
                         .        9/
haviora l     equat~ons.-


        The foregoing result eliminates, it should be emphasized, the reason at

hand for thinging that bond-financed deficits would be more expansionary than

money-financed deficits (i.e., that open-market purchases would be contractionary).

The argument seems to leave us, however, with the conclusion that dynamic in-

stability would prevail under the Friedman rule.                   It thus seems to support the

idea that adoption of the rule would be undesirable.

        The instability result has been obtained, however, in a discussion that

neglects the effects of economic growth.                    In a growing economy, equation (1) would

continue to hold but the relevant variable for considerations of dynamic stability

would not be B, but the ratio of bonds to real income, b                   =   B/Y. 10/   And the

appropriate counterpart of" (2) would be


(2')           Db = [(1 - 1)r - DY/Y]b          + "
                                          -7-

 with' analogous to    ~   in (2).11/   Furthermore, with money growth as specified

 by Friedman's rule, it is reasonable to presume that r will be of approximately

 the same value as the real rate of interest.      Then, since the latter should be

 close in magnitude to the (steady state) rate of output growth, it becomes quite

 likely (with 1   > 0) that   (1 - 1)r - DY/Y will be negative.   But that, of course,

 implies that b will be dynamically stable.      Thus, the source of instability pro-

 vided by the Friedman rule is not present in an economy in which output growth

 typically proceeds at or above the rate (1 - T)r.      The first anti-monetarist

 message, as well as the second, seems then to be unwarranted.


 IV.   Concluding Remarks

       It has been argued that the body of literature under discussion provides

 little reason for skepticism regarding the monetarist proposition (i).       Some

 possibility of instability remains, however, and it must be recognized that

 while the validity of propositions (i) and (ii) may be necessary, it is not

. sufficient, for belief in the desirability of a constant money growth rule.        It

 is possible, even if propositions (i) and (ii) are true, that other policy rules

 would induce operating characteristics of an economy that would be superior to

 those yielded by constant money growth.

       In this regard, it is interesting to recall that in Friedman's original

 design of "A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability," it was the

 stock of bonds, not money, that was to be exogenous to cyclical activity.       Money

 stock changes were to be non-discretionary but were to play the role of financing

 government deficits and surpluses.     Only later, in A Program for Monetary Stability,

 did Friedman propose an exogenous (constant) rate of monetary growth.       The original

 Friedman rule, it should be noted, apparently possesses all the features of auto-

 maticity stressed in Friedman's later writings.      Furthermore, with money-financed

 deficits more expansionary than bond-financed, it would imply a strengthening of
                                      -8-


any stabilizing effects that might be induced by automatic tax responses to

fluctuations in nominal income.   Its implementation would be difficult, to say

the least, but perhaps the original Friedman rule nevertheless warrants renewed

consideration.
                                   References



A. S. Blinder and R.M. Solow, "Does Fiscal Policy Matter?" J. Pub!. Econ.,

     Jan./Feb. 1973, 2, 319-37.

- - - - and ----- , "Does Fiscal Policy Still Matter?      A Reply," J. Monet.

     Econ., Nov. 1976, 2, 501-10.

K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer, "An Aggregate Theory for a Closed Economy," in

     J.L. Stein, ed., Monetarism, Amsterdam 1976.

C.F. Christ,     "Some Dynamic Theory of Macroeconomic Policy Effects on

     Income and Prices under the Government Budget Restraint," J. Monet.

     Econ., Jan. 1978,4,45-70.

- - - - , "On Fiscal and Monetary Policies and the Government Budget
     Restraint," Amer. Econ. Rev., Sept. 1979,69,526-38.

H. Friedman,     "A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability,"

     Amer. Econ. Rev., June 1948,38, 245-64.

____, A Program for Monetary Stability, New York 1959.

- - - -, "The Role of Monetary Policy," Amer. Econ. Rev., March 1968, 58,
     1-17.

____, A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis, New York 1971.

F.H. Hahn,     "Monetarism and Economic Theory," Economica, Feb. 1980, 47, 1-17.

E.F. Infante and J.L. Stein, "Does Fiscal Policy Matter?" J. Monet. Econ.,

     Nov. 1976, 2, 473-500.

R.E. Lucas, Jr., "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis," in

     O. Eckstein, ed., The Econometrics of Price Determination Conference,

     Washington 1972.
_________ , "Rules, Discretion, and the Role of the Economic Advisor,"

     in S. Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago 1980.

B.T. McCallum, "On Macroeconomic Instability from a Monetarist Policy Rule,"

     Economics Letters, 1978, 1,   l2l-4~


F. Modigliani, liThe Monetarist Controversy or, Should We Forsake Stabiliza-

     tion Policies?," American Economic Review, March 1977, 67, 1-19.

J.L. Stein, ed., Monetarism, Amsterdam 1976.

J. Tobin and W. Buiter, "Long-Run Effects of Fiscal and Monetary Policy on

     Aggregate Demand," in J.L. Stein, ed., Monetarism, Amsterdam 1976.

J. Tobin, "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After," Brookings Papers, No.1,

     1980, 19-71.
                                                                /
                                         FOOTNOTES

*Professor    of Economics, University of Virginia, and Visiting Professor, Carnegie-

Mellon University.      I am indebted to Albert Ando, Robert Barro, Alan Blirider,

 Karl Brunner, Carl Christ, Robert Hodrick, Bob Lucas, Allan Meltzer, and John

Whitaker for helpful comments.       Also, I am grateful for the financial support

 of the National Science Foundation (SES 70-15353).


11      Friedman's rule also requires that the government budget be balanced on

average.      For compact recent statements of the rule, see Robert Lucas (1980)

and Carl Christ (1979, p. 534).


        This list has deliberately been kept as short as possible, in order to

increase its discriminatory power.       Its two items correspond to those stressed

by Hahn (1980).      The discussion presumes a closed economy.

11      See, for example, the papers and comments in the volume edited by Jerome

Stein.      The NRH is closely related to the Brunner-Meltzer hypothesis that

"the economic system is stable."

!!;.I   See, for example, James Tobin.   The same is of course true for formu-

la tions involving a "non- inflationary ra te of unemployment."


~I      The condition is that the partial derivative of the aggregate demand func-

tion with respect to the bond stock be "large" in relation to l-'T', with 'T' =

marginal income tax rate.       But this condition is almost certainly invalid, be-

cause of substantial tax capitalization -- see p. 6 below.

§j
        If DM is a non-zero constant, then the current argument would be expressed

in terms of the bond-money ratio, rather than B.

II      It may be useful to think of r and   ~   in (2) as stationary equilibrium values

        of those variables.   Then the result implies local instability.
~/    In these functions,   n is the expected rate of inflation.    It is taken as

exogenous in most of the models under discussion; the effect of rational ex-

pectations does not seem to alter the results.


~/    In the Brunner-Meltzer system, the result will obtain with bond finance

(~   = 0)   since my argument implies that -- in their notation (p. 83)

e(y,SIO,AM) is small.


10/ I am deeply indebted to Albert Ando for calling to my attention the importance

of output growth.


11/ To see this, define m = M/Y, g     = G/Y, and write (1) as Om   + Db + (m + b) DY/Y   =

Pg + (1 - 1)rb - T/Y - 1P.      Then impose Friedman's rule by setting Dm   = 0 and
requiring g, 1, and T/Y to be constants.
