                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INVOLUNTARY TERMINATIONS UNDER EXPLICIT
                AND IMPLICIT EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS


                         James L. Medoff

                      Katharine G. Abraham

                      Working Paper No. 63I




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          February 1981




We greatly benefitted from a number of discussions with Robert Hall
concerning an earlier version of this study. Gregory Bialecki,
Nancy Earley, Jon Fay, Susan Johnson, and Martin Van Denburgh gave
invaluable assistance in carrying out the research to be discussed.
The comments and suggestions made by numerous individuals at
Chicago, Cornell, Harvard, International Institute of Management
(Berlin), Maryland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Princeton, Virginia Polytechnic
Institute, and Wisconsin were also most useful. The study was sup-
ported by a National Science Foundation Grant (DAR—7'8281o') to the
National Bureau. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies and project in Productivity. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper 11634
                                                            February 1981



                       Involuntary Terminations under Explicit
                          and Implicit Employment Contracts



                                       ABSTRACT



      This study investigates where and when last—in—first—out permanent

layoff policies seem to go hand in hand with compensation policies under

which the net value of senior workers appears to be less than that of their

junior peers. The investigation relies upon both the approximately 260 usable

responses to a survey we mailed out to a sample of U.S. firms and microdata

from the computerized personnel files of a major U.S. corporation. Our findings

for U.S. companies outside of agriculture and construction lead us to the

following three conclusions: (1) For most employees, it appears that protection

against job loss grows with seniority, although net value to the firm does not.

(2) While a very sizeable percentage of nonunion workers may be covered by

implicit employment contracts which give more protection against termination to

those with more seniority, a much higher percentage of workers covered by

collective   bargaining agreements seem to enjoy such protection; and (3) The
job protection afforded senior nonunion personnel, especially exempt employees,
appears to be less strong than that provided to union members,


                                                  Professor James L. Medoff
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Harvard University
                                                  Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                                  (617) 495—4209


                                                  Professor Katharine G. Abraham
                                                  Alfred P. Sloan School of
                                                    Management
                                                  Massachusetts Institute of
                                                    Technology
                                                  Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
                                                  (617)   253—2661
     At most U.S. work places, junior employees appear to be paid less

than the value of their current contribution, while senior employees

appear to be paid more.1 This phenomenon is consistent with the presence

of either explicit or implicit employment ctitract provisions designed to defer

earnings from early to later in the worklife.2 Contract provisions

under which compensation is deferred to late in the working years have

been hypothesized to be attractive to the parties involved because, for

one or more of a variety of possiblereasons,, workers can be offered any

given level of expected utility at a lower expected cost to the employer

than if wage equalled value marginal product at each point in time.3

An earnings provision of this sort could produce a positively—

sloped seniority—earnings profile even if productivity was constant or

decreased with tenure. Under the provision, employees with greater—than—

average company service are paid more than the value of their contribution

in return for having accepted earnings less than their contribution at the

start of their tenure.

     One   would expect that an explicit or implicit contract with a pay
provision like the one just discussed would also have a provision designed

to protect workers from being cheated out of the return promised for the

second half of their work1ves, At least in the U.S., the most common type

of provision providing this protection found in explicit (union) contracts

is one which calls for layoffs in inverse seniority order.4 But what goes

on in nonunion settings? How prevalent are implicit last—in—first—out

termination policies? Are they as binding in all states of nature (that is,

as "strong") as those which are found under unionism?

      In this paper, we assess the likely prevalence of implicit contract provisions

under which senior employees are protected against being laid of before junior

employees by studying whether, in the absence of a union contract, junior employees
                                   —2—



are sometimes terminated while senior employees keep their jobs, in spite

of the perceived net value of the senior employees being less than that of

their terminated junior compatriots.5 We also assess the likely "strength" of puta-

tive implicit contract provisions pertaining to the order of layoffs

by looking at outcomes in various states of nture.0


      In the first section, we summarize the large amount of evidence which

supports the proposition that junior employees in a wide variety of occupations

are typically paid less than their current value marginal product while their

senior co—workers are typically paid more. These studies strongly suggest that

schemes under which pay is deferred from early to later in the worklife are

the rule, not the exception, throughout the U.S. economy.

      In Section II, we lay out a sflp1e framework for discussing the role

an implicit contract provision pertaining to terminations can play in bring-

ing the ex post interests of the employer and his/her employees closer to-

gether. We then present evidence to support the argument that, in the absence

of any implicit contract provision governing terminations but given existing

wage and productivity profiles, employers would typically want to terminate

senior employees before junior employees. Thus, a last-in-first—out rule

could potentially play a key role in conditioning employees' permanent layoff

decisions. Finally, we discuss why a last—in—first—out layoff rule might

be the preferred approach to protecting employees' deferred earnings.

     Section III offers an empirical assessment of where and when last—in—

first—out termination policies do in fact protect potentially vulnerable senior
                                        —3--




 employees from losing their jobs when workforce cutbacks occur. This

 assessment relies upon both the approximately 260 usable responses to

 a survey we mailed out to a sanple of U.S. firms and microdata from the
                                                               7
 computerized personnel files of a major U.S. corporation. Our
                                                                    findings
 for U.S. companies outside of agriculture and construction lead us to

 the following three conclusions: (1) For most employee it appears

 that protection against job loss grows with seniority, although net value

 to the firm does not. (2) While a very sizeable percentage of nonunion

 workers may be covered by implicit employment contracts which give more pro—

 taction against termination to those with more seniority, a much higher percent-

 age of workers covered by collective bargaining agreements seem to en-oy      such protec—
 tion; and (3) The job protection afforded senior nonunion personnel, especially exemrt

 employees, appears to be less strong than that provided to union members

      In Section IV, we summarize the main conclusions of our analysis and

 offer some suggestions for future research.


I. Evidence on the Relationship of Tenure to Wages and Productivity

    Examination of available data reveals that, controlling for occupation

and industry, length of company service tends to be positively related to

wages. Previous studies have provided a large body of evidence which

strongly suggests that, again controlling for occupation and industry,

productivity bears either no relationship or a negative relationship to

length of service after a short initiation period. When juxtaposed, these

two sets of findings seem to imply that senior (junior) workers are indeed

typically paid more (less) than their value marginal product.
     One   source   of data on the relationship of tenure to rate of pay
                                  —4—




is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) conducted by researchers at the

University of Michigan. We estimated separate ln(hourly wage) equations for blue

collar workers and for managers and professionals using 1971 PSID data

and 1974 PSID data (a total of four separate samples). Our results

are presented in Appendix A. Controlling for 1—digit industry and 1—digit

occupation, those with less than 3 years of tenure earned between 13 and

20 percent less than those with 3 to 10 years tenure (coefficient

statistically significant in all four sanp1es) and those with more than

20 years of tenure earned between 10 and 12 percent more than those with

3 to 10 years of tenure (coeificient statistically significant in three
                   8
of four samples)


     While tenure appears to be positively related to earnings both among

blue collar workers and among managers and professionals, there is a great

deal of evidence which strongly suggests that in most occupations additional

service is not positively related to productivity. We have completed an

exhaustive search of the extant literature on the relationship between

an individual's tenure (or experience or age) and his/her productivity; all
                                                                              10
26 studies which we were able to locate are summarized in Appendix B. 9,

The large body of available evidence provides support for the following stylized

facts: (1) Among managers and professionals, employees who have greater—than—

average service typically perform less well than employees with similar assign-

ments who have less-than—average service (but are beyond the typically    -




short orientation period); and (2) Among hourly employees (beyond a normally even
shorter orientation period), seniority is usually unrelated to productivity among

those performing comparable work. When considered together with the evidence from the

PSID that wages have a strong positive relationship with tenure, what we know about

the relationship of productivity to tenure makes it seem likely that more (less)

senior employees are generally paid more. (less) than their value marginal product.
                                       —5—


     This conclusion might be criticized on the grounds that the wage results

and the productivity results we have compared do not really mesh insofar as

the two sets of findings were derived using different samples and arguably incompatible

methodologies. among the productivity studies we reviewed, those completed by

the authors and by their students (Nedoff 1977, Medoff and Abraham l980a and

forthcoming, Halasz 1980, and Yanker 1980) were designed specifically to test

whether the higher earnings of more senior employees could be justified on

the basis that the senior employees were better performers than junior employees

doing comparable work.

      At each of the four companies whose personnel data were analyzed in

our earlier papers (one airline and three manufacturing firms) approx-

imately 40 percent of the return to company service among white male exempt11

employees occurred within job grade levels. The central issue addressed in

these studies was whether this consistently substantial within—grade—level

return to seniority could be explained on the basis of more senior employees

being relatively more productive than less senior employees in the same grade

level.

     To answer this question, we constructed measures of relative within—grade—

level productivity based on performance evaluations for each white male exempt

employee at each of our four firms. Our underlying assumption was that white males in a

grade level who received higher performance ratings were relatively more productive than

comparable employees in the same grade level who received lower performance

ratings. This assumption seemed reasonable since, at each of the companies we

studied, jobs were grouped into grade levels on the basis of their importance
              12
and difficulty.    In each case, we found that while additional company service

was associated with being higher in the relevant within—grade—level salary

distribution, it was associated with   being   lower in the relevant within—grade--

level performance distribution.
                                  —6—



     Halasz (1980) applied the same methodology to data for a sample of nonunion

 production and warehouse employees. For this group, approximately half of

 the return to company service occurred within grade levels. While addiitonal

 company service beyond the mean amount was associated with a higher probability

 of being towards the top of one's within—grade—level salary distribution, it

 was associated with a lower probability of being towards the top of one's

 within—grade—level performance distribution. In Yanker's (1980) sample of

 blue collar union employees, approximately 80 percent of the total return to

 seniority occurred within departments; none of this within—deDartnent

 return could be explained by reference to measured productivity. Our earlier

 studies, the Halasz study and the Yanker study all indicate that senior

 employees tend to be overpaid relative to junior employees performing work
                                         13
 of comparable difficulty and importance.

      The aforementioned studies focus on within—assignment earnings differ-

entials. Medoff and Abraham (l980b) summarizes data collected with the

survey instrument discussed at length below14 which strongly suggests

that approximately 50 percent of our country's private sector nonagricultural

nonconstruction employees work in settings where senior employees are favored

substantially when promotion decisions are made.1 Hence, for this half of

the U.S. workforce, it appears that the piece of the total monetary return

to seniority which can be linked to senior employees having been promoted to

better—paying jobs than are held by otherwise comparable junior employees is to

a signficant extent a reward to seniority     se, rather than simply a reward

for higher productivity. Moreover, it should be noted that the 50 percent

figure estimates the percentage of the workforce employed where senior

employees seem to be favored substantially in promotion decisions; the

percentage working where senior employees are favored at all is likely to be

much greater. This is because in many settings senior employees can be
expected to have a significantly higher probability of being promoted

than their junior colleagues when the comparisons are limited to those

with the same productivity.16

       In sum, even when seniority independent of productivity is not

rewarded in promotion decisions, the evidence pertaining to within-grade

or within—job earnings differentials strongly suggests that, overall,

seniority p se is handsomely rewarded in most firms' compensation policies;

for the 50 percent or more of the labor force for which seniority in and of

itself seems to enhance promotion possibilities, this conclusion holds

afortiori. That is, it appears that the vast majority of the U.S. workforce

is employed where a significant fraction of earnings are deferred from early

to later in the worklife. Thus, it would seem that employees would seek

policies that would protect the interests of those whohav'ébeen "underpaid"

for some period and anticipate being "overpaid".

II.     Why We Night E ect to Find Last—In—First—Out Termination Provisions
        We begin this section by   offering a simple framework for discussing

how   an employer who faced given wage   profiles arid productivity profiles

might   make termination decisions and how an     implicit   contract provision
pertaining    to terminations might affect those decisions. Next, we argue

that available empirical evidence implies that in the absence of any

implicit contract provision pertaining to terminations, but given the

actual compensation and contribution structures, U.S. employers would

typically be more likely to terminate senior employees than junior employees.

Thus, last—in—first—out implicit contract provisions could potentially play

an    important role in conditioning firms' termination decisions, Finally,
we discuss why inverse—seniority—order termination policies might be the
method chosen for protecting employees' returns under the deferred compensation
schemes which we believe are common in     the   U.S. economy (as discussed in

Section I).
                                                   —8—




 The Simple Framework

              Let us define the "net value" of employee j to a firm about to

 terminate some workers (s. ) as follows:
                          it0
                                                   T
                                                                              i
              (')   sit o
                                            + t=t+l ejt (vjt —w )             ____
                              o         o                                         t—t
                                                                          (1+r)      o
                                                   T
                                        —                         1

                                  it0          t=t+l
                                                 o
                                                                 .t—t
                                                              (l+r)      o,


where v is the value marginal product of worker j in period t; w. is the

wage of j in t; T denotes the end of the firm's planning horizon;

e. is the probability that j would not have left the firm voluntarily in or

prior to t; r is the appropriate discount rate; c. represents the expected

 resent       value as of period t      of the cost to the firm of replacing j if he/she
were    to    leave in t; andp. represents the probability that j will quit or

voluntarily         retire from the firm in t.
        The first three terms in the expression for                   capture the expected

present value of any gap(s) between what j contributes to the firm and what j

is being paid in the current and in any relevant future period. The terms involving

c.'s reflect the fact that terminating those workers doing each affected job

who would have been most likely to quit or retire anyway will reduce the

firm's expected hiring and training costs below what they would have otherwise

been.

        A profit—maximizing firm which had to let some employees go would wish to

terminate employee 1 before employee 2 in period to if                                  with



        (2)
                    'jt0 =   't    + =t 0
                                              jt
                                             a.
                                                       1
                                                   (l+r)tto
                                          —9—


 where a. represents the expected value of the Costs (not reflected
                                                                          in s)
 to the firm in period t if it terminates j in to, such as Costs associated

 with current and prospective employees' reactions to j's termination or

 those associated with the severance pay received by j, and T again denotes

 the end of the firm's planning horizon.

        In determining the order of permanent layoffs, the firm would

 consider both the net value of each employee and the costs associated

with his/her termination. Therein lies the potential for an implicit contract

 provision which affects the a.'s. For example, a fiDm that was operating

under a last—in—first—out implicit contract provision might incur costs stem-

ming from reluctance of new employees to join the firm, bruised workforce
                                                                               morale,
and/or increased employee interest in unionization if it terminated senior employees

before junior employees.

       Assessing the existence and strength of implicit employment contracts

pertaining to order of involuntary terminations requires that we determine

the relationship between the s.of equation (1) and employee seniority. If

the 5jt is larger for senior workers, then an implicit contract provision

under which the costs of terminating rises with years of service would have

a definite role; it would give senior employees job security they would

not otherwise enjoy, given the existing wage and productivity profiles. If

the      did not decline with seniority, it would be impossible to test for

the existence of a last—in—first—out implicit contract provision; in this case,

we would not expect an employer to terminate senior workers first even

in the absence of an implicit contract provision proscribing such conduct.

Potential Vulnerability to Job Loss During a Crisis

       In   very bad states of nature, we can expect that the firm's discount

rate will be very high   (r-*-o) or,   to put it differently, that the firm's planning

horizon will be very short (T+t) and that the firm will not be replacing employees
                                        —10—


who voluntarily depart. In this scenario, an employer would want to be rid

of employee 1 before employee 2 if:



        (3) vlt —
                      w1 + ai     < v2 — w2 + a2.


Thus, in very bad states of nature, only the current wage, current productivity,

and current termination costs are likely to determine which employees a firm
              17
terminates.
        There are at least two good reasons to believe that the approximation

 r --    (T ÷   t)   is not unreasonable insofar as decisionmaking related to

 permanent layoffs is concerned. First, firms that find themselves cutting

 back their employment through permanent layoffs most typically are encoun—

 tering very difficult economic conditions. For such firms, doing well enough

 in the current period to survive into the next period is apt to be a very

 real consideration. Second, for the person actually charged with deciding

 which employees should be terminated, taking steps which increase profits

 in the current period is apt to seem particularly important. An exécütive who

 fails to produce immediate results may find his/her job on the line)8

        We believe we showed in Section I that the gap between current wages

 and current productivity is typically greater for senior employees than for

 junior employees in most occupation. Thus, v —           w    in

 above is apt to be smaller for senior than for junior employees. Since

 the approximation r-- (T ÷        t)   is likely to be quite reasonable when permanent

 layoffs are occuring, employment contract provisions affecting the a's in

 (3) in such a way that the current costs of terminating senior employees exceed

 the current costs of terminating junior employees could play an important

 role in conditioning firms'ex post termination decisions.
                                                        —11—


More Evidence Concerning Potential Vulnerability to Job—Loss

       A good argument can be made for believing that those employees valued least by the

firm   and,   hence, potentially most vulnerable to job loss in the absence of any contract

provision governing terminations are the same employees whose voluntary departures would

be least regretted by the firm. We can write the firni's net loss from j                        quitting    in

t(d.) as:

       '(4/      ,jt ° =s.jt °
                d.                   +
                                              =   t°
                                                       aJ ___
                                                          (i+r)         o


where the a. terms capture the indirect costs related to other current

and prospective future employee's reactions to employee j's quit

which are incurred by the firm in period t                     if   j   departs   in period to. The

 a      terms are intended to pick up costs associated with such things as

 change in workforce morale, or change in ability to recruit desirable employees,

 resulting from js "voluntary" separation.


                T
                '
                         ,
                                     1
         If          a
                             jt   ________    -
                                                  is   the same for all employees,        s will
                                  (l+r)   o                                                -o
be greater than 52t               (employee 1 will have a higher net value than employee 2)

whenever di is gr:ater than d2t (that is, whenever employee l's quit is

more regretted than employee 2's quit). There is no good a priori reason
                                                                                      -

                      T     '
                                   1
for believing that        a              should be systeioatically related to
                     tt        (l+r)  o
seniority. On the one hand, quits of long service employees might lower workforce

morale. On the other hand, by opening up promotion possibilities, voluntary :.

separations    of senior employees would most likely enhance employee's perceptions

of how quickly they might get ahead at the firm.

       If we accept the seemingly reasonable assumption that                                        1
                                                                                           a (l+r) —    o
                                                                                                -

is not associated with seniority, evidence that senior workers' quits

were less likely to be regretted than junior workers' quits would indicate that the
                                        —12—



 perceived net value relevant for ex post termination decisions is less for senior

 employees than for their junior compatriots. This would mean that an

 implicit contract provision affecting the a.'s of     (2)   above in such a way
 that   the present value of the costs associated with terminating a senior
 employee exceeded the present value of the costs associated with terminating
a   junior employee could play an important role in influencing firms'

 cxj      termination decisions.
         From 1971   to 1976, Company C collected data which allowed us to

aDproximate   relative dJt
                         's for all exempt employees in a civen rade. Duriric!
                                          -


 this   period, supervisors at Company C were asked to label the quits of their

 exempt subordinates as "regretted," "nonregretted," or "encouraged." In the

 1973 to 1975 period (the years to be analyzed below), among white male exempt

 employees (the group to be studied), 68 percent of all quits were regretted,

 18 percent were nonregretted, and 15 percent were encouraged. It seems

 reasonable to assume that employees whose departure was
                                                              "regretted" had d.'s
larger than the d.'s of employees whose departure was "nonregretted" or
tencouraged" 19

        While it is possible to estimate the effects of various emtloyee

characteristics on the extent to which qitters' departures ire regretted,

these estimated effects could well represent biased estimates of the

relationships between the characteristics and degree of regret over iuit

for the company's workforce as a whole. Given the way the U.S. labor

market for managerial and professional
                                          employees saci- to operate, we were concerned
that. the partial correlation between value to the firm and
                                                            company service would
be more positive (or equivalently less negative) for Company C's quitters
                                      -13-




than for Company C's entire exempt population. If this were the case,

simple estimates of the relationship between supervisors' degree of regret

over quits and years of company service, using data for a sample of auitters,

would understate the extent to which the departure of the typical employee

with more—than—average service would be less regretted than the departure

of the typical employee with below—average service.


         The potential importance of sample selection bias of the tyne we are

considering was raised in the influential piece by Heckman (1976). A maximum

likelihood procedure to deal with sample selection bias (also providing

consistent standard errors;, which Heckman's Mills' ratio nrocedure does

not) was developed and cliscissed by Criliches, Hall and Hausman                  (1978), We

modified this maximum likelihood procedure to deal with sample seletirri

bias   when the dependent variable in the equation                 of concern is dichotomous

("quit   regretted" versus "quit not regretted") rather than continuous
and   computed joint maximum likelihood estimates of:                (1) 3, the vector of

coefficients in a probit equation with quit/not quit as the dependent variable;


and (2)      ,   the vector of coefficients in a probit equation with quit regretted!

not regetted         the dependent yrJ,b1e, Th.e ec's in the quit equation and jn

the regret equation were assumed to be distributed bivariate normal,

B(c1, a2, p), where c51 is the standard deviation of the error in the quit

equation, ci is the standard deviation of the error in the regret equation

and p is the correlation between the errors in the two equations.

             The likelihood for an observation on a person who did not quit

can be written:

       (4)       1            -   exp {-
                                             (
                                                 i.   }   dy
                                                               1
                                                     —14-


 the likelihood for an observation on a person who quit and was regretted

 can be written as:



         (5)            1
                _____________________                  r
                                                      -I
                                                                           r
                                                                     — expL—       ___) irY2
                  2a12v  /
                               i—p
                                     2           —         —                       2(1—p   )   'a I   '




                     () —           Y Y
                 + Y
                      0-
                           2
                                   2P((
                                    a    1
                                             a
                                             2
                                                 ]    -
                                                           dy1dy


 and the likelihood for an observation on a person who quit and wa not

 regretted can be written:



                                                                xl                             Y2
          (6)                  1
                                                      f     -
                                                                I    -   exp
                                                                               r    1

                                                                                   2(l-p
                     2na1a22

                 +             -
                     (2            2p    12) I } dydy2
                      a2                 a1 a2
 where          is the vector of independent variables included
                                                                                        in the quit equation
and        is the vector of independent variables included
                                                                                    in the regret equation.
                                                                                         20
Neither a1 nor 0-2 is identified; we set both equal to i.



         Table 1 presents estimates of the coefficients from a simple

probit regret equation and of the coefficients estimated for the regret

equation using the maximum likelihood technique just described. The simple

probit equation coefficient point estimates suggest a declining relation-

ship between probability of a quit being regretted and tenure.                                 However, as
discussed above, these estimates are likely to be affected by sample

selection bias.
                                           —15—


            The maximum likelihood coefficient estimates more strongly indicate a

 negative relationship between probability of a quit being regretted and tenure.

 The maximum likelihood results imply that potential quits of those with

 more than 20 years tenure are significantly less likely to be regretted

 than potential quits of those with less than 10 years of tenure. The

 coefficient on the 10 to 20 years of tenure dummy suggests that potential

 quits of persons in this company service group are less likely to be

 regretted than potential quits of persons with less service; however, the

 relevant estimated coefficient is not
                                              statistically significant1

            If among all exempt employees perforaing comparable work,
  T     ,         1
                         is unrelated to seniority and supervisor's coding
        jt(1+r)t_to
 of quits as "regretted"      or otherwise accurately captures the relative size
of the      d.'s of equation (4), then these results have the important implication

that the perceived net value relevant for termination decisions of the most

senior (those with more than 20 years of company service) exempt employees

in any grade level is less than the perceived net value relevant for ex post term-

ination decisions of the least senior (those with less than 10 years of service)

exempt employees in the same grade. This means that if an implicit contract

provision under which the present value of the costs of terminating an

employee is positively related to the employee's company service is

operative at Company C, the relationship of seniority to probability of

termination among Company C's exempt employees may look quite different

than it would in the absence of such a provision, all else the same.22


Why   Last-In-First-Out Layoff Rules?
      Thus far in this section     ,   we have argued that, given existing wage

and productivity profiles, a last—in—first—out Implicit contract provision

which affected the relative losses to the firm associated with terminations
                                        —16—


of   junior versus senior employees could play an important role in condition-

ing firms' termination decisions. We have not yet discussed why a last—in—

first—out   rule might be the method actually chosn for protecting employees'
 rights to their deferred compensation. However, it must be recognized that this
 rule is only one of a set of possible mechanis for protecting employees'
deferred earnings. For example, one might observe any of the following:

a severance pay scheme under which all terminated employees were given the

present value of the return due to them; a rule under which permanent layoffs

were forbidden; or a policy under which the probability of termination would

be inversely related to the 'present value of the amount o-f 'py deferred.

        If we allow for administrative costs, each of these protection

mechanisms has strengths and each has weaknesses. While we cannot ?proveI!

that a last—in—2irst—out rule would be the one chosen from the feasible set,

this   rule seems quite appealing for three princial reasons: (1) A policy
under which terminations   are by inverse seniority   should discourage employers
from   using permanent layoffs, since those let go first would have to be

junior employees who on average contribute the most relative to what they are

paid. (2) Since permanent layoffs usually affect only a small percentage

of a firm's work force, terminating employees in inverse seniority order would

generally protect those employees who are owed the greatest amount, namely

those who have just reached the point where their pay equals their current

contribution and who are looking ahead to a period of pay greater than

current contribution.      (3) A last—in—first—out rule can be administered,

monitored, and (if necessary) justified at low Cost.

      While there is much evidence that employment practices are different
                                                                        23
for unionized workers than for otherwise comparable workers who are not,

it still seems most useful to examine collective bargaining agreements in deriving

priors about the nature of putative implicit contracts. If virtually all explicit ernpl'iy—

ment contracts seemed to have a given provision, we would expect that a large fraction of
                                   —17—



implicit employment contracts would have the same provision, unless we had some

particular reason for believing the opposite. This is both because the

relevant production functions and distributions of tastes are not likely to

be completely different in union and nonunion firms and because there

appears to be some spillover of practices from union to nonunion settings,

presumably as a result of the "threat" of unionism.

      Under nearly all collective bargaining agreements in the U.S.,

management has the right to determine the number of employees to be terminated.

There are, however, two sets of provisions which are likely to affect

termination decisions. One set deals with the order of terminations and the

other set deals with severance payments to those terminated.

      Union contracts typically state that junior workers must be laid off before

senior workers. The most recent relevant study of contract provisions was a BLS

analysis of major contracts (those covering 1,000 or more employees) in effect in 1970—

1971. According to the BLS report, 81 percent of the major contract work force

was covered by some type of layoff provision. Over two—thirds of the 19

percent not covered by any layoff provision were construction workers; of all

the construction workers under major contracts, only 6 percent were covered by

any type of layoff provision. Examination of a sample of those contracts which

contained layoff provisions showed seniority to be the "sole" or "primary"

factor in determining layoff rights for 78 percent of the workers covered by

contracts in the sample, exclusive of those workers covered by contracts in

which the issue was "subject to local negotiationb."24

      While last—in—first—out layoff provisions appear to have been found

in the vast majority of union contracts since the advent of industrial unionism,
                                                           25
severance pay provisions are a relatively new phenomenon. The3e provisions,

under which terminated employees are normally given a Limp—sum reward based

on their years of service and wage at separation, have grown in importance

substantially during the past twenty—five years. Despite this growth,

only 37 percent of the 1978 major contract workforce was   covered   by
                                          —18—
               26
 these plans. Moreover, it should also be noted that a significant

 fraction of the employees covered by severance pay provisions are also

 covered by a provision stating that layoffs must be by inverse order
                  27
 of seniority.

       It appears that in most unionized firms the interests of senior

 employees are protected primarily by last—in—first—out layoff policies.

 It therefore seems sensible to expect to find such policies in nonunion

settings. However, there are two key reasons why these provisions might

be less prevalent and strong in the absence of a union. First, the

weights attached to a given set of preferences are likely to he

significantly different under unionism; in particular, senior

employees can be expected to have much more power relative to their junior

co—workers under unionism.28 Second, the fact that implicit contract pro-

visions pertaining to the order of terminations are not enforceable under U.S.

law (which is not the case for explicit provisions) is likely to affect the

way in which senior employees' interests are supposed to be protected in

nonunion firms and the extent to which this expected protection is in fact
             29
delivered.

      Despite these potentially important reasons for union—nonunion

differences, a priori logic and union contracts strongly suggest that if

implicit contracts exist, they are very likely to have last—in—first—out

termination provisions accompanying the compensation provisions they would
seem to have.

ll• On the Likely Prevalence and Strength of Implicit
      Last—In—First—Out Layoff Provisions

        In this section, we first present the results from our survey of

  U.S. firms dealing with their policies concerning permanent layoffs. We

  then analyze the terminations of a firm which we have been studying for a

  number of years, which in one of these years happened to have a massive

  reduction    in its exempt workforce.
                                  —19—



Results from Our Employer Survey Pertaining to Involuntary Terminations

      Evidence used to determine the existence of implicit contract

provisions concerning the order of terminations should meet two criteria.

First, it should reflect the pattern of terminations on a firm—by--firm basis.

When data which do not link individuals to particular enterprises

are used, it is impossible to tell whether any particular termination

is one of a small number at many firms or one in a major cutback

 at one firm. This is important because if a weak implicit contract were

 operative at most firms, then we would expect senior workers to be more likely

 to be terminated in major upheavals. A reasonable guess is that a

high overall layoff rate is more likely to be reflecting major staff reductions

at the relevant f:irms than a low layoff rate, but we cannot be sure.

Differences in the distribution across tenure categories of those employed

at firms experiencing permanent layoffs and those employed at firms not

terminating employees could also lead to misleading results. These factors

prevented the use of some data sets which at first blush seemed to be

obvious sources, namely the PSID and the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS),

Second, the evidence should reflect the arrangements of a sufficiently

large number of firms to allow us to generalize about how permanent layoff

decisions are typically made. To generate the requisite data on the

policies governing terminations among various employee groups at different

firms, we developed and mailed out the employer survey which is reproduced

in Appendix C.
                                   —20—




      The original sample of firms which were to be sent our survey consisted

  of 1000 randomly selected companies from the 1979 edition of Standard

  and Poor's Register, 200 randomly selected companies from the 1977 News Front

 list of the 1,000 largest manufacturing firms and 50 randomly selected

 companies from the l977 News F'ront list of the next 2,000 largest. 30 We chose to

 oversample manufacturing by adding companies from theNews Front lists to our

 Standard and Poor's sample of firms because of the very large fraction of the

 economy—wide variation in employment which occurs in this sector. After those

 firms from the 1979 Standard and Poor's Register which were foreign based, those

 to whom mail was not deliverable at the address given in the 1979 Register,

 those not included in the 1980 Register, and those in the News Front sampi that

 were also in the Standard and Poor's sample were deleted, we were left with a

 mailing list of 884 Standard and Poor's fixtms plus 24lNews Front firms.


     Whenever possible, we mailed our survey to that individual at each firm

who appeared to be in charge of personnel matters (e.g, the Executive Vice

President for Personnel, the Personnel Director or the Industrial Relations

Vice President). In cases where no such indiviudal's name could be obtained,

the letter was sent to the Chief Executive Officer of the corporation. The

recipient of the letter was told "Since your firm is part of a
                                                                 scientifically
selected sample, it is crucial that we receive a response to this very short

questionnaire from you or a colleague who makes decisions concerning the

management of human resources." If no response was received from a firm within

a month after our first request was mailed, a second request was sent to the

original contact.
                                    —21—




     Of the 1125 surveys we mailed out, 2 percent were not deliverable as

addressed; 3 percent were sent back to us by firms that did not satisfy

the criteria specified for participation in the survey; 3 percent

were returned with a refusal; 6 percent were completed and returned but

could not be used because of data problems; 27 percent were otherwise

acceptable but could not be used because they were filled out by respondents

who had no experience with permanent layoffs; and 23 percent were acceptably

completed by respondents who had experience with permanent layQffs. Only

35 percent of those on our mailing list were unaccounted for.

     The persons who actually replied to our survey tended to be high—level

corporate executives. Of the 561 people who returned accurately completed survey

forms to us, 7 percent were Chairmen, 29 percent were Presidents, 27 percent

were Vice Presidents, 14 percent were Directors, 11 percent were Managers,

and 12 percent held other titles.

     The most important item on the survey is Question 10.


     In the event of a reduction in the workforce, would one of the
     senior employees in [the largest group of employees who are
     affected by your decisions concerning the management ot human
     resources ever be involuntarily terminated, that is, laid off
     permanently against his or her will, in place of a junior
     employee?

    i—    Yes, if the junior employee was considered a better
    L.    performer than the senior employee
    ri    Yes, if the junior employee was considered a significantly
    U     better   performer than the senior employee.

          No, never.
                                       —22—




         The emplo\'ee group referred to   could   con.s.L of   houcLy   employees, non—exempt
 salaried   employees or exempt employees. We also asked whether or not a majority

 of those in the affected employee group were covered by a collective bargaining

 agreement, whether permanent layoffs had ever been used to reduce the size of

 the affected employee group, and, if the previous question was answered "yes",

 what proportion of the affected employee group had been terminated in the most

recent two permanent layoffs. In addition, we collected the respondent's

address (from which we created a region variable), number of people employed

by the firm   ('hic.h in ln units became our size—of—firm measure),       and information

on products produced by the firm (from which we constructed industry dummies).

         Table 2 summarizes   the responses to our question regarding whether a
junior   employee would ever be involuntarily terminated in place of a senior

employee. In discussing the table, we focus on the economy—wide (except for

agriculture and construction) Standard and Poor's sample. In this sample, the

vast majority of the responses for nonunion employee groups indicated either

that a senior employee would have to be a giificantly worse performer than a

junior employee to be laid off first or that a senior employee would never be

laid off before a junior employee; the relevant percentages are 76 percent of

nonunion hourly responses, 78 percent of non—exempt salaried responses, and

44 percent of exempt responses. If those making permanent layoff decisions

typically use high discount rates (which is not unreasonable as explained above) anu

if the senior nonunion employees referred to by each respondent typically earn more
                                          —23--




   than junior nonunion employees referred to by the saue respondents

   (as can be expected), then these data are supportive of the claim that

  approximately 70 percent of the nonunion employees in this country (outside

  of agriculture and construction) are covered by an implicit contract
                                                                           31
  provision which affords extra protection against job loss to senior workers.


        While the frequencies in Table 2 are quite consistent with the

 assertion that implicit contract provisions concerning the order of

 involuntary terminations are not uncommon, they also indicate
                                                                  clearly
 that senior workers are most likely to be protected against losing their

 jobs prior to junior workers where there is a collective bargaining

 agreement. Even when we limit our comparison to hourly employees, we

 observe that while almost 76 percent of the respondents discussing non-

 union hourlies indicated that a senior employee would not be terminated

 before a junior employee unless the junior employee was at least a

 significantly better performer (and at some firms would never be terminated

before a junior employee) almost 95 percent of the responses Dertaining to

union hourlies fell into this category. This difference is
                                                                statistically
significant at the .01 level.

        Are some groups of nonunion employees more likely than others to be

covered by strong implicit contract provisions under which a firm would

never   terminate   a senior employee prior to his/her junio.r co—worker? Our

survey results imply that this type of strong protection is much more prevalent

for nonunion hourly employees than for nonunion salaried employees. In the

Standard and Poor's sample, almost 28 percent of the responses for nonunion

hourly employees, but fewer than 6 percent of those for nonexempt salaried

employees and none of those for exempt employees, indicated that a senior

employee would never be terminated before a junior employee. Both hourly

versus salaried differences are significant at the .01 level.
                                       —24—



        Our survey results also imply that very strong protection, such

that a senior employee would never be permanently laid off before a

junior employee, is very much more prevalent under unionisli. Even when

only hourly employees are considered, the responses from the Standard and

Poor's sample suggest that 68 percent of union hourly employees (outside

agriculture and construction) work in settings where the senior worker

would never be let go before a junior worker; the comparable figure

for nonunion hourly workers, as reported above, is 28 percent. This

difference is significant at the .01 level.

       The responses to our employer survey can also be used to address

 the following questions, which seem most pertinent to the issues at hand:

 Can the apparent union—nonunion differential in the extent of protection

 against involuntary termination afforded senior hourly employees be explained

 solely in terms of the types of settings in which unions are likely to

 exist? How is the union—nonunion differential in the extent of this protection

 related to the fraction of the relevant workforce permanently laid off

 (which can be assumed to mirror, albeit very imperfectly, the ex post costs

 inoived in providing      the insurance under consideration)?   Is the operat ion of
 a   last—in—first—out   permanent layoff policy for exempt employees, among whom

 the overpayment (underpayment) of senior (junior) employees seems to be

 especially large, likely to depend to a much greater extent on the economic

climate than it does for other nonunion
                                              employees? To address these questions,
we combined the Standard and Poor's and News Front samples and fit the

models whose key parameter estimates are presented in Table 3.
                                      —25—


           Models 1 and 2 in Table 3 indicate that the probability that a senior

employee might be permanently laid off if a junior employee was a betrer

performer is significantly and substantially higher for employees not

covered by a collective bargaining agreement than for covered employees, even

when   firm   size, broad industry and geograpli-ic region (ir Noc!1 1)   or the-e
 same factors plus size of largest permanent layoff (jjc-jrjj       2).ne
controlled for. The estimated coefficients in Model I (Model 2)

imply    that,at the total sample mean values of the other dependent

variables, the probability that a senior hourly worker covered by

a collective bargaining agreement might be laid off before a better—

performing junior co—worker is .059 (.057). For a senior hourly worker

not covered by a collective bargaining agreemént,theorregondjng
                                                                           prhability
is .156 (.148); for a senior salaried non—exempt employee, .226 (.253); and

for a senior exempt employee, .419 (.417).

              It is interèsing tha, at least in model 1, large firms anear

to be significantly less likely to terminate senior employees ahead of

junior employees who are better performers. One very tentative interpret-

 ation of the negative coefficient on ln(number of persons emDloyed by the

 firm)   might   be that large firms incur greater costs if they violate an

 implicit contract provision concerning order of termination because their

acts aremorevisible. If the fraction laid off in a firm's largest

permanent layoff can be considered an acceptable proxy for the severity

of   the worst economic conditions a firm has faced, the significant
positive coefficient on that variable suggests that, as expected, firms
that have faced     very bad   economic conditions are less likely to have
protected      senior employees from being terminated before junior employees

who are better performers.
                               —26—

     Model 3, by including interactions of employee groups with size of

largest layoff, provides a modicum of evidence about the strength of

implicit contracts by examining the extent to which they seem to protect

senior workers as economic conditions, imperfectly measured, worsen.

While the exempt employee interaction coefficient just misses statistical

significance, the point estimate suggests that senior exempt employees are

substantially more likely than hourly employees covered by a collective

bargaining agreement to become increasingly vulnerable when economic conditions

worsen. While our estimated coefficients are not precise, they are consistent

with the claim that implicit contract provisions protecting senior exempt

employees? jobs are weaker than implicit contract provisions rotecting the

jobs of other nonunion employees.

     As discussed above, one can also try to assess the prevalence of strong

contract provisions concerning the order of terminations by looking at the

pattern of "no never" responses to our question about whether senior employees

would be permanently laid off before junior employees. We should perhaps

mention that when we pooled the Standard and Poor's and News Front responses

for hourly employees and fit a probit model whfch had a dependent variable

equal to 1 if a senior worker would never be permanently laid off before a

junior worker and which controlled (as in Table 3) for major industry, region,

firm size, and size of downturn we found that the probability of having this

very strong type of senior worker protection was substantially (and significantly)

greater under explicit union contracts. At the total sample means the

probabilities were .627    for those covered by collective bargaining agreements

and .323 for those not covered.
                                   —27--


 Analysis   of Exempt   Worforce   Reduction at

        The cross—sectional data from the survey was used to draw inferences about how

 an individual firm with the relevant implicit contract provision might change

 its order of layoffs in response to changes in economic conditions.    However,
 only longitudinal data can demonstrate explicitly how patterns of involuntary

 terminations vary with economic conditions under any one trovision. To

 this end, we examined the changing patterns of permanent layoffs among the

 exempt employees at a major U.S. corporation which we have studied over an

 extended period. This examination is especially rich since in one of the years

 during which we happened to be analyzing the company, it terminated a very

 oihstantlai   fract ion of its exempt workforc,

            The models presented in Table 4       describe

the pattern of involuntary terminations among white male managerial and
professional employees at Company B's corporate headquarters during a recent
year in which the termination rate was normal and during the

following six months in which the termination rate was extremely high. The

contrast between th t-io periods is striking. In the normal—layoff period, exmDt

employees with greater—than--average service were no more or perhaps less likely to be

involuntarily terminated than exempt employees with less—than—average

service. In the high—layoff period, probability of being involuntarily

terminated was strongly and positively related to seniority. These results are con-

sistent with the following two claims: '(1) Under normal circumstances, the jobs of

senior exempt employees at Company B are protected by an implicit contract

provision regarding terminations; and (2) This implicit provision, if it in fact

exists, is not strong enough to protect senior exempt mpioyèe jobs In the event of

a major cutback. That is, the findings are consistent with the assertion   that a weak
implicit c,ntract proision protects the jobs of B's senior exempt employees.

       Company B's net income ns more than L percent cwer      n eal termr
in   calandar year t than in calendar year t—l. During the first halt of
                                  -2 8—

 calendar year t + 1, a new chief executive officer took charge of the
                                                                         company
 and decided that, in light of the firm's econoric position, its work force

 should be substantially trimmed. No change in the basic nature of the enter-

 prise was contemplated; rather, manpower requireents were to be reduced

 through consolidati3n of operations, particularly at the corporate head--

 quarters level. Those responsible for deciding who should be terminated

 were instructed that past performance and ability to perform in the revised

 organization were the basic factors they ought to consider in drawing

 up their list. Only 2.2 percent of the white males who had held exempt

 positions at Company B headquarters as of May 31 of year t were involuntarily

 terminated during the following year. In contrast, 12.3 percent of the

 white males who had held exempt positons at Company B headquarters as of May

31 of year t + 1 were involuntarily terminated during the subsequent

six months and l77 percent were notified that they were on the list

of those to be severed as part of the consolidation process initiated

by the new chief executive officer.

     Table   presents two sets of models for assessing the effect of

tenure on the probability of a white male holding an exempt position

at Company B headquarters losing his job, one set with no grade level

dummies included (quations 1, 3 and 5) and one set including grade

level dummies (Equations 2,4 and 6). One of our earlier studies (Medoff

and Abraham l980a) focused on the within—grade—level relation-

ships between company service and relative salary and between company

service and relative performance for exempt employees at Company B, As

discussed in Section I, none of the substantial within—grade—level earnings advantage

associated with company service could be explained by the better performance

of long tenure employees. Thus, we have especially good reason to

believe that the net value of those Company B exempt employees in any r&de level

who have more service is substantially below that of those in the same grade

level who have less service.
                                      -.29-.




     Equations 1 and 2 indicate that in the lowterniination neriocl fror

June 1 of year t to Nay 31 of year t      + 1,   long—service employees were

protected from being involuntarily terminated. None of the estimated

tenure dummy coefficients in either the first or second model (one with no grade

level dummies and the other controlling for grade level) is significantly

different from zero. The point estimates suggest that, all else the

same, employees with more than 10 years of service were less likely to

be terminated than eITlployees with 3 to 10 years service. These results,

in conjunction with the findings pertaining to performance versus pay for

less senior and for more senior employees discussed
                                                           above, are consistent
with the claim than an implicit employmnnt contract provision concerning the order

of involuntary terminations covers the relevant group of employees at Company B.

     Equations 3 and 4 analyze the probability of actually having been

laid off between June 1 and November 30 of year t + 1 and Equations 5 and 6

focus on the probability of being chosen to be terminated during the same

period. These four equations show a very different pattern than Equations 1 and 2.

Whether or not grade level is held constant, there is a strong positive association

between company service and probability of either actual or scheduled tennination,

which is exactly what would be expected if the company made its termination decisions

on a purelymeritocratic or (current) net value basis. The Equation 3 coefficient

estimates imply that employees with more than 30 years of service, but otherwise

average characteristics, are 3.56 times as likely to be laid off as employees

with 3 to 10 years; the Equation 4 coefficient
                                                     estimates, that they are 4.59
times as likely; the 1'quation 5 coefficient estimates, that they are 3.25 times

as likely; and the Equation 6 coefficient estimates, that they are 3.89 times

as likely. We are led to conclude that if any implicit contract provision

protects the   jobs   of senior exempt employees at Company B, it is a weak one.
                                                                                   32
                                      —30--




IV. Conclusions and Directions

        In the preceding pages, we have investigated where and when last—in—first—

out permanent layoff policies seem to go hand in hand with compensation policies

under which the net value of senior workers appears to be less than that of their

junior peers.

        Our investigation yielded three seemingly important findings about

employment relationships in the U.S. First, roughly 70 percent of our country's non-

union workforce (outside of agriculture and construction) appears to be employed where

last—in-first—out termination policies go hand in hand with compensation policies

under which employees with less—than—average company service are paid below the value of

their   current contribution and those with greater—than—average service are paid above
it. Second, the probability that a group of workers is covered by a policy under
which protection against job loss grows with company service even   though net value

to the firm does not is greater under unionism, even when we limit the comparison

to hourly employees in the same broad industry and region working for similar—

sized companies. Overall, approximately 95 percent of union members outside of

agriculture and   construction work under such a policy. Taken together, our
figures for nonunion employees   and for union employees imply tha. about 80
                                                                                       -




percent of our country's total (nonagricultural, nonconstruction) wotkforce
work in settings where senior employees receive extra protection against job

loss. Third, the provisions under which job security is supposed to increase

with seniority appear to be "stronger" when part of a collective bargaining

contract; that is, even when we examine (roughly) comparable employees, the probability

that a senior worker would ever be terminated (no matter how bad the economic conditions)
                                     —31—




 before his/her junior co—worker appears to be substantially

 lower under unionism. While senior nonunion employees have some

 protection against losing their jobs prior to their junior colleagues,

 it seems much less likely to be "crisisproof" than that
                                                             enjoyed by senior
 union members.

       It is our belief that, for better or worse, our research has raised

 as many questions for enterprising empiricists as it has answered: Can

 the other necessary conditions required for the existence of weak implicit

 contract provisions concerning the order of permanent job losses be shown to

hold? How can we explain the apparent union—nonunion
                                                         differential, even among

comparable groups of employees, in the extent to which firms have last—in—f irst—

out permanent layoff procedures in general and those which are strong in

particular? Is the ordering by seniority of permanent layoffs observed among

unionized workers closer to an "efficient" ordering than what is observed in

nonunion settings?      What is it about a trade union that moves collective

bargaining contracts closer to or further away from an etficient. employment

contract ?

      These    questions indicate, at least to us, that the empirical, research
on implicit employment contracts, as on most issues currently being
discussed by economists, has lagged far behind the theoretical work. The
questions    themselves suggest that to close this gap effort must be channeled

in two directions: First, more data onhow individuals' utility and firms' productivity

are affected by the events about which we do much theorizing must be collected.

Second, more information about the institutions which seem to greatly condition

economic outcomes must be generated. We believe that as this evidence

is collected, the real answers to the questions raised here and elsewhere

in our discipline will be forthcoming.
                                     32

                             Footnotes



1The evidence for this claim is presented in section I below.


2Our use of the term "implicit contract" parallels Baily's (1974) and Azariadis'

 (1975) use of the term in another context.


3Becker and Stigler (1974) and Lazear (1979) develop a line of argument

in which deterrence of worker cheating motivates entrance into this sort

of implicit contract. Salop and Salop (1976) and Viscusi (1978) suggest

that steep wage profiles might serve as a self—selection device. A

number of other possible hypotheses are outlined in Medoff and Abraham

(1980a) and Halasz (1980).


4Section II below provides support for this claim.



5To establish the existence of an implicit contract provision pertaining

 to the order of permanent layoffs, one would want to show that each of

 the following three conditions was satisfied. First, the firm's decision

 to enter into the implicit contract which has the provision should be

 based on an ex ante profit maximizing calculus. This condition merely

 makes our use of the term "implicit contract" consistent with other authors'

 use of the term in other contexts. Second, there should be at least some

 states of the world such that, in the absence of any implicit contract

 provision concerning the order of terminations, but all else the same, the

 firm could earn higher profits by laying off a different set of workers

 than the implicit contract would say should be laid off. Otherwise, there

 would be no point in having the implicit termination provision. Third,

 both the firm and its employees should know what the terms of the contract

 provision are and whether those terms are being adhered to. The second of

 these necessary conditions ii-; the only one anlayzed in this study.
                                 —33—

 61t should perhaps be emphasized that to the extent that the strength of an

     implicit contract provision concerning order of layoffs can be observed,

     it will reflect both the terms of the relevant contract and the degree to

     which those terms are adhered to. In this paper, we make no effort to

     separate out the roles played by the terms of implicit contracts and by

     adherence to those terms.


 7For a more detailed discussion of our survey methodology and results,

     see Medoff and Abraham (l980c).


 8Adding controls for education, region, and pre—company experience did not

     appreciably affect these findings. We also estimated separate ln (wage)

     regressions for union and nonunion blue collar workers. The   results
     of this estimation indicate that while the earnings ratio of those with

     more than 20 years tenure to those with 3 to 10 years was smaller under

     unionismin 1971, it was larger under unionism in 1974.

 9
 Because we felt it was important to make our review of relevant work

 as comprehensive as possible, we decided to include in Appendix B studies

 which focused on the relationships of age to productivity and experiance

 to productivity as well as those which looked at the relationship of

 length of service to productivity. In all of the data sets analyzed for

 this paper (Company C's exempt employee data, the PSID data and Company

 B's exempt employee data), both age and experience were highly correlated

 with tenure. It would be surprising if the relationship of tenure to productivity

 for those groups covered by the age and experience studies differed

 greatly from the reported relationship of age or experience to productivity.

10
 The criterion that the unit of observation be an individual has led

 us to exclude a number of studies which examine aggregate data.

 We know of several educational production function studies which

 relate the average test scores of groups of students to their teachers'

 average experience; all of them provide results which imply
                                       —34--

     a flat or negative relationship between teachers' "productivity" and

     their experience after a couple of years of teaching. The one relevant

     non—educational study that we know of was an analysis of 100

     unionized grocery stores done by Walter A. Fogel (1964); this research

     concluded that unit labor costs were higher in those stores with more

     senior personnel, which implies that senior grocery store employees

     were not sufficiently more productive than junior grocery store employees

     to compensate for their higher salaries.


     Exempt employees are those in executive, administrative, professional

     or outside sales jobs and exempt from the overtime provisions of the

     Fair Labor Standards and Walsh—Healy Acts.

12
     See Medoff and Abraham (1980a and forthcoming) for a more thorough

     defense of the proposition that performance ratings are valid indicators

     of relative productivity.


        should be noted that none of these results provide unbiased estimates

     of the effect of company service on either relative pay or relative

     productivity. This is because more able individuals are most likely promoted

     more rapidly than otherwise similar but less able individuals, especially among exempt

     employees (see Medoff and Abraham l980b). Thus, even if in any workforce

 considered as a whole, service was positively related to value marginal product,

 within a grade level where merit played some role in. promotions, one would expect long-

 er—service employees to be less able than shorter—service employees and as a result to

 perform no better. However, if an individual's pay equalled his value marginal product

 at each point in time, seniority should also have a non—positive partial relationshin

 to within—grade—level salary; these results show that it does not. Thus, we can conclude

 that senior employees in the relevant populations are most likely paid more than their

 value marginal product.



 14The instrument itself is presented in Appendix C below.
                                       —35—

15Thjs figure is based on the responses from the representative Standard and Poor's

 sample discussed below. See Medoff and Abraham (l980c) for a precise statement of

 how this figure was derived.
16
 Evidence supporting this claim is presented in Medoff and Abraham (1980b).


      first blush it might appear that c       should also appear in (3). However,
                                        jt 0
 since   we have assumed that a firm will not terminate a worker and then replace him/her

 during the same period, the present value of the costs of replacing a terminated

 employee will approach zero as r+(T        t0).
 18
 The assumption that business decisionmakers typically employ a very

 high discount rate (very short planning horizon) is consistent with

 much recent writing in the business press. For example, the June 30,

 1980 issue of Business Week states that:


         "There isaschizophrenia pervading U.S. business today. It is a
         rare CEO who has not publicly expounded on the need for focusing
         on the future——usually couched within a speech castigating govern-
         ment or labor unions for their short—term policies. Yet the
         compensation systems in their companies, the financial require-
         ments for investment projects, the criteria for management—by—
         objectives goals and for performance appraisal, all point to an
         exceedingly short—term orientation." (pp. 74—75).

         In addition, it should be pointed out that

  earlier empirical work pertaining to the relationship between layoffs

 and seniority has always, at least insofar as we are aware, implicitly

 or explicitly assumed that firms use an infinite discount rate (ona

 period time horizon) in deciding who to terminate,      See, for example,

 Parsons (1972) and Mincer and Jovanovic (1979), both of which argue that

 layoffs are principally related to the gap that specific human capital

 investments are hynothesized to produce between current wage and current

 value marginal product.
                                       36



 19
  The d.'s capture what supervisors.ought to have been thinking about

 when theycodcci their subordinates' quits as "regretted" "nonregretted"

 or "encouraged". However, when we circulated a questionniare to 15

 Company C employee relations managers to ask them what factors they

 thought supervisors considered when making regretted/nonregretted

 decisions, 13 marked "HOW much the person was contributing to (Company C)"

 and 2 marked "Whether the person's specialized skills would be easy

 or difficult to replace" as the most important factors. "The person's

 potential future contribution to (Company C) was marked by 7 of the 15

 managers as the second most important factor influencing regretted/non—

 regretted decisions. No one said that "How much the person was

 contributing to (Company C) relative to what he or she was being paid"

 mattered and only 1 person said that "...how the person's contibution

 to (Company C) a few years out would most likely have compared to his

 or her earnings" mattered. These responses suggest that the regretted!

 nonregretted codes might alternatively be interpreted as capturing

 quitters' relative current productivity.

 20
   We   are   grateful to Jeffrey Zax for his skilled work on the development

     of this maximum likelihood model. Gary Chamberlain, Bronwyn Hall, and

     Jerry Hausman also gave us helpful advice.

21
     The maximum likelihood model estimated for Table 1 includes in (annual

      salary), whether ever married, number of children under 18 and whether

      participating in the company thrift plan in the quit equation, but

      does not include these variables in the regret equation. While we

      felt these exclusions to be structurally appropriate, it was not the

      case that the omitted variables assumed zero coefficients when they

     were allowed to enter the regret equation. We reestimated our

     maximum likelihood model without any exclusions and then calculated
                                     37
                                                  4
  tenure dummy coefficents equal to       13.   + k=l   k'

  where i indicates the tenure group; k indexes the variables excluded

  from our original models; the 13's are coefficients from the regret
                                                             k
  equation in our modified maximum likelihood model; and the y s are

  coefficients from regressions of each of the originally excluded variables

 on all of the other explanatory variables in the new regret equation,

 estimated for a representative sample of the Company C workforce. This

 procedure produced estimated coefficients of .270 for the 0 to 3 years of

 tenure dummy, —.137 for the 10 to 20 years dummy and —.656 for the more

 ti-ian 20 years dummy.

22Nedoff and Abraham      (forthcoming) provides evidence which strongly

  supports the claim that Company C has a deferred compensation policy for

  the group of employees under analysis.

23For a review of some of this evidence, see Freeman and Medoff (1980).


24The figures concerning layoff procedures are from U.S. Department of Labor

  1972, pp. 53-54).

25For evidence on the early importance of contract provisions stipulating that layoffs

 would be in accordance with length of service, see Slichter (1941, pp. 115—122).

 For a discussion of the history of severance pay plans, see Slichter, Healy and

 Livernash (1960, pp. 463—469).

26Thjs estimate is from U.S. Department of Labor (1978, p. 101).

27Thjs fact becomes apparent when one examines the industrial locus of

  last—in—first—out layoff provisions and the industrial locus of severance

 pay plans.

28This point is discussed at some lengtli in Freeman and Medoff (1980). Its

 relevance to union /nonunion differences in the importance of layoffs for labor

 adjustment is addressed. in Medoff (1979). It is also central to

 the interesting recent study by Blau and Kahn (1980) who used 1969 to 1971 National

 Longitudinal Survey data for younger men (aged 17 to 27) and for older

 mea (aged 48 to 62) to compare and contrast the impact of collective
                                               38


bargaining on layoff probabilities among the two groups. Their results for

permanent layoffs are consistent with the claim that during the sharp

downturn from 1969 to 1971, as during the one from 1974 to 1975, the

vulnerability to job loss of those with long service relative to those

with short service was substantially lower under unionism.

It should be mentioned that it is possible that the nonunion preference

distribution is more skewed toward present—oriented policies than the

union distribution. While this possibility cannot be ruled out a priori,

it would seem to become remote as the number of firm and worker controls grows.



29
     In contrast to employees who are protected by implicit employment contract

     provisions pertaining to order of permanent layoffs, those who have entered with

     their employers into explicit employment contracts dealing with the same issue

     can turn to the courts for enforcement. In nonunion settings, senior workers

     usually have no legal protection against being laid off before their junior

     compatriots. Ignoring situations where a termination has been predicated on

     a consideration expressly made unlawful by statute (i.e., sex, race, religion,

     national origin, age, union organizational activity, or protected concerted

     activity),   nonunion employment relationships are generally "terminable at
     will," regardless of how long an employee has been with his/her employer.
     Even a written company manual stating that layoffs will occur in inverse
     order of years of company service will not generally be viewed as an

     enforceable contract; employers in virtually all jurisdictions have the right to

     alter this "policy't at any time. The one jurisdiction we know   of for   which this is not

     the case is Michigan. The Nichigan Supreme Court recently held that "an
                                    —39—


 employer's express agreement to terminate only for cause, or statements

 of company policy and procedure to that effect, can give rise to rights

 enforceable in contract," in Toussaint v. Blue Cross, as reported in

 Bureau of National Affairs (1980, p. 2823). A senior employee who was in-

 voluntarily terminated in violation of a union contract would have legal recourse.

 3C
   The 1979 Standard and Poor's Register listed companies whiéh In 1978 had sales

   of at least $1,000,000 and/or 50 employees and asked to be listed. The 1977

   News Front listing of the largest 3,000 manufacturing companies was based on the

   companies 1974 sales; this listing was the most recent one available at the

   time our sample was drawn.


31Throughout the paper, our aggregate survey results were derived with weights

 based on weighted counts of private sector wage and salary employees working

 outside of agriculture and construction obtained from the May 1978 Current

 Population Survey (CPs). While the CPS would have permitted us to construct

 separate weights for non—hourly nonunion employees and non—hourly union employees,

 we received no responses to our survey which pertained to a non—hourly union

 group. Our aggregation procedure, which implicitly assumes that the

 responses for non—hourly union employees would look like the responses for

 non—hourly nonunion employees, most likely leads to a slight understatement

 of union/nonunion differentials for the labor force as a whole.
                                     40




32Clearly it would be valuable to obta information on the pattern of

 exempt employee terminations during large cutbacks at other firms besides Company

 B. We do know of at least two additional instances where it had been

 reported that a disproportionate number of senior managerial and professional

 employees were terminated during retrenching periods. However, the

 companies involved would be very unlikely to want to share their data with us;

 exempt terminations are typically an extremely touchy subject with

 corporate officials. Furthermore, if we studied firms that we knew had

 very likely terminated a high proportion of their senior employees, finding

 that they had in fact done so would not be too surprising. The Company B

 results are particularly interesting because we were able to observe their

 layoff as it occured rather than selecting it for study, and because we

 had access to information in addition to the relevant computerized

microdata file which indicated that the company took every step possible

 to make the cutback meritocractic (that is, based on net value).


33The concept of an "efficient" emploent contract is at the heart of


 the provocative paper by Hall (1980); his piece contains other relevant

 references.
                                           41

                                   REFERENCE S

 Azariadis, Costas. "Implicit Contracts and Unemployment Equilibria." Journal

    of Political Economy 83, no. 6 (December 1975): 1183—1202.

 Baily, Martin. "Wages and Employment Under Uncertain Demand." Review of

    Economic Studies 41, no. 125 (January 1974): 37—50.


Becker, Gary S., and Stigler, George J. "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance and

   Compensation of Enforcers." Journal of Legal Studies 3, no. 1 (1974): 1—18.

Blau, Francine D., and Kahn, Lawrence M. "Union Coverage, Seniority and Layoffs."

   Mimeographed. Urbana: University of Illinois, 1980.

Bureau of National Affairs. U.S. Law Week (June 24, 1980): 2823.

Freeman, Richard B., and Medoff, James L. "The Two Faces of Unionism." The

   Public Interest, no. 57 (Fall 1979): 69—93.

Fogel, Walter A. "Job Rate Ranges: A Theoretical and Empirical Mialysis."

   Industrial and Labor Relations Review 17, no. 4 (July 1964): 584—597.


Griliches, Zvi; Hall, Bronwyn; and Hausman, Jerry. "Missing Data and Self Selection in

   Large Panels." Annales de L'INSEE, no. 30—31 (April — September 1978): 137—186.


Hall, Robert E. "Employment Fluctuations and
                                                 Wage Rigidity." Brookins Papers
   on Economic Activity, no. 1 (1980): 91—123.

Halasz, Peter Jonathan. "What Lies Behind the Slope of the Age—Earnings Profile."

   Senior honors thesis, Harvard College, 1980.


Heckman, James D. "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,

   Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator

   for Such Models." Annals of Economics and Social Measurement 5, no. 4 (1976):

  475—492.


Lazear, Edward P. "Why is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political

  Economy 87, no. 6 (December 1979): 1261—1284.


"Managers who are no longer entrepreneurs." Business Week, (June 30, 1980): 74—75.
                                            42




 Medoff, James L. "The Earnings Function: A Glimpse Inside the Black Box."

    Mimeographed. Cambridge: Harvard University, 1977.

                    "Layoffs and Alternatives Under Trade Unions in U.S.
                                                                               Manufacturing."
    American Economic Review 69, no. 3 (June 1979): 380—395.

 _____________ and Abraham, Katharine C. "Experience, Performance, and
                                                                       Earnings."
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 95, no. 4 (December 1980): 703—736.            (a)


_______________ and                          . "Are Those Paid More R?a1ly More
   Poductjve?: The Case of Experience." Journal of
                                                           Human Resources, forthcoming.

________________ and _____________________.      "Years of Service and Probability of

   Promotion." Mimeographed. Cambridge: Harvard University, 1980. (U)

_______________   and     _______________    .   "The Role of Seniority at U.S. Work
   Places:   A Report on Some New Evidence." Mimeographed.
                                                                 Cambridge:
   Harvard University, 1980. (c)

Mincer, Jacob and Jovanovic, Boyan. "Labor
                                            Mobility and Wages." Working Paper no. 357,
   National Bureau of Economic Research, 1979.


Parsons,DonaljO. "Specific Human Capital: An Application to Quit Rates and Layoff

   Rates." Journal of Political Economy 80, no. 6 (December 1972): 1120—1148.


Salop, Joanne and Salop, Steven. "Self—Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market."

  ,Qrterly Journal of Economics 90, no. 4 (November 1976):          619—627.

Slichter, Sumner H. Union•Poljcjes and IndustrialManagement
                                                                      Washington: Brookings,
  1941.


                        Healy, James S.; and Livernash, E. Robert. The Impact of

   Qollective Bargaining on Management. Washington:         Brookings, 1960.
                                    43



U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Layoff, Recall
                                                   and Worksharing Procedures."

  jor Collective Bargaining Agreements. Bulletin No. 1425—13.      Washington:
  Government Printing Office, 1972.
                                 Characteristics of Major   Collective   Bargaining
  Agreements, Bulletin no. 2065.   Washington: Government
  Printing Office, 1980.

Viscusi, W. Kip. "Self—Selection, Learning—Induced Quits, and the Optimal

   Wage Structure." Mimeographed. Evanston: Northwestern University, 1978.

Yanker, Robert H., Jr. "Productivity Versus Seniority: What is the Determining

   Factor in Regard to Wages and Promotion?" Senior honors thesis, Harvard

   College, 1980.
                                        —44—

                                     TABLE 1

              EFFECT OF TENURE AND SELECTED OTHER VARIABLES ON
   THE PROBABILITY OF AN EXEMPT COMPANY C EMPLOYEE'S QUIT BEING REGRETTED



                                        Probit Equationa         Maximum Likelihoodb
                                               (N =   844)             Model
                                                                    (N   11,054)


Less than 3 years tenure (yesl)                  .220                    .182
                                                (.120)                  (.110)
10 to 20 years tenure (yesl)                    —.057                   —.194
                                                (.151)                  (.149)
More than 20 years tenure (yesl)                — .301                  —.644
                                                (.335)                  (.299)
Less than a bachelor's degree (yesl)             .140                   —.058
                                                (.170)                  (.167)
Master's or law degree (yes=l)                  —.081                   —.057)
                                                (.119)                  (.113)
Doctorate (yes=l)                               —.586                   —.528
                                                (.235)                  (.211)
Quit in 1974 (yes=l)                              .194                      .113
                                                (.117)                  (.110)
Quit   in 1975 (yes=l)                          —.159                   —.261
                                                (.128)                  (.120)

Pre—company  experience dummies                       2                       2
Region dummies                                        3                       3
Grade level dummies                                   9                       9

                                                  89.1                      1525.2
                                                  21                          44

    a At Company C, almost every managerial or professional resignation from 1973 through
1975 was coded as "regretted," "nonregretted," or "encouraged"; mall, usable data was
available for 844 white male exempt quitters who had been employed in regular full—time
jobs in the continental United States prior to leaving Company C. The dependent variable
in our probit equation was set equal to 1 if an individual's quit was "regretted" and to
O otherwise. All of the independent variables reflect individuals' status as of the
date they left the company.
    b The maximum likelihood model which generated the results presented in the table
corrects for possible sample selection bias present in the single equation probit estimates.
The sample used in estimating the model consists of white males active as of January 1,
1973 and employed in regular full—time managerial or professional jobs in the continental
United States as of that date plus white males who were hired or transferred into such
jobs anytime between January 1, 1973 and December 31, 1975. One part of the maximum
likelihood model specifies probability of quitting as a ftinction of tenure, pre—company
experience, education, region of residence, ln (annual salary) whether ever married, number
of children under 18, and whether participating in the company thrift plan. All of the
quit variables reflect individuals' status as of January 1, 1973 (for those in exempt
postions at the company as of that date) or as of 'at transferrred or hired into an
 exempt position (for those moving into the exempt ranks after January 1, 1973). The
 second part of the model specifies probability of an in'lividual's quit being regretted
as a function of variables shown in the table. All of the regret variables reflect
individuals' status as of the time they left the company.


Note: Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
                                                               TABLE       2
                          SUMMARY OF RESPONSES TO SURVEY QUESTIONS PERTAINING TO WHETHER A SENIOR EMPLOYEE
                                WOULD EVER BE INVOLUNTARILY TERMINATED IN PLACE OF A JUNIOR EMPLOYEE


                                                                A  Senior Employee           A Senior Employee              A Senior Employee
                                                                 Might be Involun—           Might Be Involun—              Would Never Be
                                                                 tarily Terminated           tarily         Terminated      Involuntarily
                                                                 if a      Junior Employee   if   a       Junior Employee   Terminated in Place
                                                                Was Considered a             Was Considered a               of a Junior Employee
                                                                Better Performer             Significantly
                                                                                             Better Performer
                                             Total Number of    Number of Percent of         Number of         Percent of   Number of   Percent of
                                             Responses for      Responses Responses          Responses         Responses    Responses   Responses
                                             Indicated Group           (1.)         (2)           (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)
                                        a
 Standard and Poor s Sample (N = 1o3)

   Hourly employees covered by a                  75                   4           5.3            20              26.7         51         68.0
   collective bargaining agreement

   Hourly employees not covered by a              54                13            24.1            26              48.1         15         27.8
   collective bargaining agreement

   Non—exempt salaried employees                  18                   4          22.2            13              72.2          1           5.6
   Exempt employees                               16                              56.3                7          43.8           0           0.0
 Newsfront Sample (N =   73)a

   Hourly employees covered by a                  41                   1          2.4             17             41.5          23         56.1
   collective bargaining agreement

   Hourly employees not covered by a              10                   1         10.0                 4          40.0           5
   collective bargaining agreement                                                                                                        50.0

    Non—exempt salaried employees                 5                 2            40.0             3              60.0           0           0.0
    Exempt employees                             17                 4            23.5                                          0
                                                                                                                 7.6.5                      0.0
  a Only those surveys which provided acceptable information on all of the
                                                                            following items were included in these
tabulations: worker group (exempt, salaried non—exempt, non—union, or hourly
                                                                              union); circumstances under which a
senior worker in .that group would be terminated before a junior worker; number of
                                                                                   persons mnloved by the the firm; size of
largest permanent layoff affecting the relevant worker group witnessed by the respondent; nature of the flrm s business;
and state where respondent located.   In addition to the total of 236 usable surveys which could be categorized as
belonging to either the Standard and Poor's sample or the Newsfront sample, there were 22 usable surveys where the
company name given by the respondent did not match any company name on our mailing list and which therefore were
omitted from these tabulations.
                                                46
                                           TABLE 3

                       FACTORS AFFECTING THE PROBABILITY THAT A SENIOR WORKER
                          NIGHT BE INVOLUNTARILY TERMINATED BEFORE A JUNIOR
                          WORKER IF THE JUNIOR WORKER WAS A BETTER PERFORMER
                                          (ALL EMPLOYEES)



                                                                Dependent Variable =    1 if
                                                                a Senior Worker May Be
                                                                Permanently Laid Of f if a
                                                                Junior Worker Was a Better
                                                                Performer. a

                                                                        (N = 258)
                                       Mean
                                      [Standard
                                       Deviation]       1                      2                3



[ourly employees not covered by          .267            .549               .539                 .128
 collective bargaining agree—           [.443]          (.271)             (.273)               (.383)
ient (yes =      1)

Ion—exempt salaried employees            .109            .808               .918               1.083
yes    1)                               [.312]          (.356)             (.361)              (.486)

xempt employees (yes     1)              .136          1.354              1.373                  .820
                                        [.343]          (.314)             (.316)               (.449)

'raction laid off in largest             .117                             1.354                 —.698
ermanent layoff                         [.140]                             (.687)              (1.712)

[ourly not covered by a collective       .037                                                  2.615
argaining agreement by fraction         [.111]                                                 (1 944)
aid off in largest permanent layoff

Eon—exempt salaried employees            .007                                              —3.765
n largest permanent layoff              [.035]                                             (4.230)

xempt x fraction laid off in largest .013                                                      6.039
ermanent layoff                     [.057]                                                     (3.761)

n(number of persons employed           6.89            —.104              —.080                —.105
) the    firm)                         [2.06            (.054)            (.056)                (.O6l
                                                            3                       3                3
:ndustry dummiesb

legion   dummiesb                                           3                       3                3


                                                        39.4               43.2                 50.6
                                                            10                     11               14



    a All of the models estimated for this table were probit equations. The mean of
:he dependent variable is .167.
     b The industry categories are manufacturing (omitted), transportation and communication,
:iade and other industries. The regions are north central (omitted), northeast, south and west.
[ote: Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
                                               TABLE 4
           EFFECT OF TENURE ON THE PROBABILITY OF LOSING JOB DURING A YEAR WITH "FEW"
           AND DURING A YEAR WITH "MANY" TERMINATIONS AT COMPANY 'S HEADQUARTERS

                                        Dependent Variable             Dependent Variable       Dependent Variable
                                           1   if Laid Off             = 1 if Laid Off            1 if on List of
                                        Between May            31, t   Between June 1,          Those to be Ter-
                                         and May 31, t + 1,            t + 1 and November       minated as Part of
                                         0 Otherwise.a                 30, t + 1, 0
                                                                                  a             Major Staff Paring
                                           (N =       1,199)           Otherwise.               which Occurred Be-
                                                                                (N = 1,257)     tween June 1, t+1,
                                                                                                and November 30,
                                                                                                t+1, 0 Otherwise.a
                                                                                                    (N =   1,257)
                                                        ....   (2).        (3)          (4)     (5)         (6)
2robit equation specification:b
    Less than 3 years tenure               — .062          —.154       — .045         —.081    —.001       —.084
         (yes   1)                         (.243)          (.254)      (.171)         (.179)   (.156)      (.165)
      10 to 20 years tenure                —.245           —.273       —.024            .020    .086        .150
         (yes   1)                         (.227)          (.239)      (.137)         (.141)   (.123)      (.127)
      20 to 30 years tenure                —.248           —.183           .3O         .410     .320        .412
        (yesl)
      More than 30 years tenure
                                           (.249)          (.261)      (.139)         (.146)   (.128)      (.134)
                                           —.268           —.260           .862       1.025     .903       1.039
         (yes = 1)                         (.411)          (.423)      (.170)         (.178)   (.158)      (.165)
Education dummies                               3               3           3           3       3            3
Pre-company experience   dummies                2               2           2           2       2            2
 Grade level dummies                            0               8           0          12       0           14
  2
x                                          9.2           18.4              52.4        85.5    67.3        101.1
d.f.                                            9               17          9           21      9            23

Estimated probability of a sample
member with the indicated amount of
tenure and otherwise average
characteristics losing job:
   Less than 3 years tenure                    .023            .015        .080        .062    .122         .094
   3 to 10 years tenure                        .026            .022        .087        .073    .122         .109
   10 to 20 years tenure                       .015            .011        .083        .075    .140         .140
   20 to 30 years tenure                       .014            .014        .145        .148    .199         .206
   More than 30 years tenure                   .014            .012        .309        .333    .397         .423



   a All of the models estimated for this table were probit equations. The samples used to
estimate the models consist of white male Company B employees who worked at regular full—
time managerial or professional jobs in the continental U.S. as of either May 31 of year t
(models 1 and 2) or May 31 of year t + 1 (models 3 through 6). The dependent variables
are as specified in the table and the independent variables are based on information for
either Nay 31 of year t or May 31 of year t + 1. The dependent variable for models 1 and 2
has a mean value of .022; that for models 3 and 4 , a mean value of .123; and that for
models 5 and 6, a mean value of .177. Of those in the first (second) sample, 14.1 percent
(14.0 percent) had less than 3 years tenure as of May 31 of year t (May 31 of year t +1);
28.4 percent (25.4 percent) had 3 to 10 years tenure; 26.4 percent (28.6 percent) had 10
to 20 years tenure; 22.3 percent (22.3 percent) had 20 to 30 years tenure; and 8.8 percent
(9.8 percent) had more than 30 years tenure.
   b We did not introduce a full set of grade level controls in either model 2 or model 4
because in a number of grade levels there was no one for whom the relevent dependent variable
equalled 1.
Note: Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
                   ______________                        48
                    APPENDIX A]


                         THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE TO LN (HOURLY WAGE)
                       IN THE PANEL STUDY OF INCOME DYNANICS (PsID) DATA



                                              1971 Regressions              1974 Regressions

                                      Blue          Managerial &     Blue          Managerial &
                                      Collara       Prof essionala   Collara       Prof essionala
                                    (N =   479)       (N = 241)      (N = 541)        (N =   278)


Mean (standard deviation)            5.941              6.359         6.108             6.465
of the dependent variable             (.369)            (.440)        (.399)            (.492)

Proportion of sample with:
   Less than 3 years tenure            .397              .415          .370              .432
   3 to 10 years tenure                .230              .282          .309              .291
   10 to 20 years tenure               .217              .178          .174              .147
   More than 20 years tenure           .157              .124          .148              .129



Regression specification

   Less than 3 years tenure          —.132              —.165         —.198             .149
       (yes   1)                     (.039)             (.066)        (.038)           (.064)
   10 to 20 years tenure              .047               .072          .011             .234
      (yes = 1)                      (.044)             (.084)        (.047)           (.086)
   More than 20 years tenure          .159               .109          .099             .419
       (yes   1)                     (.049)             (.092)        (.050)           (.089)
   Industry dummies                    10                 10            10               10

   Occupation dummies                  2                  1             2                1
   R                                  .274               .174




  a All of the models estimated for this table were ordinary least square regressions. Each of
the samples consisted of male residents of the continental U.S. who were employed full—time in
the private sector as of the relevant interview date in industries other than agriculture and
construction, reported a wage of $1.60 per hour or greater, and were in appropriate occupations.
4embers of households in the PSID low income samples were excluded from the analysis. The 1971
(1974) regressions have ln(Average Hourly Wage) during 1970 (1973) as the dependent variable
and independentvariables derived from information given at the time of the 1971 (l974' inteiview.




Tote: Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
                                                        49
                                                                                      1


               APPENDIX B




                  SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                                EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY




       Subject Group                          Methodology and Conclusions
         and Study


 Exempt employees at        Data on salary, performance rating assigned by supervisor, job grade
 two large                  level and individual characteristics for several thousand white male
 manufacturing              employees at each of two large companies were taken from those
 firms (Medoff and          companies' computerized personnel files. At both companies
 Abraham [forth-            approximately 40 percent of the higher earnings associated with
 coming a]).                seniority took the form of higher earnings within grade level. While
                            additional company service beyond the mean amount increased the
                            probability of being towards the top of the within—grade—level salary
                            distribution, it decreased the probability of being towards the top of
                            the within—grade—level performance distribution.

Exempt employees at         Cross—sectional results virtually identical to those in Medoff and
a large manufacturing       Abraham (forthcoming a) were obtained with data for approximately
firm (Medoff and            8,000 exempt employees of a third large company. In addition, analysis
Abraham [forthcoming        of longitudinal data on pay and performance revealed that, for those
b]).                        staying in the same job grade level over time, relative within—grade—
                            level salary rose but relative within—grade—level rated performance
                            fell.
Production and ware-        Salary, performance rating, job grade level and information on
house employees at a        individual characteristics were taken from approximately 300 non-exempt
flOflUfl lan                employees' personnel records. For these employees, approximately 50
manufacturing plant         percent of the return to seniority took the form of higher earnings
(talasz [1980]).            within grade level. Additional company service beyond the mean
                            amount increased the probability of being towards the top of the within—
                            grade—level salary distribution but decreased the probability of being
                            towards the top of the within—grade--level performance distribution.

Blue collar                 Data on hourly rate of pay, productivity, job grade level and individual
employees at a              characteristics for approximately 400 workers were taken from their
unionized                   personnel records. The productivity measure was equal to the time the
manufacturing plant         worker took to do his/her job divided by the standard time for performing
(Yanker [1980]).            the job. Approximately 80 percent of the earnings return to seniority
                            occurred within job grade level; none of this within—grade—level
                            return could be explained on the basis of more senior workers
                            having higher productivity.

Recently—hired first        Performance ratings for approximately 200 persons hired over a six
line supervisors at         year period were used in the analysis. Other factors the same,
a manufacturing             years in supervisory position had a positive affect on rated
plant (Brown [1979]).       performance. However, the mean amount of company service among
                            those in the sample was only three years.
                                                   50




             SUNMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                         EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                     (continued)



                                        Methodology and Conclusions
Subject Group
   and Study



Scientists         Cross—sectional data for a random sample of U.S. scientists in six
                   disciplines showed a peak among those aged 40 to 44 both in mean
(Cole [1978]).
                   number of papers published and in the importance of published 'orks
                   as measured by number of citations. However, all differences
                   in mean output between adjacent age groups were very small.
                   Longitudinal data for the cohort of U.S. mathemeticians who got
                   their Ph.D.'s between 1947 and 1950 showed no relationship between
                   time since receiving Ph.D. and either number of publidationS or
                   number of citations to those publications.

Air line
                 Cross—sectional results very similar to those in Medoff and Abraham
                 (forthcoming a) were obtained using data for approximately 800 managers
managers
(Medoff [1977]). employed by an airline.

Sixth grade        The change between third grade and sixth grade in individual students'
tiacher s
                   composite achievement score on the Iowa Test of Basic Skills
(Summers and       was used as a measure of educational output. Sixth grade teachers'
Wolfe [1977]).     experience was measured in years up to 11 years. A total of 627 usuable
                   observations were obtained. Controlling for other factors, students
                   whose thid grade scores were above the norm benefitted from additional
                   sixth grade teacher experience, but among those with third grade scores
                   below the norm, additional teacher experience was associated with smaller
                   changes in test score.

Scientists and     Performance data was collected for 290 researchers in 22 research and
engineers          development organizations using questionnaires which asked people to
 (Hall and         rate their own performance relative to others in similar positions
Mansfield          by placing themselves on a 7 point scale ranging from "in top 5%" to
                                                                   readministered to 90
[1975]).           "in the lower 25%". The same questionnaire was
                                                                                 of the
                   of the researchers two years later. Cross—sectional analyses
                   two sets of responses found self—rated performance to be uncorrelated
                   with seniority.

Inner—city         Progress made during third grade in math and in reading by each of
                   approximately 900 black students was measured using changes in the
third
                   students' standard scores on Metropolitan Achievement Tests. Controlling
grade                                                            students' test scores
teachers           for other factors, the biggest improvement in
                   was observed for teachers with three to four years of experience.
(Murnane
                   Teachers with five or more years of experience were found to be
 [1975]).
                   no more effective or less effective than teachers with three or four
                   years of experience.

            S in  Three measures of performance were collected for approximately
                                                          at six companies (1)
 technology—based 2,500 design and development engineers
 commer ical      performance ratings done by management; (2) management evaluations
 industries        of the complxity of engineers' assignments; and (3) engineers' own
 (Dalton and       assessments of what happens to the productivity of those doing
                                                                               for those
 Thompson [1971]) technical work as they age. Rated performance was highest
                                                                (continued on next page)
                                             —51—
                                                                                     3
                  SIJ14MARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                              EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                           (continued)




 Subject Group                                      Methodology and Conclusions
    and Stud.y



                         aged 31 to 35 and fell off sharply thereafter. Those 26 to 30
                         performed the most complex tasks, with older engineers doing much less
                         complex work. The engineers themselves said peak productivity for those
                         doing technical work occurred at age 38. However, salaries were
                         substantially higher for those in each successive age bracket through the
                         41 to 45 year old group and were level beyond age 45.

Third grade              Cross—sectional data from a survey covering 1,061 third—grade students
teachers                 in a large California school system was used. Individual students'
 (Hanushek [1970].       third grade Stanford Achievement test scores were used as a measure
                         of educational output. Controlling for students' first grade
                         test scores and other relevant factors, neither second grade
                         teachers' experience nor third grade teachers' experience was found
                         to have any significant effect on third grade test score.

Male production         Data was collected on 113 male production managers in one division of
managers (Tenopyr       a rocket engine development and manufacturing concern. The study
[1969]).                focused on how well various tests of leadership potential predict
                       managerial success, but included a correlation analysis of seniority
                       versus performance. Two measures of performance were used: (1)
                       immediate supervisors were asked to check descriptive statements about
                       each manager and integral weights from 0 to 4 were applied in scoring
                       the checklists; and (2) the company's labor relations staff rated
                       the manager's handling of employee relations matters on a 7—interval
                       scale. For the 86 subjects for whom both performance measures were
                       available, seniority was not found to be significantly correlated
                       with either rating.

Research               Longitudinal data on average number of papers published per year during
scientists             each of two successive five year periods was collected for 40 research
(Elduson [1966]).      scientists ranging in age from their 30's to their 60's. Subjects'
                       curriculum vitae were the source of the publication information. Pro-
                       ductivity was steady for those aged 30 to 39 at the end of the first
                       five year period, grew slightly for those aged 40 to 49, and fell off
                       for those aged 50 or greater.

Research               Number of patent memoranda, number of patent applications and number
chemists                of patents issued were used as measures of productivity. Altogether 962
(Stewart and           man—years worth of data for 89 men in one division of a large industrial
Sparks [1966]).         scientific research organization were collected. Each of these 962
                       man years was treated as a separate observation in a cross sectional
                       analysis. All three paterit'variables were positively correlated with
                       length of service; however, the positive association between patent
                       activity and length of service was much weaker beyond 10 years of
                       service than prior to that cutoff.
                                             52
                                                                                       4

                 SUARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                             EXPERIENCE A1'D AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                         (continued)




 Subject Group                                    Methodology and Conclusions
   and Study



Employees of          Supervisors were asked to complete a performance evaluation of each of
one multi—
                      their subordinates, rating them on "overall effectiveness," which was
department firr      not explicitly defined. A significant negative correlation was found
(Svetik, Prien,       between these ratings and individual employees' length of service.
and Barnet
                     The supervisors' ratings were also negatively correlated with salary.
[1966]).

Federal mail          Production records covering an eight week period for approximately
sorters (Bureau       6,000 workers in twelve cities were analyzed. An index of
of Labor              performance was computed for each worker by dividing his/her
Statistics            production score by the average production score of all workers
[19641).              aged 35 to 44 doing similar work in the sallie city. Those with
                      less than six months service had the lowest average performance
                      index; beyond six months, length of service seemed to be unimportant.


Scicnti3ts and        Five measures of current perfOrmance were collected fora cross—section
eniccrc in             of 1,311 scientists and engineers working in 11 research laboratories:
research               (1) contribution to scientific knowlege, as judged by colleagues; (2)
laboratories          overall usefulness to laboratory, again as judged by colleagues; (3)pub—
(Pelz [19641).         lished papers; (4) patent applications; and (5) unpublished papers. All
                       the performance measures were for the five year period prior to the date of
                       the study. For those in research laboratories, measured performance typ-
                       ically was highest among those aged 35—44 as of the time of the study; for
                      those in development laboratories, the peak occurred among those 45
                      to 49. Performance among those immediately beyond the peak age group
                      was sharply lower. A second peak in performance was evident 10 to 15
                      years beyond the first performance peak.

Office workers         'ata on physical volume of production per hour worked over an
doing routine work     observation period of 4 to 12 weeks was collected tor approximately
such as typing,       6,000 workers in 5 federal agencies and 21 private companies. An
filing, posting,     index of performance was computed for each worker by taking the
sorting and card     ratio of his/her output to the average output of those aged 35 to
punching (Bureau     44 employed at the same firm and doing comparable work. Among
of Labor             workers with 9 months or more experience on the job, there was
Statistics [19601)   practically no difference in the mean value of the performance index
                     across age groups, either within occupational groups or when an
                     average was taken across the occupational groups. A large
                     proportion of those included in the sample were under incentive
                     payment schemes. However, the results looked very similar for
                     those under incentive and those under time payment plans
                                               53
                                                                                     5

                 SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                             EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                         (continued)




Subject Group                                          Methodology and Conclusions
  and Study


Technical employees     Performance of approximately 900 technical employees in one firm
in a large research     was estimated using cross—sectional data on individuals' positions
and engineering         in the annual order—of—merit rankings of technical employees. These
firm (Oberg [19601)     rankings were done on a department by department basis for salary
                        administration purposes. The criterion used in ranking was the
                        workers' "present value to the compnay". This criterion was not
                        defined more precisely. Among those doing research and development
                        work, performance was highest for those 30 to 35 and fell off grad-
                        ually thereafter. Among those doing engineering work, performance
                        fell off for those aged 32 through 50, then showed a second peak for
                        those in their 50's.

Retail sales            The dollar volume of sales for clerks in two large department
personnel               stores were used to form performance ratings of 1 through 4,
(Canadian               depending on each individuals' quartile postion in the distribution
Department of           of dollar sales for his/her department. At one store, mean rated
Labor [1959]).          performance was lower for those with less than 3 years service than
                        for those in the longer service groups, and weakly but positively
                        related to service thereafter. At the second store, mean rated
                        performance was lower for those with less than 6 years service than
                        for those with more service and again weakly but positively
                        related to service thereafter.




I?roduction workers     For approximately 5,100 workers in 15 footwear establishments and
in the wood             11 furniture establishments, output per worker—hour was measured
household               using average straight time hourly piecework earnings. The
furniture industry      production index used for comparison purposes was each individual's
and the footwear        average hourly earnings divided by the mean of average hourly earnings
industry (Bureau        for those of the same sex in the 35 to 44 age group doing the same
of Labor Statistics     job in the same plant. In both industries and for both sexes, the
[1957]).                mean value of the production index was highest for those aged 25 to
                        34 and fell off beyond that age group.

Production workers      Piecework earnings data for 933 workers in the footwear industry and
in the footwear         1,284 workers in the clothing industry was studied. The data were
industry and the        used to create a production index like that used in Bureau of Labor
clothing industry       Statistics (1957). The mean value of this production index was
(Bureau of Labor        stable for all age groups through age 54 and approximately 10
Statistics [1956])      percent lower for those agi 55 to 64..
                                                 54                                   6

                  SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                              EXPERIENCE AND ACE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                          (continued)



Subject Group                                     Methodology and Conclusions
  and Study


Outstanding            The goal of this study was to identify the age by which numerous
people in a            individuals in various fields had done their best work or achieved
variety of pro-        their highest average rate of productivity. In the majority of
fessional              occupations, it was found that the individulas' best work had been
occupat ions           done by age 40. However, it should be emphasized that the study
(Lehman {19531).       focused on selected outstanding individuals rather than on a
                       representative sampling of members of any occupation.

Shopcraft              Relative speed of work for a cross—section of 701 employees of one
railroad               railroad was used as a measure of worker efficiency.
                                                                             Holding age
employees              constant, efficiency appeared to peak at about 10 years of service
(Mater [19411)         and fall off thereafter.


Employees of large     Records on productivity of workers at six companies were obtained
New England            and broken down into a comparison of productivity by age groups
manufacturing          for 172 textile weavers, 127 textile spinners and 147 workers in
companies              nonferrous metal manufacturing. The records did not show any
(Palmer and            tendency for productivity to vary with age.
Brownell {1939]).
                                    55



Sources cited:

Brown, Charles. "Estimating the Determinants of Employee Performance."
   Working Paper no. 353. National Bureau of Economic Research., 1979.


Canadian Department of Labor Economics and Research Branch. Age and Performance
   in Retail Trade. Ottawa: The Queen's Printer and Controller of Stationery,
   1959.

Cole, Stephen. Age and Scientific Performance. New York: Center for the
   Social Sciences , Columbia University, 1978.

Dalton, Gene W., and Thompson, Paul H, "Accelerating Obsolescence of Older
   Engineers." Harvard Business Review 49, no. 5 (September—October 1971):
   57—67.

Eiduson, Bernice T. "Productivity Rate in Research Scientists." American
   Scientist 54, no. 1 (1966): 57—63.

Halasz, Peter Jonathan. "What Lies Behind the Slope of the Age—Earnings
   Profile." Senior honors thesis, Harvard College, 1980.


Hall, Douglas T. and Mansfield, Roger. "Relationships of Age and Seniority
   with Career Variables of Engineers and Scientists," Journal of Applied Psycholo_gy
   60, no. 2 (1975): 201—210.

Hanushek, Eric. "The Poduction of Education, Teacher Quality, and Efficiency."
   In Do Teachers Make a Difference? Office of Education, Department of Health,
   Education and Welfare. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1970.

Lehman, Harvey C., Age and Achievement. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
   1953.

Mater, Pan H., "A Statistical Study of the Effect of Seniority Upon Employee
   Efficiency," Journal of Business of the University of Chicago 14 no 2
   (April 1941): 169—204,

Medoff, James L. "The Earnings Function: A Glimpse Inside the Black Box."
   Mimeographed. Cambridge: Harvard University, 1977.


                 and Abraham, Katharine C. "Experience, Performance, and
   Earnings." Quarterly Journal of Economics 95, no. 4 (December 1980): 703—736.

                 and ____________________ . "Are Those Paid More Really More Product-
ive?" The Case of Experience." Journal of Human Resources, forthcoming.
Murnane, Richard J. The Impact of School Resources on the Learning of Inner
   City Children. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger, 1975.

Oberg, Winston, "Age and Achievement——and the Technical Man." Personnel
   Psychology 13, no. 3 (Autumn 1960) : 245—259.
                                        56




 Palmer, Dwight L., and Brownell, John A. "Influence of Age on Employment
    Opportunities," Monthly Labor Review (April 1939): 765—780.

 Pelz, Donald C. "The 'Creative Years' and the Research Environments." LEEE
    Transactions on Engineering Management Vol. EM—li, no. 1 (March 1964) :29.


Stewart, Naomi, and Sparks, William J. "Patent Productivity of Research
   Chemists as Related to Age and Experience." Personnel and Guidance Journal
   45 (September 1966): 28—36.

Summers, Anita A., and Wolfe, Barbara L. "Do Schools Make a Difference?"
   The American Economic Review 67, no. 4 (September 1977): 639—652.

Svetiik, Byron, et. al. "Relationships Between Job Difficulty, Employee's
   Attitude Toward His Job, and Supervisory Ratings of the Employee Effectiveness."
   Journal of Applied Psychology 48, no. 5 (1964): 320—324.

Tenopyr, Mary L. "The Comparative Validity of Selected Leadership Scales
   Relative to Success in Production Management." Personnel Psychology 22, no. 1
   (1969): 77—85.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Comparative Job Performance by Age: Large
   Plants 1n the Men's Footwear and Household Furniture Industries. Bulletin No. 1223.
   Washington: Government Printing Office, November 1957.


______________________________________________________   Comparative Job
   mance b A e: Office Workers. Bulletin No. 1273. Washington: Government
   Printing Office, February 19 0.

__________________________________________________ Job Performance and Age:
   A Study in Measurement. Bulletin No. 1203. Washington: Government Printing
   Office, September 1956.

_______________________________________________________."The Job Performance of
   of Federal Mail Sorters by Age." Monthly Labor Review , March 1964, pp. 296—300.

Yanker, Robert H. Jr. "Productivity Versus Seniority: What is the Determining
   Factor in Regard to Wages and Promotion?' Senior honors thesis, Harvard College,
   1980.
AlPENDIXCi                                                      CONFIDE2TLAL
                                                                No inforiost ion you ubnIt will ho Identified with
                                                                you or your company without your written
                                                                permission.
        Please    return to:

        Professor James L. Medoff
        Department of Economics
        115 Littauer Center
        Harvard University
        Cambridge, MA 02138


                                            HUMAN RESOURCES RESPARCH PROJECT
                                               EiTLOYLE SEPARATIONS SURVEY

                    You should answer this survey only if: (1) you are employed by a private—
                    sector, for—profit firm whose principal activity is ralthar agriculture nor
                    construction; (2) you make decisicns concerning the management of human
                    resources affecting omiOyess other than those whom you supervise directly.
                    If   you   do not lit   the above description, please just complete the mailing
                    address     below and   return this form in the enclosed pre—addressed envelope.
        Company   name:
                                     _____________________-____________________________________________
       Your metro   and tit].e:

       Your   address:
                                                S
       Your telephone number: —
                                                —__________________________       _______
       As part of our ongoing human resources research program, we are currently conducting a
       comprehensive sudv of Ircloluntarv seoara:ions at U.S. cc•Tooanies. Our col is to
       generate a suhataatiol 000uot of eronirical evidence ci companies' decisions rogardins
       employment cutbacks e believe such information should be of great value and interest
       to   many managers.
       This survey is primarily concerned with the factors that influence management decisions
       pertaining to emplorment cutbacks. Other components of our research effort include
       computer analysis of data from a number of major U.S. corporations and in—depth
       interviews with officials at those same firms.

       Completing this questionnaire should take no more than five ninutes of your tine. Your
       cooperation will be invaluable to our research effort:

       If you would like us to send you a personal copy of our sulmuary report, please be              sure
       you have given us your mailing address above and check the appropriate box.

       I would like a personal copy of          the   summary   report.     D    Yes.      No.



       1. Approximately how many people are employed by your company?

       2. What is the principal product or service supplied by your company?




       3.   Row would you classify the largest group of employees who are affected by
                                                                                      your
            decisions concerning the management of human resources?

                  Hourly.                     Non—exempt salary.                 Exempt.


       4. Are the majority of the members of the group you checked In question 3 covered                by
           either a written company policy pertaining to conditions of employment or by a
           collective bargaining agreement?

                  Yes, by a written company policy.

             0    Yes, by a collective bargaining agreement.
                  No (PLEASE SKIP TO QUESTION 9).
                                                      58
 5.     Does this wr Iten policy r collective bargaining agreement deal with piens?
                  Yes.                  Eo (PLEASE SKIP JO QSTION 7).

 6.   Under the terms of the policy or agreement, is senIority the most important factor
      in awarding promotions?

            []   Yes.                   No.



 7. Does this written policy or collective bargaining agreement deal with                 permanent
    layoffs?

        0        Yes.                   No (PLEASE SKIP TO QUESTION 9).


 8. Under the terms of the policy or agreement, is seniority the most important
    factor in determining wtte Is permanently laid off during any reduction in the                 workforce?
                 Yes.              LI   No.


 9. In actual practice, would one of the junior employees in the group you checked Ia
    question 3 ever be promoted instead of a mere sentor employee who wanted the job?
                 Yea,    if   the junior employee was oonsiered a better performer than the
                 senior employee.

        D Yes, If the junior employee was considered a significantly better performer
          than the senior employee.
        0        No,    never.

10. In the event of a reduction in the workforce, would one of the senior employees
    in the grouo you checked in question 3 ever be Involuntarily terminated, that is,
    laid off permanently against his or her will, in place of a junior employee?
        U        Yes,    if the junior employee was considered a better performer than the
                 senior employee.
               Yes,      if the junior employee   was considered a significantly better performer
               than      the senior employee.

       0       No, never.


11. During the years in which you have been involved in decision making in the human
    resources area, have permanent layoffs ever been used to reduce the size of the
    group you checked in question 3?

       0       No, never (PLEASE STOP HERE).

       D       Yes, permanent layoffs have been used once or twice.

             Yes, permanent layoffs have been used more than twice.


12. What percent of the group you checked in question 3 was               permanently   laid off
    in your most recent reduction of the workforce?

                 percent.


13.   What percent of the group you checked in question 3 was permanently laid off in
      the next most recent reduction of your worktorce?

      ______     percent.
                 Does not apply. We have used permanent layoffs only once.

        f    Thank you for your help. Please return this questionmaire in the
             enclosed envelope.
