                    NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ISSUES IN THE DESIGN OF SAVING
                    AND INVESTMENT INCENTIVES


                        David F. Bradford


                      Working Paper No. 637




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          February 1981




This author is Professor of Economics and Public Affairs Princeton
University. This paper was prepared for presentation at the Urban
Institute Conference on Depreciation Measurement and Policy,
Washington, DC, December 1, 1980, while the author was a visitor at
the Industrial Institute for Economic and Social Research,
Stockholm, Sweden. The research reported here is part of the
NBER'S research program in Thxation and project in Capital
Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #637
                                                             February 1981




              Issues in the Design of Saving and Investment Incentives



                                        ABSTRACT



       This paper   examines the characteristics of and interactions among

measures   to effect saving and investment incentives ("S—I incentives")
in the context of an income tax system that is inadequately indexed for
inflation.    Examples are proposals for more rapid depreciation of build-

ings and equipment and proposals to exempt larger amounts of interest

income. SI incentives are classified into "consumption tax" and "direct

grant" types, and it is shown that these differ in their influence on

portfolio choices, in their sensitivity to inflation and in the design

problems they present. Stress is placed on requirements for neutrality

with respect to asset durability and portfolio composition. A new result

is the derivation    of the reduction in interest taxation yielding neutrality
in   the presence of partial expensing of real investment or equivalent

investment incentive,




                                                   Professor David F. Bradford
                                                   Woodrow Wilson School
                                                   Princeton University
                                                   Princeton, New Jersey 08544
                                                   (609) 452—4842
           ISSUES IN THE DESIGN OF SAVING AND INVESTMENT INCENTIVES

                              David F. Bradford




          The view is widespread that the rate of accumulation of capital in

recent years in the United States has been too low. This conclusion is based

in part upon a comparison of the rate of net investment, especially of business

fixed investment, relative to aggregate output both with its past value in the

U.S. and with its value in the other advanced industrial countries. it is based

as well upon symptoms that are presumptively traceable to a slow—down in capital

formation, most especially the apparent cessation in the growth of labor

productivity.

          A deterioration in the rate of return to savers resulting from the

interaction of inflation with an unindexed tax system is often cited among the

reasons for this shift in performance of the U.S. economy. In particular, the

failure of the tax rules to permit correct accounting for depreciation and capi-

tal gains, together with a not obviously explicable reluctance of businesses to

use the LIFO inventory procedures permitted under the tax law, result in a bur-

den of tax on the return from investment that increases with the rate of

inflation. Furthermore, because the tax treatment of nominally deinoninated

assets also ignores inflation, considerable if poorly understood stress is

placed upon the financial structure of the economy in a period of rapid increase

in the price level.
                                           —2—



              A consequence of this view, that there is a problem, and that taxes

 have something to do with it, has been a movement to increase the incentive

 to save and invest by changing the rules. Somewhat oddly, there seems to

 be relatively little interest in approaching this by asking what steps would

 be necessary to correct for inflation. Nor has there yet appeared an ex-

 plicit strater of shifting taxation away from an income and towards a

 consumption base, a policy not necessarily related to inflation. Perhaps

because of the perceived complexity of the former and unfamiliarity with

the latter, policy—makers and the interest groups actively involved with

the issue have been attracted to ad hoc measures.

             Most prominent and widely discussed among these have been proposals

to allow taxpayers to write off the cost of acquisition of productive assets,

for purposes of calculating income subject to tax, more rapidly than the

economic definition of income would imply. Bills sponsored by House Ways

and   Means Conmrittee members Conable and Jones (the "10—5—3 proposal"), by Com-
mittee chairman Al Ullman, and by the Senate Finance Committee (the "2—)4—7—l0
proposal")    would in   various ways provide for a grouping of assets into
categories,    for which relatively rapid write of f for tax purposes would be

allowed. Other changes in tax rules recently enacted or currently discussed

with a similar objective of reducing the tax on capital income from present

inflation—influenced levels are lower effective rates on long—term capital

gains, exemption of a limited amount of dividends and savings account interest

from individual income taxation, and relaxation of restrictions on tax deferred

saving of the sort now allowed via employer sponsored pension programs,

Individual Retirement Accounts and Keogh Plans.
                                       —3--

           These phenomena and policy choices raise issues of economic

 analysis, both theoretical and empirical, which have attracted an appro-

priate amount of professional attention.      Perhaps the most important are

whether the facts indeed warrant the conclusion that there should be more

capital formation and whether, if so, rule changes of the sort under con-

sicleration are likely to call it forth. This paper dodges those difficult

questions. It considers rather the problem of designing tax and related

rules to promote capital formation.1

          To put the matter somewhat more precisely, I take up in this paper

the characteristics of and interactions among measures to effect saving

and investment incentives (henceforth "S—I    incentives")   in the context of

an income tax system that is inadequately indexed for inflation. Although

the issues have been separately addressed many times, a treatment that is at

once unified and reasonably simple is lacking.2 Furthermore, existing analyses

that may incorporate more realistic detail have failed to appreciate suf-

ficiently what legal commentators call the "pressures" introduced to the tax

system by inflation and by the present ad hoc measures to deal with it.

These pressures are by and large created by the opportunity to make money

by undertaking transactions which have offsetting effects on the balance sheet,

but different tax consequences, a process I have referred to as "tax

arbitrage." It is these opportunities for arbitrage profit and how the sys—


1 I have addressed these larger issues in Bradford [1980]. Readers may also
  find helpful the discussion there of the problems created by inconsistent
  treatment of different forms o± savings. For further discussion of the general
  issues see King [1980]. For empirical analysis of the U.S. experience see, for
  example, Boskin [19181, Eisner [1971], Feldstein [1977a,b; 1980], Nalkiel [1979].

2 For an examination of selected investment incentive proposals under con-
  sideration recently in the United States see Hendershott and Eu [1980].
                                       _l4



 tam eliminates them that I shall stress in the following pages.

           Underlying the analysis in this paper is the view that rules which

 do not work well in a simple model world will also not work well in the

 complex real world. This is the justification for confining attention almost

wholly to situations of no uncertainty, no borrowing and lending constraints,

and uncomplicated financial relationships. There is no doubt that the extreme

sorts of outcomes that emerge in simple models, such as conclusions that a

taxpayer's wealth will consist all of one asset, or involve large borrowing,

will be often be prevented in actuality by information and other uncertainty—

related costs. It is clear that a proper treatment of uncertainty is necessary

to a full understanding of capital market equilibrium. However, arbitrage among

relatively risk—free assets represents a significant subset of the transactions

that must be dealt with by the tax system. The qualitative character of out-

comes predicted by the certainty models is observed in the real world.

Furthermore, the learning process is obviously still incomplete and cheap high—

speed information handling is increasingly extending sophisticated tax arbitrage

to a wider market. Thus problems now manifested in the "aggressive" behavior of

a few taxpayers are quite likely to be seen more generally in the future.

          In Section I below, I sketch out the criteria applicable to choice

among saving and investment incentives and offer a classification of measures

differing according to the transactions to which they apply and the way they

work. Section II looks at the major elements of this structure in the context

of stable prices, while Section III takes up the difficult problems posed by

inflation. There is a brief summing up in Section IV.
                                         —5—


          I.   BACKGROUND ON SAVING AND IIWESTMENT INCENTIVES

          Some preliminaries: First, as to what I mean by saving and

investment. I shall use the terms more or less interchangeably, but to

the extent there is a distinction, investment refers to the acquisition

of a real asset, while saving refers to the foregoing of consumption.

Second, as to what I mean by saving and investment incentives. The background

for this discussion is an income tax system. An income tax, by definition,

embodies a saving or investment disincentive in that it creates a divergence

between the rate of return on investment and the yield to the saver. Inflation

may increase this tax wedge.   Thus the incentives we are considering are rela-

tive to existing disincentives, whatever their merits.

          It is important to be aware of a resulting ambiguity of the term

saving or investment incentive as applied to the measures studied here.

As I have stressed elsewhere [19801 ,   in   view of the government's budget

constraint an incentive such as the investment tax credit may be bought at the

price of higher tax rates than would otherwise be possible. The net effect may

be an increase in the tax wedge applicable, at least for some savers.


Criteria for Choice Among S—I Incentives


          At the risk of banality, I would suggest that the criteria for choice

among S—I incentive measures can be summarized by the familiar trinity of

equity, efficiency and simplicity.

          Equity. As usual, equity is the most difficult criterion to deal

with. To start with, one of the objectives of currently considered S—I measures

is to offset inequities that have been perpetrated by inflation, and thus con-

centration on the static characteristics of rules may miss part of the point.
                                       —6—




This is a particular aspect of the more general problem of distinguishing between

transition and steady—state effects.   It is regretable that I shall have most to

say about the better—understood steady state properties of S—I incentives.

          As we shall see, there are essentially two sorts of available S—I

incentives. The first —— which I call C—tax measures —— tend to

equalize the rate of return received by savers at all levels of economic

well—being. The second —— which I call direct grant measures ——   tend   to raise

all rates of return received by savers, relative to the social rate of return,

but do not alter the differentials among after—tax rates of return on savings

characteristic of a graduated income tax. Even with a fixed structure of

tax rates the difference in relative individual welfare involved is not a

priori certain, as it has to do with the lifetime pattern of earnings and

consumption, but it is plausible that the former class of incentives (basically

deductions from the income tax base) is relatively more favorable to high

bracket taxpayers than the latter (basically investment grants or credits). If

desired, such differences could be offset by adjustments in marginal tax rates.

          This would leave horizontal equity differences between the two

approaches, and these are essentially the same as those involved in choosing

between a consumption base and and an income base for taxation. Relative to a

consumption tax an income tax penalizes those who postpone consumption, whether

because they simply prefer to do so, or because their labor earnings, gifts,

transfers, etc., occur early in life.1



1 For further discussion of this issue see Bradford and Toder 11916].
                                       —1—




          Efficiency.   As Auerbach [1979b1 has emphasized, we are dealing here

with a problem in the economics of the second best. This means that, for

example, a measure creating a divergence in the real rates of return on

investment in machines of different durability may not be inferior to a measure,

similar in most other respects, that causes these rates to be equalized. Our

analysis of S—I incentives will simply point out the distortions they engender.

          There are three margins of trade—off of particular interest. First

is that between present and future consumption. An income tax introduces a

wedge between the trade—off available to individuals, through borrowing and

lending or through real investment and production, and that available socially

via the production process——the social rate of return on investment. It thus

inherently involves an inefficiency, albeit a potentially second best one, since

revenue mast be raised somehow. When an income tax is assessed at different

rates on different individuals, there is also a violation of exchange ef-

ficiency: different individuals have different marginal rates of substitution

of present for future consumption. As has been mentioned, S—I incentives of the

C—tax type ameliorate both sorts of wedges, while direct grant measures simply

shift the distribution of private rates of return, after taxes, upward relative

to the social rate of return.

          The second margin is between investment in different forms or dif-

ferent sectors. This is a matter of production efficiency. If the real social

rate of return is not the same in two activities, an opportunity exists to

increase consumption in all periods by shifting resources from the low yield
                                       —8—




to   the high yield activity. Such a situation commonly arises under an income

tax with the weaknesses typical of actual tax accounting systems. Individuals

have an incentive, for example, to push investment in owner occupied housing to

the point that the marginal social (and private) return equals the after—tax

return in fully taxed industries. Similar inefficiencies are predicted by

theory when S—I incentives are limited to particular classes of assets, for

example, manufacturing equipment, or to particular industries. A particular

case is the difference in social rate of return to capital of different durabi—

lities that is predicted when an investment credit is not appropriately varied

with the service life of the asset. At a more refined level of analysis, simi-

lar comments would apply to the risk characteristics of real investments.

           A third significant margin, between different assets in the

household's portfolio, also involves questions of risk bearing. Efficient allo-

cation of risk will normally imply a certain division of each individual's

portfolio among real asset types and among financial instruments such as bonds

and shares. Equilibrium portfolios with taxes may be expected to diverge from

efficiency, and S—I incentives often worsen the distortions characteristic of

the existing income tax, typically in the direction of increasing debt—equity

ratios in the aggregate and concentrating debt ownership relatively in low tax

bracket hands (including life insurance and pension fund portfolios).-

           The degree to which the S—I incentive displaces the existing income

tax presents a further aspect of efficiency. It is reasonable to suppose



1 For analyses stressing this efficiency problem see Gordon 119801 and Gordon
  and Malkiel l9801.
                                         —9—




that   the basic outlines of the existing tax system will be maintained, with

the relatively minor addition of S—I incentive features. It is also the

case that the existing system has solved badly many problems of measure—

ing income from capital, notably in the treatment of owner—occupied houses,

accruing capital gains, and state and municipal bond interest, and in the

absence   of inflation adjustments. If the effect of the S—I incentive is to
reduce reliance on these aspects of the income tax, it    also   diminishes the in-
efficiencies associated    with such defects of income measurement.


           Simplicity. It is difficult to say very much in general about

the potential tendency of S—I incentives to complicate further or to

simplify compliance with and enforcement of the tax law. There is a cer-

tain risk that S—I incentives will bring with them hard—to—administer

rules to prevent "abuse", as in the present rules disallowing deduction of

interest traceable to the purchase or holding of tax exempt bonds, or

will require inherently complex calculations, as in the case of some

aspects of inflation adjustment.

           One desirable characteristic that might be included under this

heading is the degree to which an S—I incentive automatically adjusts to

a changing rate of inflation. Arguments in favor of proposals, for example,

for accelerated depreciation, often turn on their ability to offset the cur-

rent rate of inflation. The measures typically will be inappropriate for

other rates of inflation, implying the necessity for further rule adjustments

when conditions change. Other S—I incentives may be more or less robust to

varying inflation rates.
A Classification of S—I Incentives

          As has been indicated, currently employed or discussed measures

to encourage saving and investment can, with a little license, be placed in two

broad categories, the class of consumption tax ("C—tax") rules and the

class of direct grant rules. These rules in turn may be applicable to either

real or financial assets, and they may apply to the purchase or sale of assets

(a stock notion) or to the yield from assets (a flow notion). This generates an

eight way classification.

          The usual approach to implementing a consumption tax base ("standard"

C—tax treatment) is to permit the taxpayer to deduct from a conventional income

tax base the net purchase of assets during the accounting period. Various S—I

incentive measures have this character, notably including accelerated depre-

ciation of real assets (the standard C—tax treatment would carry acceleration to

the logical extreme of immediate expensing). Contributions by employers to a

qualified pension plan on behalf of employees are subject to the standard C—tax

treatment, since the procedure is equivalent to paying out the contributions in

wages and allowing the employees to deduct the amounts saved in this form.

Subsequent pension dissaving upon retirement is then included in the employees'

income tax base. Similar rules apply to saving through Keogh Plans and IRA's,

further examples of S—I incentives of the C—tax type.

         A classical consumption tax, levied at a constant rate over time for a

given taxpayer, is equivalent in its effect to exempting the yield from saving

or investing from the income tax, and I refer to this as the "alternative"

method of implementing a consumption tax. This approach is also used in

S—I incentives, particularly in the deferral of tax on capital gains accruing in
                                      —l 1.-




either real or financial assets and in the reduced rate of tax imposed on such

gains upon realization. Reducing the rate of corporation income tax can also be

viewed as belonging in this class of S—I incentives with respect to real assets.

The exclusion of dividend and interest receipts (up to a limit) from individual

income tax represents an application of the alternative consumption tax treat-

ment to financial assets. One might also include here the exemption of state

and municipal bond interest, although this is evidently not a measure designed

to encourage saving and investment generally.

          In addition to these two consumption tax approaches on the markets for

real and financial assets, we can distinguish incentives having the character of

a direct grant, which is not subject to tax or equivalent to a deduction from

the income tax base. The prime example of this in the U.S. is the investment

tax credit (ITc), which provides the investor (who has sufficient tax

liability), in effect, a cash grant equal to a fraction of the cost of a real

asset. Unlike the closely related techniques of accelerated depreciation or imme-

diate expensing of investment outlays, the subsidy provided by the ITC is inde-

pendent of the investorts marginal tax rate.

         There is no program in the U.S. system obviously corresponding to this

with respect to saving in the form of financial assets. In other countries,

there exist direct subsidies to saving of a character similar to the U.S.

investment tax credit: the public treasury supplements individual savings by

direct grants, independent of the recipientts marginal tax rate.

         For completeness, we may   note   the possibility in principle of S—I

incentives of the yield exemption type analogous to the investment tax credit.
                                       —12—




Such measures would involve providing the owner of real or financial assets with

an extra return not subject to income taxation. We would then have four approaches

to the subsidy of each of the two asset types, real and financial, a total of

eight hypothetical subsidy techniques. Thble 1 displays the eight—way

classification. Cells 6, 7 and 8 appear to be essentially empty in the U.S.

today.

            In the next section, we look at the way these different incentive

measures work, and interact, under conditions of stable prices (or well indexed

income measurement rules, regardless of inflation).


                                      Table 1

A Classification of Saving and Investment Incentives in an Income Tax System

                                                           Asset Type
         S—I Incentive Type                   Real                        Financial
                                                (1)                         (2)
                                       Accelerated
 Consumption      Standard C—Tax       Depreciation                     Qualified Pension
   Tax              Rules                                                  Saving
  Rules                                 Expensing R&D
                                                ()                          (It)


                 Alternative C—Tax      Capital Gain Special            Capital Gain
                   Rules                   Rules                        Special Rules

                                                (5)                         (6)

                 Grant for Purchase     Investment    Tax Credit        Savings Premium
   Direct          of Assets                                            Programs (not
  Grant                                                                 U.S.)
                                                (y)                         (8)
                  Supplement to
                    Asset Yield         No known examples               No known examples
                    (after taxes)
                                           —13—


            II.   S—I INCENTIVES IN THE ABSENCE OF INFLATION

Consumption Tax Incentives

            To understand the way the different incentives work, how they differ

and how they interact, we are best served by considering their application in a

context with a minimum of complication. Therefore, we focus on the case of an

investment with a risk—free return. To start with, assume away also the gra-

duated structure of tax rates.

            It will be sufficient, furthermore, for most of our purposes to study

the impact of the various rules on one particular sort of real investment

opportunity, the exponentially decaying machine. This is the model made fami-

liar by Jorgenson and colleagues.1 A new machine costing one dollar produces a

rate of output valued at c, after allowing for payments to cooperating factors,

and this is thus the rental rate a producer would be prepared to pay for the use

of   the machine. If   the machine is of durability (5 its rate of output declines

at the   constant relative rate (5; the smaller (5, the more durable the machine.
The output rate of an s—year old machine is thus ceS. Since an s—year old

machine is just equivalent to         new machines, economic depreciation takes

place   at rate (5eS. It is generally assumed that machines of different durabi—
lities are in use at a given time, and their output rates will differ. When it
is necessary to be explicit about this I write c( 5) for the output rate of a new
machine of durability (5.
           Simple   wealth maximizing considerations will determine who will wish
to own machines under various conditions. If the market rate of interest is
given by i, a capitalist subject to a marginal tax rate m, will base his


1 See, for example, Jorgenson [1963] Hall and Jorgenson [19611.
                                       ,
                                                    _])4_

borrowing and lending on the after tax interest rate, (l—m)i. Such a taxpayer
will be willing to offer for a new machine any amount up to the discounted (at

rate (l—m)i) sum of rental payments on the machine, net of taxes, plus depre-

ciation allowances. This demand price for the real asset is a result of pure

arbitrage considerations, and has nothing to do with the capitalist's time pre—

ference or propensity to save. Since the supply price of a machine is 1, the

elimination of arbitrage profit requires


           1 =5 [(l—m)c + m]                  e_(        _m)i)sds   .   (1)


Explicit integration leads from (1) to the familiar condition of

equilibrium


            i =   c(5)   —   cS       .                                 (2)
We may describe as the social rate of return, r(S), on an asset of

durability c3 the internal rate of return on a unit of consumption

foregone. That is,


           1 f c(s) er())5 ds                        .                  ()
Solving   explicity gives us

           r(6) =    c(5)         —       .                             ())

Conditions (2) and () tell us that in equilibrium with an income tax

the social rate of return on investment in machines of different types is the

same. The allocation is thus characterized by production efficiency.1 While



  This has been shown by, among others, Samuelson tl961.
                                               —15—


the common social rate of return in this equilibrium equals the interest rate,

i, the savers receive a lower rate of return, (1—m)i = (1—m)r, whether they save

in the form of financial or real assets. Note that as the marginal tax rate in

does not appear in equilibrium condition (2), this analysis would continue to

hold with different tax rates applicable to different capitalists.

          Accelerated Depreciation. Consider now the way the accelerated depre-

ciation for tax purposes influences the equilibrium outcome. There is no single

interpretation to be given to this notion, but a natural approach in this con-

text is to assume that in reckoning income tax the capitalist is allowed to

treat the machine with actual durability parameter 6 as though it were of dura-

bility 6. For example, since any likely measure of the average effective or

expected lifetime of an asset of type 6 will be inversely proportional to 6,

allowing investors to assume 6* = 26 could be taken to represent a halving of

service lives for tax purposes.

          If the taxation of interest is as before, the no—arbitrage equilibrium

condition with accelerated depreciation is given by



          1        [(i—m)c e —(6 +        (l—m)i)s + m6*e _(6*+(l_m)i)s] ds   ,   (5)

which reduces to relationship (6) among rental rate, interest rate, and depre-

ciation and tax parameters:



          c =   (_m     +
                 (l—m)i +
                            6

                            6*
                                 )(i +   6*)   .                                  (6)
                                            —i6—


We may verify by substitution that if tax and economic depreciation are the

same (6 =   6*),   condition (6) reduces to (2). Increasing (5*   relative   to (5 reduces

the equilibrium rental rate, given i, and results in the return to savers,

(l—m)i, being higher in relation to the social rate of return, c—S.

            If accelerated depreciation is carried to the extreme of instantaneous

write—off, 5 =     °o, equilibrium   condition (6) reduces to


            c = (l—m) j + 6    •                                             (7)

This is the characteristic equilibrium condition for a flat rate income

tax system in which real investment is given standard consumption tax

treatment. Since c—6 is equated over all durabilities, this equili-

brium is characterized by production efficiency, and since c—S = (l—m)i,           the

return to the saver, (l—m)i, is just equated to the social yield on real in-

vestment. Note that in this equilibrium the market interest rate exceeds the

social rate of return by the factor l/(l—m), so that the tax on interest just

takes away the excess over the social return.

            Returning to condition (6), we may inquire about the relationship be-

tween (5 and 6* needed to assure that in equilibrium the social return, c( 6) — 6,

is equated at some value r for all asset types, a condition for production

efficiency. If we let 6*((5) stand for the depreciation rate allowed under the

tax laws when the true depreciation rate is 6, a little algebra shows that pro-

duction efficiency (c(6)—6 =r) requires a particular relationship,



                   =   (i-m)(i-r)    + m6
                                            i                                (8)
                          r — (l—ni)i
                                       —11--



It is assumed here that the rate of return to the saver, (l—m)i, is below the

social rate of return on investment, r.

          Condition (8) may be more readily interpreted if we state the objec-

tive of the accelerated depreciation scheme to be obtaining a specified propor-

tional difference, , between the interest rate and the common social rate of

return on investment, that is, to effect in equilibrium the relationship r =

(l.-)i.   With this substitution, (8) becomes (assuming    less than m)




                  =   (i-m)    i +
                                      m                              ()




Increasing   the degree of acceleration toward effectively eliminating

the tax wedge between private and social return involves setting     closer to m.

From (9), we see this does involve raising      toward , but (9) also tells us

that to avoid inefficiency in the allocation of investment it is necessary to

add a term, related to the interest rate, that itself tends to .

          To get some sort of feel for the inefficiency which might be engen-

dered by failing to calibrate the tax depreciation appropriately to the interest

rate and the applicable marginal tax rate, consider the particular case

described in Table 2.
                                     —18—


                                    Table 2

                      Illustrative Acceleration Schedule
                      and Effects of Using Simple Scaling



   Actual Depreciation        Neutral Accelerated       Social Return (c—s)
        Rate,                Depreciation, 6*(5)!/       when 5* = 2.6&?i
       (percent)                   (percent)                 (percent)


          2                           10                        10.3

          5                           16                         9.5

         10                           26                         9.0

         50                          io6                         8.5




    Assumptions: i=.12, m=.5,
    'Calculated according to text expression (9).
    2Derived from text expression (6).




The first column of Table 2 shows the true depreciation rate of assets. The

second shows the tax depreciation rate required to obtain the effect of a fifty—

percent relief from a fifty percent marginal tax rate, if the before—tax

interest rate is twelve percent. Notable is the fact that the ratio of tax

depreciation to true depreciation rate, near 2 for assets with an expected life-

time of two years, rises to 5 for assets with expected fifty year lives.

Depreciation of long—lived assets must be "more accelerated" than that of short—

lived assets. Failing to calibrate the degree of acceleration in this way,

by employing instead a simple proportional increase in depreciation rates,
                                          —19—



disadvantages    more durable relative to less durable assets.

             The third column of Table 2 illustrates this by showing the social

rate of return in equilibrium on assets of different durabilities when instead

of the usual acceleration scheme a simple proportional shortening of lives is

employed.     In this example the proportionality factor is set to achieve the same

incentive    effect   as the neutral pattern for assets with an expected life of ten

years.     The result is a spread of roughly two percentage points, or twenty—five
percent, between the equilibrium social return on the two—year asset and that on
the fifty—year asset. This difference is the pure social gain that could be
obtained    at the margin by shifting investment from the least to the most durable

assets in the table.

             In assessing whether a given differential in rates of return or tax on

rates of return is ttlargeU, it is    well to keep in mind the proverbial power
of   compound interest. With fifty years of reinvestment at ten percent, $1 accu-

mulates to nearly $150; at eight percent it accumulates to a little over $50.

It thus may make sense to be concerned about differences in equilibrium rates

of return that appear to be small.

            Before leaving this exercise in calculating tax depreciation rates we

should note that the assumption we have employed of a fixed interest rate

involves a sort of self—contradiction. In view of the arbitrage potential, a

fixed interest rate implies a fixed incentive to save, unless the tax rate

declines. If the new equilibrium is to involve a larger amount of consumption

foregone, it will presumably require a higher interest rate. Presumably also,

the tax rate will need to be higher than otherwise to cover the revenue losses
                                       —20—

to cover the revenue losses due to accelerated depreciation. If the tax depre-

ciation rule is not well designed, it is possible that it would do no more than

generate a higher interest rate, higher tax rate and some dead weight loss.'

Much the same can be said of any S—I incentive.

            While exponential depreciation does not encompass all investment

opportunities, we can learn several lessons from this analysis. We see that a

mechanical compressing of the life of an asset for tax purposes will not in

general generate an appropriate balancing of incentives across short— and long—

lived assets, that the adjustment required to maintain efficient resource use

may be moderately complicated to derive, and that it will in general depend upon

the interest rate and the applicable marginal tax rate. However, the problem of

designing a schedule of accelerated depreciation allowances is made to appear

simpler in this case than it is when other possible patterns of the decline of

asset value are taken into account. Each alternative requires, in principle,

its own version of (9).

            Arguably, this says nothing more than that in this sphere as in

others, there is a problem of choosing a sufficiently good approximation. A

further oversimplification is not so easily dealt with. The marginal tax rate

in the equilibrium condition, (6), and in the expression for a neutral acceleration

schedule, (9), is not a constant. Taxpayers with different marginal tax rates

will have different demand prices for the same real asset. Establishing

equilibrium requires assuming constraints on arbitrage (for example, borrowing




-   For an example see Bradford E1980; pp. )42—5O.
                                                 —21—


limits), or a mechanism that produces its own constraints. We shall return to

this issue in the context of an alternative approach to the application of con-

sumption tax rules to real investment.

          Partial Expensing of Real Investment. We know that taxation according

to income properly measured, using economic depreciation, does not upset the

aspect of production efficiency which we are studying, nor does taxation

according to consumption principles, which involves immediate expensing of

investment outlays. One suspects then that a "mixture" of the two approaches,

appropriately designed, should share this virtue. As Harberger [19791 has

recently argued, such is indeed the case.1

          Specifically, consider the effect of allowing in this system the imme-

diate expensing for tax purposes of a fraction a of the investment in the

machine. This means that for given value of i, the demand price of the capita-

list is increased by ma less the loss in value of depreciation allowances. If

the basis for depreciation is reduced by just the amount expensed, elimination

of arbitrage profits implies



          1     f    [(1—rn) c +       m(l—a)]   e61_m5 ds +   ma   .   (10)


Again, explicit integration plus some algebra reduces (io) to

          c —       = (1—mcx)i     .                                    (ii)
          Thus, for the case of exponential depreciation (and this generalizes

easily to all patterns of depreciation) equilibrium with a flat rate income tax



1 Auerbach [1979a} confirms this point for the case of exponential depreciation.
                                     —22—

allowing partial expensing of investment outlays, together with economic depre-

ciation applied for tax purposes to the unexpensed basis, is characterized by

production efficiency in the sense that the social rate of return to marginal

investment in capital of all durabilities (in use) is the same, and given by

(1—ma)i. In this equilibrium the interest rate exceeds the social rate of

return:


                  r
          i=    1-mc
                                                                     (12)


while the rate of return received by the saver in either form is




          (l—m)i =         r                                        (13)


The relationship holding when immediate expensing of all real investment is

allowed is found by setting c=l, whereby (l—m)i=r. The return to the saver

equals the social return. This repeats the result above that immediate

expensing of investment accomplishes the elimination of the tax "wedge" on the

return to saving and thus effects consumption taxation, even though interest

income is subject to tax (and interest outlays are allowed as a deduction).1

          Note, though, that, as in the case of accelerated depreciation, the

single marginal tax rate now enters the equilibrium condition. If the rela-

tionship between the interest rate, i, and the equilibrium rental rate, c(S), is

given by (11), the demand price for a unit machine of a taxpayer with marginal



1This was one of the methods proposed by the Meade Committee for implementing
 a consumption tax in the U.K., where the income tax is imposed at essentially
 a single flat rate for the great bulk of taxpayers. [Institute for Fiscal
 Studies, 1918; ch. 81.
                                         —23—



rate rn', possibly different from m, will be given by



          S +   (l—m')(l+(m'—m)a)i   •                                   (lIt)
                   + (1—rn'   )i




This demand price (obtained by evaluating the right—hand side of (io) for

rn=m', given (11)), derived from pure arbitrage considerations, will be greater

than the supply price, 1, if rn'>m and less if m'<ni.     This accords with

intuition, most clearly for the case a=1 •      For we know that the application of

consumption tax principles to the real investment amounts to exempting the yield

from tax. Any taxpayer can then be assured the rate of return r=c— 3.         This will

just equal the after tax interest rate for the taxpayer with marginal rate m.

For the taxpayer with rate rn'>m, the after tax return on lending or the cost

of borrowing is less. Hence the situation presents an opportunity for arbitrage

profit, with the high bracket taxpayer borrowing to finance the acquisition of

machines, each time earning a pure profit at the expense of the tax system.

          Although one imist be cautious about a mechanical interpretation of

this model, it is instructive to push it to an equilibrium. Such is permitted

by the impossibility of holding negative quantities of the real asset (short

sales of real assets seeming too far fetched). Tax arbitrage profits are elimi-

nated when the marginal rate applicable to equilibrium condition (ii) is rninax,

the highest rate among taxpayers. At that point, all real assets are owned by

top—bracket taxpayers, while the portfolios of lower bracket households are

entirely in loans. The yield on saving by the top bracket taxpayer is related

to the social return according to (13) (with m=mmax) while taxpayers with lower
rates obtain higher after tax yields in the usual way. Those with a suf-

ficiently low marginal rate (below cxinmax) receive a return on saving in excess

of r. When a=1, all taxpayers below the maximum tax bracket will have an after

tax interest rate in excess of the social rate of return on investment.

           Adjusting the Treatment of Interest. The phenomenon of lightly taxed

assets migrating to the portfolios of high bracket taxpayers is not a new

discovery. What seems yet to be recognized is the possibility of offsetting the

effect through varying the rate of inclusion of interest receipts in (and

deduction of interest outlays from) the income tax base. That is to say, a par-

tial standard consumption tax treatment of real investment will be compatible

with an appropriately partial alternative consumption tax treatment of borrowing

and lending. The argument is general, not dependent on the exponential depre-

ciation assumption, and is simply a matter of discovering the inclusion rate

needed to foreclose arbitrage profit.

           Because of the tax rebate, the taxpayer with marginal rate m can

finance a fraction ma of the outlay on real assets by the tax reduction due

to the immediate expensing of the fraction a. In a pure arbitrage transaction

the remainder is financed by borrowing at interest rate i.         If a fraction

y of interest payments is deductible from the tax base together with a fraction

(i—a) of d, the decline in value of the asset during the period, the net of tax

proceeds from rental will be (l—m)c +   m(y(i—cn)i   + (i—cx)d).    This must cover the

sum of interest payments and the actual loss in asset value to the holder. The

former is simply (l—am)i. The latter differs from d because of the treasuryt S

claim   on the value of the asset. A decline of d in the market value of the
                                                   —25—


asset implies a decline of (1—rnn)d in the value of the private owner's share.

Thus the no arbitrage profit condition is given by


               (1—rn)c    + m(y(l—cxm)i + (1—a)d) = (1—cm)i + (l—am)d,         (15)


which   reduces      to


                 =   ( (1_1m)(1_ma)
                           1-rn
                                         + d   .                               (16)




The coefficient of i in (i6) will be identically 1 if




                                                                               (ii)
                     l—mc




           When the proportion of interest allowed as a deduction is given

by y,   defined      in (ii), taxpayers in all brackets are indifferent be-

tween lending and purchasing real assets. The equilibrium interest rate

just equals c.-d, the social rate of return on real investment, and

the rate of return received by the saver is (1—mi)i. When c=1, the

purchasers of real assets are allowed immediate expensing. The corres-

ponding value of y'         is   zero: interest is not subject to tax. Both rules

are precisely those of a consumption tax system with tax rates constant

over time for each taxpayer, although graduated across taxpayers. When

cz=O,   real   assets are allowed only economic depreciation as a deduction
                                           —26—

in calculating the tax base, the principle of true income taxation. In

this case, y1; interest is taxed in full. Table 3 shows the values

of y for various combinations of write—off rate and marginal tax bracket.

                                       Table 3

                 Rate of Inclusion of Interest Income and Deduction
                        of Interest Expense Corresponding to
                     Various Rates of Expensing Real Investment
                                      (percent)


                                           Marginal Tax Rate
 Fraction of Real                              (percent)
 Asset Expensed           10          20             40         50
  (percent)


             0           100         100            100        100       100


         25               11          19            83         86         91


         50               53          56            63         6y


         15               21          29            36         140        53


        100                0           0              0         0          0


    Entries are calculated according to text expression (12) for y, with a =
    fraction of real asset allowed as immediate deduction and m investor's
    marginal tax rate.



             The reader may verify that the demand price for a dollar's worth of

exponentially depreciating real assets, given by the right—hand side of (io),      is
exactly one dollar, independent of the taxpayer's marginal rate, when the

discount rate (l—m)i is replaced by (l—im)i and c is replaced by the equilibrium

value i+6.
                                     —21—


          Cells (2) and (3). Thus far we have focussed on the interactions be-

tween standard C—tax treatment of real investment (cell (i) of Table 1) and alter-

native C—tax treatment of interest (cell c)4) of Table 1). The analysis of stan-

dard C—tax treatment of financial assets (cell (2) of Table 1), typified by

Keogh Plan saving is straightforward. As far as its interaction with the

appropriate treatment of interest is concerned, the argument is basically the

same as applied to real investment. The important difference is that there is

now no possibility to equilibrate away tax arbitrage profits through a differen-

tial in the returns on the two forms of saving.

          To illustrate, if saving in a pension plan could be used to secure a

loan subject to conventional income tax rules, there would be a tax arbitrage

profit obtainable through borrowing (to make the example particularly graphic,

let it be from the pension fund itself) and depositing the funds, together with

the tax refund due upon deducting the deposit, in the pension fund. This

involves no change in consumption and no real change in portfolio. But the

interest on the borrowing is deductible, while the interest on the offsetting

"lending' is not taxed. Since the underlying asset is exactly the same, there

is no possibility for this profit to be eliminated through yield differentials:

the earnings of the fund are the interest paid on the borrowing.

          Controlling this arbitrage profit requires either direct limits on the

arbitrage process or an offsetting change in the treatment of interest.

(Another possibility is found in the endogenous adjustment of marginal rates

over the life cycle; see Bradford [1980, pp. 47'—49I). Current rules follow the first

approach, setting ceilings on annual additions to tax—favored pension savings,

restricting the pledging of pension wealth as loan collateral, prohibiting or
                                     —28—


penalizing withdrawal of funds before retirement, and so forth. While these

rules no doubt inhibit arbitrage profit, they also tend to eliminate the incen-

tive effect of the programs. Pn individual who has reached the ceiling

confronts the usual (l—m)i yield on incremental savings, as does one suf-

ficiently deterred by the restrictions on the pension asset to stop short of the

statutory ceiling. Significantly lifting these restrictions on the standard C—

tax treatment of financial assets calls for associated changes in the taxation

of interest, along the lines discussed in connection with the standard C—tax

treatment of real investment.

          Discussion of cell (3) of Table 1 requires a closer look at the rules

for taxing sales of depreciable assets (importantly real estate) and certain tax

favored activities, such as ship building and timber production. While there is

no doubt an important story to be told here, it extends beyond my knowledge of

the rules. However, we can readily see that there is a potential for

"double—dipping,' with assets subject to the incentive effects of both standard

and alternative C—tax treatment. This would have the consequences of production

inefficiency and portfolio distortion as a function of marginal tax brackets of

the sort analyzed in connection with standard C—tax treatment of real investment

with no change in the taxation of interest.


Direct Grant Incentives

          We can move more quickly through the discussion of direct grant

incentives since the basic analytical approach is now familiar. Further-

more, there is as a practical matter only one program in question, that of
                                        —29—


a direct subsidy   to   real investment expenditures. This happens to be ad-

ministered through the tax system, in the form of the ITC. Two     features
distinguish it from a directly appropriated grant. First, the credit may only

be applied to settlement of positive tax liability. This may mean the subsidy

is not available to many firms at a given time. Certainly it introduces incen-

tives for somewhat artificial financing arrangements and creates administrative

complexity, an aspect of the ITC about which I have nothing new to say. Second,

the subsidy is not reflected in the basis for depreciation. That is, while the

cost of an asset to the taxpayer is the price net of tax credit, depreciation

allowances are calculated as though the full price had been paid. This is

nothing more than a mismeasurement of income, and the appropriate analysis is

the same as that above in connection with accelerated depreciation.1

          Zero arbitrage—profit equilibrium with an ITC correctly calibrated for

durability, together with allowances for depreciation calculated on the basis of

the purchase price of the asset net of tax credit, will be characterized by pro-

duction efficiency in the sense we have been using, and neutrality with respect

to the portfolios of wealth holders. The latter property, indeed, depends only

on the use of economic depreciation (of the net of credit asset value) for tax

purposes. We may see these conclusions easily in the exponential depreciation

case, where the elimination of arbitrage profits requires



          1   f     (i—m)c + m(1—k)6] e( (1m)i)s ds + k       ,         (18)




1 An early treatment of this is found in Brown 1962; for further details see
  Bradford l919J.
                                             —30—


where k is the fraction of the unit purchase price of the asset available

as a credit against tax. Upon explicit integration and simplification, this

condition reduces to




             c —       = (1—k)i — k5   .                                      (19)




We see that, as m does not appear in the equilibrium condition, arbitrage pro-

fit opportunity is eliminated for individuals in all tax brackets by (19).

However, to obtain equality of the social rate of return, c—5, over all asset

types, CS,   in   use in equilibrium, a particular relationship, k(S), between

the credit rate and the durability of the asset is required. It follows from

(19) that to obtain a given value, r, of the social rate of return requires

k(S) to satisfy




             k(CS) =   1-   (r                                                (20)




             This relationship is illustrated in Table 4.      In   the second column

are shown the credit rates necessary to obtain a social rate of return of

9 percent where the associated interest rate is 12 percent, assumptions

paralleling those of Table 2.          (The savers thus receive a rate of return of
                                          —31—


(1—m)12 percent, depending upon individual marginal tax rates.) It will

be seen that a considerable variation is required to implement a subsidy

that does not distort the choice of asset lives. To give an idea of the

effect of failing to take into account the need to calibrate the credit for

durability, the third column of Table 14 shows the social rate of return on

assets of different lives when a flat rate credit of 13.6 percent is ap-

plied uniformly. This is the credit rate which induces a social yield of

9 percent for an asset with a ten—year expected life (still assuming an

interest rate of 12 percent). Because of the bias toward short—lived assets

this entails, investment in less durable assets is driven to the point of

very low social yield (it would go to zero for an asset with zero life)

while the social rate of return on long—lived assets exceeds 9 percent

(tending to lO.)4 percent for a non—depreciating asset).

                                          Table 14

                   Illustrative Neutral Tax Credit Schedule
                     and Equilibrium Social Rate of Return
                               Using a Flat Rate


     Actual                   Neutral ITC                  Social Return (c—cS))
   Depreciation                 Ratel!                     When k( 6) = .136J
    Rate, 6                        k(6)
    (percent)                  (percent)                      (percent)


       2                          21.14                        10.1

       5                          li.6                          9.1

      10                          13.6                          9.0

      50                           14.8                         3.5



    1Calculated according to text expression (20) for r=.09, i=.12.
    2Calculated according to text expression (19) for i=.12, k=.136.
                                     —32—

          Certain general conclusions emerge from this discussion of direct

grant incentives for the purchase of real assets. First, if economic depre-

ciation of the net of credit cost of the asset is employed in calculating

taxable income, we do not encounter differential effects on the demand price for

assets as a function of the applicable marginal tax rate ——    effects   which called

for a change in the taxation of interest under the consumption tax approach to

S—I incentives. A corollary is that increasing the rate of credit does not

affect the relative taxation of the returns to saving as in   varies   across

taxpayers. In the case of the consumption tax approach, as the level of incen-

tive is increased, the rate of return on consumption forgone obtained by all

savers tends toward equality with the social yield on investment. In the direct

grant approach, as the subsidy level is increased the whole structure of indivi-

dual rewards to saving goes up relative to the social return on investment, but

there is no tendency toward equating the private yields of taxpayers in dif-

ferent marginal rate brackets.

          Designing a credit structure to avoid production inefficiency may be

difficult.1 While in the particular case of exponential depreciation the for-

mula is not particularly complex, it requires knowledge of both the target

social rate of return and the interest rate that will call forth the private

saving necessary to generate precisely that rate of return. Furthermore, a dif-

ferent formula applies to each pattern of depreciation.2 In view of the dif—


  E. Cary Brown [1962] shows that one way to achieve the correct calibration of
  the credit is to structure it as flat "net credit," that is, a fixed percen-
  tage of the difference between the cost of the machine and the present value
  (at the net of tax interest for that investor) of economic depreciation
  allowances. Since this is equivalent to calibration of the ttgross credit," it
  is subject to the same problems.

2 For examples of the formulas applicable to other patterns of depreciation see
  Bradford [19191.
                                       —33—

ficulty tax authorities have in determining the facts about depreciation, a

requirement that the credit rules be written with a detailed knowledge is a

severe one.

          Finally, we may note that the consumption tax approach to S—I incen-

tives tends to substitute rules with few measurement problems for the income tax

rules which are subject to many problems. The greater the C—tax type of

incentive, the less important are the shortcomings of the income tax residual.

The direct grant approach does not share this property.

                       III. S_I INCENTIVES WITH INFLATION

Background on Inflation and Taxation

          The previous section considered the properties of various S—I incen-

tive measures under conditions of stable prices. Inflation brings with it new

problems of income measurement.1 An ideal indexing system would solve those

problems, and if we had such a system, the preceding analysis would be all that

were needed. We do not, however, and the notion that an extra tax on the reward

to saving is a consequence of inflation has motivated such of the recent move-

ment to enact S—I incentives. In this section we consider, still in the simple

model, the consequences of steady state inflation and the effectiveness of

various measures to offset it.

          To start with, let us review the way in which an unindexed tax

system  affects the equilibrium in the market for real assets, first in a
flat rate tax system. With a steady rate of inflation ii, the nominal flow of
rentals obtained from a machine of age s is ce(1)5, while under historic cost
depreciation   the allowance for tax purposes is       The no—arbitrage—profit

condition becomes


1 For a general treatment see Stiglitz l98O.
                                               _3)4_


               1   =f     [(i—m)c e(6_(1—m)i)s +       m   e—((1—m)i)sJ ds   .    (21)


 Provided ii   is   less than       + (1—m)i, this condition can be reduced to



              c =   (                ) (i+)     •
                                                                                 (22)


 When lr=O   this   reduces in turn to condition (2).

             We can see from (22) that dth historic cost depreciation and no

 indexing of interest inflation influences both the relative social yields from

assets of different durabiljties and the real return received after taxes by

savers. The latter is given by (1—m)i—'rr, and thus whether it is increased or

decreased by inflation depends upon whether the equilibrium interest rate

increases by more or less than 1/(1—rn) per point increase in inflation.1

Letting i stand for the real interest rate, such an adjustment would imply


             1=1+—       Tr

                        1-rn
                                .
                                                                                 (23)

             An adjustment of this magnitude is apparently counter factual in the

U.S. recently-. But we might ask whether it is likely even in our simple analy-

tical model. Such an adjustment would imply no change in the equilibriuni

productivity-, c, (also called the "gross rental rate") of
                                                                    non—depreciating

'This required adjustment in I to compensate savers for inflation has been
 stressed by Feldstein f1976J. For an attempt to rationalize the fact that
 interest rates have moved with inflation at most according to Fisher's law (point
 for point) in the U.S. in recent years see Feldstein and Summers [19y8].
Feldstein, Green and Sheshinski [19781 explore models of interest deter-
mination under conditions of inflation. Stiglitz [1980J has emphasized that
with imperfect indexing the incidence of inflation depends upon the measures
taken to maintain adherence to the government's budget constraint. General
conclusions about the effect of inflation thus require modeling the
government' s reaction.
                                                -35-
machines, as can be verified by substitution of (23) into (22) for the case
of cS =   0.    The same analysis leads to the conclusion that the equilibrium gross

rental rate (and hence the social rate of return) would necessarily rise for all

other durabilities. If the law of diminishing returns applies to investments of

different durabilities, this condition would imply a reduction in the capital

stock in the aggregate. If the capital stock desired by private wealth holders

is a declining function of the private rate of return, this is incompatible

with the assumption, expressed in (23), of a constant value of (1—rn)i—x.      In

this sense there is a presumption that, absent correction of income measurement,

inflation will lead to a decline in the real private rate of return, (1—m)i—x, a

decline in the overall capital stock, but an increase in the stock of the most

durable forms of capital.

               This is in accord with Auerbach's [19191 analysis but in contrast to

Feldstein's [l98o view that inflation biases the pattern of investment in favor

of short—lived assets. The basis for Feldstein's conclusion is the behavior of

what he terms the "net cost" of a dollar of investment, defined to be one minus

the sum of the investment credit and the present value of real depreciation

allowances, where a constant real discount rate is employed in the evaluation.

If we let r stand for the latter rate, k(S), the investment credit allowed for a

machine of durability ô, and CH the net cost per dollar of investment under

historical cost depreciation,


                 CH = 1   _f                    ds -   k(6)
                                                                            (2)

                    = 1 —       m
                                        —k(S)
                               5+r+ir
                                        -36-

Clearly   the net cost of neither an infinitely durable asset (=o), nor an instan-

taneously depreciating asset (=),      is   affected by inflation. In between an

increase in ii   increases CH, with the relative increase rising and then falling
with 5. The range of parameter values considered by Feldstein was drawn mostly

from the rising segment of this relationship.

           A shortcoming of this approach is that it leaves unexplained the

discount rate used by investors, which is treated as a given. In our analysis,

the discount rate is a market price and its place in the calculation is deter-

mined by pure arbitrage considerations. As a market price, the discount rate

may itself be influenced by the economic environment, including the rate of

inflation. I find the arbitrage argument persuasive, particularly where (as in

both analyses) debt and real investment are treated as though riskiess.

           All of the analysis thus far is based on the assumption of a single

marginal income tax rate, m. We can see from (22) that with unadjusted

depreciation, the demand price for investment goods will vary with the tax

bracket of the investor. The rental rate in (22), which is the minimum required

to cover taxes, depreciation and interest, declines with m.       If the rental

rate and interest rate are such as to permit a taxpayer with marginal tax rate

in to break even (on purchase of a machine of given durability), taxpayers in

higher brackets will have an opportunity for pure arbitrage profit through

borrowing to finance real investment while low bracket taxpayers will want to

sell machines and lend. This is a situation similar to that discussed above.

In that case equilibrium in the model required all real investment to be in
                                      -31-
the   hands of tap—bracket taxpayers. While   to   elaborate on the details would

require more space than merited, there does not seem to be any analagous way of

achieving equilibrium in this case. Just how actual markets clear is not

obvious, but it is safe to say that without without correction of income

measurement for tax purposes inflation generates distortions in the composition

of both the real capital stock and individual portfolios.

           Inflation Adjustment. Full inflation adjustment of the accounts would

involve, first, converting all dollar amounts in the calculation of the tax to

consistent units, that is, dollars of equal purchasing power. A natural choice

of units is current dollars. Inflation adjustment thus calls for increasing the

basis of assets sold in the calculation of capital gains and in the deter-

mination of depreciation allowances, as well as for similar changes in inventory

accounting. These adjustments are conceptually straight forward.

           Less obvious are the changes called for in the treatment of interest.

In principle, the value of the lender's asset after the payment of interest is

exactly what it was at the beginning of the period. Payments considered

"interest" in the usual income tax rules are intended to have this character,

and, by and large, they do when prices are stable. Thus, if a depositor

withdraws the interest paid by a savings bank during a year, the nominal

balance is constant. Regarding this interest as income is thus correct when

there is no inflation, but when there is inflation it overstates the income of

the depositor and understates that of the bank by the loss in purchasing power

of the nominal balance over the year. Correcting the accounts calls for asso-

ciating with interest payments a sum corresponding to the bank balance —— presum-

ably one would call it the "principal" —— and allowing the creditor a deduction

for the loss in purchasing power of the principal during the year, while
                                        -38-

assessing the debtor with additional income in equal amount.'
          Following this procedure, the net of tax interest rate, i.e., the

discount rate applicable to nominal cash flows, becomes (1—rn)i + mn.   In the

case of steady inflation, this is equivalent to adjusting interest payments to

reproduce the effect of taxing on the basis of the real interest rate, i—if.     IlTt




may be readily verified that adjusting both the real and the financial sides of

the accounts in this way restores the calculus of equilibrium to full equiva-

lence to the no inflation case with the same real interest rate.

          Because the adjustment of interest called for involves equal and oppo-

site changes in the tax bases of debtors and creditors, precisely the same eco-

nomic effect can be accomplished by a change in the interest rate in a flat—rate

tax world. To see this, note that with only depreciation allowances adjusted

condition (21) becomes



                   [(i-m)c   + m6]   eN — (1m)i)s   ds                   (25)
          1 1                                            ,




which reduces to


          c=i+ s————
                  1-rn
                              .                                          (26)




1 For detailed discussions of the problems of indexing the income tax for infla-
  tion see Aaron [1976] , Bulow and Shoven [1975; 1916], Fabricant [1918].
                                      -39-


Since (26) implies c—5 is the same for all     we conclude that indexing real

investment accounting will restore the property of production efficiency to

capital market equilibrium. If, furthermore, the nominal interest adjusts

according to (23), (25) implies in turn that


           c =   I   +   ,                                                 (21)

which is to say the real rental rate and after tax real interest rate are

unaffected by inflation. Note again the large responsiveness of the interest

rate to inflation required to obtain this outcome. The nominal rate must

increase by enough to cover the inflation premium plus the tax due on that

premium.

           Unfortunately, if marginal tax rates vary across individuals,

condition (26) tells us that portfolio distortion is still a problem. There

will be opportunities for tax arbitrage profits, with high bracket taxpayers

borrowing to buy real assets and low bracket taxpayers selling real assets to

lend at interest. The result is pressure toward the sorting of portfolios along

lines already discussed.

           To sum up, it is possible by reasonably simple methods to correct for

the effects of inflation on the tax base arising from real investment.

Furthermore, this would be sufficient in a flat rate tax system, provided nomi-

nal interest rates were sufficiently flexible. However, with graduated rates,

there will be portfolio biases unless the treatment of interest is adjusted as

well. This is a much more difficult matter administratively. Current

discussion of S—I incentives emphasizes their potential to offset inflation.
                                      -no-


One objection to this is obvious, that an incentive designed to offset one

inflation rate will be inappropriate at another. Not so widely recognized is

the fact that none of the measures under consideration addresses the need to

simulate correction of interest transactions. Hence as we consider next the

properties of S—I incentives under inflation, we know that this is one problem

which they will not solve.


S—I Incentives and Inflation

          The way in which accelerated depreciation or the investment credit

fits into this scheme requires no new analytical materials. From the discussion

thus far, we know that these measures can not provide a general solution to the

problems posed by inflation. The situation calls for a second—best analysis, to

determine whether they could effect an improvement on equilibrium with existing

rules.

          The principal difficulty seems to be modeling the effect of inflation

on the interest rate.   It is tempting to deal with this by appealing to the

observation that the interest rate moves roughly point—for—point with the infla-

tion rate. However, consideration of the problem of setting depreciation

allowances to maintain a fixed rate of return under this assumption simply draws

attention to the paradox that it represents, namely, an inexplicably low nominal

interest rate. For the adjustment required is a cut in depreciation allowances.


          To see this, let     be the depreciation rate allowed for tax purposes.

The zero arbitrage profit equilibrium condition, under the assumption of

Fisher's law, is then
                                                  -4l-




        1 =1    (l-m)c        e(       (1m)i)5 + mä* e_(*+(1_m)i)sIds .             (28)

We can see that setting the tax depreciation allowance below the economic level

to the extent of the inflation rate, that is =5—ir (making the tax depreciation

rate negative for the most durable assets), leads the equilibrium condition to

reduce to


                c =   i   +   S,                                                    (29)


and since, by assumption, i =           i÷ir,   where i is the real interest rate, this in

turn implies


                c =   i   +   5    .                                                (30)

To rationalize Fisher's law thus calls for, in effect, taking into the tax base

the purely nominal capital gains on real assets, and under this condition, real

investment will be unaffected by inflation.

            The difficulty is in explaining how the assumed relationship between

interest rate and inflation rate could characterize equilibrium without the

noted cut in depreciation allowances. y conjecture is that the apparent vali-

dity of Fisher's law results from some combination of failing to account

correctly for the riskiness of debt and incomplete adjustment of markets.
                                             ——


          The analysis above of equilibrium       under   C—tax treatment of real

investment and graduated rates suggest we should anticipate an interest rate

adjustment close to that required to maintain the after—tax real return to high

bracket taxpayers. Jorgenson has also recommended working with the assumption

that the corporate tax rate, or a marginal tax rate of roughly 50 percent, would

dominate the arbitrage between the real capital and lending markets. whereas

Fisher's law asserts a point for point adjustment of minimal interest to

inflation, this assumption involves a 1/(1—rn) point increase in nominal

interest rate per point increase in the inflation rate. We know that indexing

real investment returns will justify this result and lead to efficient

investment. In view of the difficulty of implementing indexation however, we

may wish to consider acceleration as an approximation if the rate of inflation

is expected to be constant.

          It turns out that for the exponential depreciation case this is rela-

tively simple. After integration and some algebra the zero—arbitrage—profit

equilibrium condition (28), when combined with our interest rate assumption, can

be written as:


         _=j+(l_0m _l\6                  ,                                    (31)
                \1_m /
where
          = ((1_rn)   i+   c5_rr\   5*
            \ (1—rn) i   + 5*       5



In order that the equilibrium with inflation rate, 'ir, be the same as that with

zero inflation, tax depreciation, 5, should be set to render zero the coef-

ficient of S on the right—hand side of (31). This in turn requires setting 5

according to the formula:
                                     -3-

                                                                         (32)




          Note that under this interest rate adjustment assumption an increase

in depreciation allowances is called for. The required adjustment is rather

sensitive to the assumed real interest rate, i. For example, for

m   .5,     .09 and x= .1, (32) implies the tax depreciation rate should be
about three times the economic rate; for     .03,   tax depreciation should be at

nearly eight times the economic rate. To get a feel for what this might mean in

terms of service lives, we might interpret the "life" of an exponentially depre-

ciating asset to be the point at which more specified fraction (eq. 1/8) is

exhausted. This would imply service lives inversely proportional to S.     Thus

(32) would call for assets to be depreciated (on a declining balance basis)

assuming lives roughly one third of those used in the absence of inflation for i

assumed equal to nine percent, one eighth for i assumed to be three percent.


          C—Tax Rules and Inflation. One of the virtues of consumption tax

rules is their indifference to inflation. A numerical example will make this

clear. Take the case of an individual with a 50 percent marginal rate who

wishes to save $100. Under the standard C—tax rules, he would nominally "save"

$200, but would receive a tax rebate of $100 due to the resulting deduction,

thereby forgoing just $100 in consumption. With stable prices and a 10 percent

interest rate, the $200 would increase to $220 by the end of a year. The indi-

vidual now has the option of "dissaving" $220, paying the associated tax of $110

and increasing consumption by $110, thus obtaining the full 10 per cent return

on postponed consumption. By the alternative C—tax rules of exempting the yield

on saving, the ten percent return is obtained directly.
                                      _424


          Now suppose the situation is one of 100 percent per annum inflation.

If the real interest rate is unchanged, $100 set aside in the first period will

increase to $220 in the second period. The saver subject to the alternative C—

tax rule of yield exemption obviously continues to receive a 10 percent real

yield on consumption foregone. This is so because the $100 given up in the first

period is equivalent to the $200 return of principal in the second period, while

the $20 interest is equivalent to $10 of first period consumption. The same out-

come obtains for the saver subject to standard C—tax treatment. The $200

"saving" involves foregoing $100 of consumption in the first period, while

"dissaving" of the $1O accumulated by the second period is divided between $220

in taxes and $220 of increased consumption, exactly the same terms enjoyed by

the conventional saver with exempt returns.

          It is thus the case that the real effect of a flat rate C—tax

system is independent of the rate of inflation. The same thing will hold

for a graduated rate system in which the rate structure is corrected for

inflation. This adjustment, the easy part of inflation indexing, is sometimes

called in the tax policy jargon "type I indexing," and it is the only sort of

tax correction that seems to have a significant political appeal. Absent type—I

indexing there is a tendency for inflation to subject the future dissaving

corresponding to current saving to a higher rate of tax, and thereby inflation

may interact even with C—tax rules.

          We may easily verify the propositions about flat—rate C—tax rules

under inflation for the case of exponential depreciation. With the interest
                                        .-j45—



rate   adjusting point for point with the inflation rate, the no—arbitrage—profit

condition with standard C—tax treatment of real investment and no inclusion or

deduction of interest becomes




                      (l—m)c               ds + m   ,                     (33)
            1 =01




which reduces, as expected, to



            c—6i .                                                        (3))

            While   full application of C—tax rules is simultaneously an S—I incen-
tive and   a cure for inflation—induced measurement problems, partial application

of C—tax rules, involving partial expensing of new investment and partial inclu-

sion of interest income in the tax base, only partially solves these problems.

The portion of the investment that is in effect taxed as income is subject

to all of the difficulties due to defects in income measurement, including those

associated with inflation. These include increased effective rate of taxation

with inflation and pressure on portfolio composition, with high bracket tax-

payers seeking to borrow from low bracket taxpayers to finance purchase of real

assets. This suggests the continued importance of developing rules to measure

income correctly or to impose a tax burden on investment equivalent to that

resulting from correct income measurent.
                                         ——


The Auerbach—Jorgenson First—Year Write—Off Scheme

          In this connection it is appropriate to digress from the Subject of

S—I incentives to consider a suggestion put forward recently by Alan Auerbach

and Dale Jorgenson [19801.1 They address themselves to the notion that

correcting depreciation allowances for inflation is too complex for practical

administration. Under their proposal, as an alternative to current deduction

of inflation—adjusted depreciation allowances, investors are allowed a single

deduction at the time of acquisition of the asset equal to the present value of

the appropriate stream of real depreciation deductions, where a real discount

rate is applied in the calculation. This procedure is intended to accomplish

the effect of indexing historical—cost based depreciation allowances for changes

in the general price levels but to be simpler in implementation. Such

complexity as there is is embodied in the derivation of tables by the tax

authorities, specifying the allowance for each type of asset.

          The characteristics of this scheme emerge immediately if we note

that it involves eliminating the current depreciation allowances, as seen

in the term   e(    (l—m)i)s in the cash flow stream of expression (25)

for the current—depreciation adjustment case, and replacing them with a

lump sum initial deduction of



                                ds   ,




1 According to Joseph Pechman [1980] the Auerbach—Jorgenson proposal is a
  rediscovery of an idea of Nicholas Kaldor.
                                      --
where the tildas on 5 and i indicate the use of forecasted values of

these variables. It follows immediately that the two schemes are wholly

equivalent if the term iT — (l—m)i is equal to it —   (l—m)i.   The

practical promise of the method, insofar as a reasonably exact substitute

for inflation indexing is desired, depends upon determining the correct

value of it —   (i—m)r.

          This involves two difficulties. First is the necessity to employ

a discount factor taking into account the individual tax bracket of the

investor. Second is the necessity to incorporate the relationship

between it and i to the adjustment. As we have seen this is problematical. The

scheme works out precisely if the taxation of in terest is also adjusted for

inflation. Then the real after—tax interest rate for all taxpayers will be

(1—m)i, and this replaces —(iT— (l—m)) in calculation of the first year depre-

ciation allowance. Since i is tyically assumed constant, it is reasonably

straightforward to adjust the allowance for differences in m, if m is known.

Table 5 illustrates under the assumption i=.03. To give an idea of the sen-

sitivity of the scheme to the discount rate assumed, Table 5 also shows the

allowances for i.O9.
                                         ——


                                     Table    5



                        Illustrative First Year Deduction
                      Under the Auerbach—Jorgenson Approach


    Depreciation                                   Marginal Tax Rate, rn
    Bate, 6                                              (percent)
    (percent)
                                    10             20      10     50       70

       2                                           15      53     57       69
                                   (20)           (22)    (27)   (31)      (1)

       5                            65             68             77       85
                                   (38)           (l)     (18)   (53)      (65)
      10                            79             81      85     87       92
                                   ()             (58)    (65)   (69)      (9)
      50                            95            95       97     97       98
                                   (86)           (81)    (90)   (92)      ()

    Entries (in percent) show the percentage first—year write—off equivalent to
    economic dereciation allowances, calculated according to the formula
    6/(6+ (1—m)i), where , the real interest rate, is assumed = .03. Figures
    in parentheses show the allowance assuming i   .09.




           For both corporate and individual taxpayers there may be a question

about what marginal rate to employ in setting the first—year allowance.

This difficulty also arises in the application of the adjustment of the interest

deduction discussed above to coordinate with partial C—tax treatment of real

investment. In that context, it may be acceptable to use the taxpayer's current

marginal rate. In the Auerbach—Jorgenson scheme, however, more may well be

riding on the rate chosen, because it affects the taxation of the entire asset

purchase price and not one year's yield. Thus problems caused by variations over
                                     _)49



the life cycle and variations which might be induced by the deduction itself

(shifting the taxpayer to a lower bracket) may require resort to approximations.

          While the discussion thus far incorporates the basic principle of the

Auerbach—Jorgenson first year allowance, their actual proposal does not discri-

minate according to the investor's marginal tax rate. Allowances are based

instead on the present value of depreciation deductions using the same discount

rate in all cases, and thus are uniform for all taxpayers. One way to view this

is as an approximation to the theoretical model. If the allowance corresponds

to the ideal for a fifty percent marginal rate investor, for example, we see

from Table 5 the deduction will be "too large" for a lower bracket taxpayer, and

"too small" for a higher bracket taxpayer. Correspondingly there will be a

tendency for arbitrage to move the real assets toward low—bracket portfolios,

debt toward high bracket portfolios. Futhermore, if the allowances are "just

right" for the fifty percent investor, they will not be correctly calibrated

with respect to durability for the lower bracket investors, providing relatively

too much incentive to purchase short—lived assets.

          The first year allowances summarized in Table 5 are predicated on the

assumption of expotential depreciation. Other depreciation patterns would,

strictly speaking, call for different allowances; otherwise some inefficiency

in the composition of investment would be expected.1 Much the same

issue has already been discussed above in connection with investment credit. In

the present state of knowledge about depreciation there is unlikely to be anything



  Different depreciation patterns would also require different "recapture rules"
  applicable to sale of assets, a subject we shall not pursue here.
                                          —50—

practical to be done about it.

     Because under the Auerbach—Jorgenson scheme the full allowance for depre-

ciation is taken in the first year its real value is wholly insensitive to the

rate of inflation.' As we have noted, if interest payments and receipts are

adjusted for inflation, and if the correct value for the real interest rate is

employed in the formula, the Auerbach—Jorgenson first—year allowance just dupli-

cates the effect of indexing annual depreciation deductions. Otherwise, and in

particular without correction of interest payments and receipts, the effect will

not be identical. If the first year allowances are based on an assumed real

interest rate i, but nominal interest is fully taxed and deductible, the no—

arbitrage—profit equilibrium condition is given by


          c =   + (l_m)i-1r
                 + (i—m)i
                              (i +   ).                              (36)



This equilibrium condition is to be compared with (26), the condition when

depreciation is actually indexed but interest is not adjusted. Even with a

single flat rate of tax, the two are not identical unless nominal interest

adjusts according to (23). In addition, it should be stressed that under

neither approach to insulating the accounting for income from real assets from

inflation can the system reproduce the effect of adjusting interest payments

and receipts when there are different marginal tax rates. This will always

result in pressure for low bracket taxpayers to sell real assets to lend and

high bracket taxpayers to borrow to buy real assets.



1There is a frequently—overlooked but practically highly significant condition
 in this statement: the investor must have sufficient taxable income gross of
 the depreciation deduction to make use of it.
                                     —51—

          The Auerbach—Jorgenson first year allowance is not, strictly, an S—I

incentive measure. It is a procedure for approximating the indexation of depre-

ciation allowances for inflation. It would, however, be a simple matter to com-

bine the first—year depreciation allowance with a partial first—year expensing

of investment or with an investment credit and thus realize any desired degree

of S—I incentive. A flat credit on the difference between the cost of the new

asset and the first year allowance would maintain production efficiency.1 In

the case of partial expensing the entire deduction would be available in the

first year, but it would consist of the desired fractional write—off of the

investment, with the remaining fraction eligible for the Auerbach—Jorgenson

allowance. As this approach represents simply a combination of two measures

already discussed, it recluires no fresh analysis.


                                IV. SUMMING UP

          In this paper, I have suggested an eight way classification of saving

and investment incentives. Perhaps the most fundamental is the division into

the class of consumption tax treatments and the class of direct grants. Roughly

speaking, the former includes measures, such as accelerated depreciation and tax

sheltered retirement savings plans, which increase deductions or reduce inclu-

sions in the income tax, while the latter includes measures, primarily the

investment credit, providing an incentive not directly related to the investor's

income tax circumstances. The difference between the two classes is of impor-

tance primarily when tax rates vary in the population of savers and investors.



  This is thus a "net credit,t' as discussed in footnote 1, p. 32. I would like
to thank E. Cary Prown for pointing out to me the natural adaptivity of the net
credit to the Auerbach—Jorgenson proposal.
                                    —52—


          It proved possible for us to reach some fairly general conclusions

about the way incentives of the two classes operate. As to the broad charac-

teristics of the outcomes under the two approaches, we saw that increasing

levels of consumption tax incentives tend to lead to a convergence of the

returns received by savers toward the social rate of return on investment. At

the same time, because the process has the effect of displacing the income

taxation of the returns to saving, income measurement problems, including inflation

correction, tend to diminish in importance. Consumption tax incentives can also

be relatively simple to design. ,Thile this does not hold for accelerated

depreciation, we saw that expensing immediately a specified fraction of invest-

ment outlay, together with a reduced inclusion of interest receipts, provides an

incentive without distorting either investment choice (among assets of different

durabilities) or portfolio composition (between debt and real asset ownership).

          The direct grant approach via the investment tax credit, by contrast,

leads to an increase, relative to the social return on investment, in the rates

of return received by savers, but does not bring about their convergence.

Provided the basis for depreciation of assets purchased is reduced by the amount

of the credit (and provided the original depreciation rates are accurate), this

approach also maintains neutrality with respect to portfolio composition. On

the other hand, designing the credit to take correct account for differences in

asset durability is relatively difficult. Furthermore, the direct grant

approach does not share with the consumption tax approach to savings and invest-

ment incentives the tendency to displace imperfect income measurement rules as

the amount of incentive is increased. In particular, it does not to the same

degree reduce the sensitivity of the tax system to the rate of inflation.
                                         -53-


            A point that has been emphasized here is the interaction among the con—

swnption tax incentives. In particular, it has been stressed that applying con—

suxnption tax incentives to real investment without implementing a corresponding

exclusion of interest from tax (and corresponding reduction in interest

deductibility) tends to drive real assets into the hands of the highest bracket

taxpayers and to negate the potential of the consumption tax approach to bring

about convergence of the yields on saving. What has not, to nr knowledge, been

recognized before is that there is an exact and relatively simple degree of

interest inclusion appropriate for each level of write—off of real investment, a

fact that would ease a gradual phasing in of a consumption—type base should

this be the objective of policy.

            Inflation upsets the measurement of the yield of both real and finan-

cial assets. S—I incentives are commonly viewed as instruments to offset these

measurement problems. However none of them addresses the problem of correcting

interest income. As a result it is difficult to reach clear conclusions about

their relative properties, because it is difficult to model eciuilibrium in a

graduated tax rate system. Without any correction for tax purposes, a change in

the nominal interest rate of 11(1—rn) points per point of inflation is

necessary to maintain the after—tax yield of a lender (or after tax cost of a

borrower)   with marginal tax rate in.   Thus   an interest rate change that just off-
sets   inflation for one taxpayer will be too large or too small for most others.

            Just where the change settles has a bearing on the predicted effect of

measures, such as accelerated depreciation and the ITC, affecting the taxation

of real assets. Theory predicts a concentration of real investment in the hands of
                                       -5k-


relatively   high bracket investors and relatively large changes in interest rates

with inflation. To offset the resulting impact on the efficiency and quantity

of real investment, accelerated depreciation or the ITC offer possible alter-

natives to indexing depreciation, but they do not correct the portfolio

distortions. Furthermore, observed variation in interest rates does not seem

large enough to be consistent with this view. Fully convincing analysis of the

alternatives to indexing may have to await the sorting out of this puzzle.
                                     —55—

                                  References


Aaron, Henry J., 19'6, ed., Inflation and the Income Tax. Washington: The Brookings

     Institution.


Auerbach, Alan J., 1979a, "Inflation and the Choice of Asset Life," Journal of

     Political Economy, June, 89, pp. 621—38.


Auerbach, Alan J., 1919b, "The Optimal Taxation of Heterogeneous Capital," The

     Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, 93()4), pp. 589—612.


Auerbach, Alan, J., 1980, "Inflation and the Tax   Treatment   of Firm Behavior,"

     NBER Working Paper No. 541. September, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of

     Economic Research.


Auerbach, Alan J., and Jorgenson, Dale, 1980, "Inflation—Proof Depreciation of

     Assets," Harvard Business Review, September—October, pp.


Auerbach, Alan J., 1981, "A Note on the Efficient Design of Investment

     Incentives," The Economic Journal, March, 91(361), forthcoming.


Boskin, Michael J., 19y8, "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate      of   interest," Journal

     of Political Economy, April, 86(2, Part 2), pp. S3—S28.



Bradford, David F., 199, "The Case for a Personal Consumption Tax," in Joseph

     A. Pechman, ed., What Should be Taxed, Income or Expenditure? Washington:

     The Brookings Institution, pp. 15—113.
                                       -56-



Bradford, David F., 1980a, "The Economics of Tax Policy Toward Savings," in

     George N. von Furstenberg, ed. , The Government and Capital Formation.

     Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, pp. 11—11.


Bradford, David F., 1980b, "Tax Neutrality and the Investment Tax Credit," in

     Henry J. Aaron and Michael J. Boskin, eds., The Economics of Taxation.

    Washington: The Brookings Institution, pp. 281—298.


Bradford, David F. and Toder, Eric, 1916, "Consumption vs. Income Base Taxes:

     The Argument on Grounds of Equity and Simplicity, Proceedings of the

     National Tax Association, pp. 25—31.


Eisner, Robert, 1911, "Capital Shortage: rth and Reality," American Economic

     Review, February, 6i(i), pp. 110—15.


Fabricant,   Solomon, 1918, "Accounting for Business Income Under Inflation:

     Current Issues and Views in the United States," The Review of Income and Wealth,

    March, 21(l), pp. 1—21.


Feldstein, Martin S., 1916, "Inflation, Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest,"

    American Economic Review, December, 66(b), pp. 809—820.


Feldstein, Martin S., 19'TIa, "Does the United States Save Too Little?" American

     Economic Review, February, 6y(i), pp. 116—121.


Feldstein, Martin S., 1971b, "National Saving in the United States," in Eli

     Shapiro and William L. White, eds., Capital for Productivity and Jobs.

     Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:   Prentice—Hall.
                                       —51—


 Feldstein, Martin S., 1980, "Inflation, Tax Rules and Investment: Some

      Econometric Evidence," NBER Working Raper 511. October, Cambridge MA:

     National Bureau of Economic Research.


Feldstein, Martin S., 1981, "Adjusting Depreciation in an Inflationary Econorcy,"

     National Tax Journal, March, 3)4(1).


Feldstein, Martin S., and Summers, Lawrence, 1978, "Inflation, Tax Rules, and

     the Longer Term Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (i),

     pp. 61—109.


Gordon, Roger H., 1980, "Inflation, Taxation, and Corporate Behavior," NBER

     Working Paper 588. December, Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic

     Research.


Gordon, Roger J. , and Ivklkiel, Burton G. , 1980, "Taxation and Corporate

     Finance," NEER Working Paper 516. November, Cambridge, MA: National

     Bureau of Economic Research.


Hall, Robert and Jorgenson, Dale, 1967, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,"

     American Economic Review, June, 51(3), pp. 391—41)4.


Harberger, Arnold C., 1980, "Tax Neutrality in Investment Incentives," in Henry

     J. Aaron and Michael J. Boskin, eds., The Economics of Taxation.

     Washington: The Brookings Institution, pp. 299—316.

Hendershott, Patric H., and Hu, Sheng—Cheng, 1980, "The Relative Impact of Various

     Proposals to Stimulate Business Incentives," in George M. von Furstenberg,

    ed., The Government and Capital Formation. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, pp. 321-336.
                                       —58—

Institute for Fiscal Studies, 1918, The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation,

     Report of a Committee Chaired by Professor J. E. Meade. London: George

     Allen and Unwin.

Jorgenson, Dale W., 1963, "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior," American

     Economic Review, May, 53(2), pp. 241—59.


King, Mervyn, 1980, "Savings and Taxation," NBER Working Paper 1428, January.

     Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.


Malkiel, Burton G., 1919, "The Capital Formation Problem in the United States,"

     Journal of Finance, May, 314(2), pp. 291—306.


Pechman, Joseph, 1980, "Tax Policies for the 1980's," Tax Notes, December

     22, 11(25), pp. 1195—1208.


Samuelson, Paul A., 196)4, "Tax Deductibility of Economic Depreciation to Insure

     Invariant Valuations," Journal of Political Economy, December, 12, pp. 6014—606.


Shoven,   John B. and Bulow, Jeremey I., 1975, "Inflation Accounting and

     Nonfinancial Corporate Profits: Physical Assets," Brookings Papers on

     Economic Activity, 3, pp. 551—611.


Shoven, John B. and Bulow, Jeremy I., 1916, "Inflation Accounting and

     Nonfinancial Corporate Profits: Financial Assets and Liabilities,"

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 15—57.


Steuerle, Eugene, 1980, "Is Income from Capital Subject to Individual Income

     Taxation?" OTA Fper 1.2.     October, Washington: U.S. Treasury Department.
                                      —59—




Stiglitz,   Joseph E., 1980, "On the Almost Neutrality of Inflation: Notes on

     Taxation and The Welfare Costs of Inflation," NBER Working Paper No. )499, July.

     Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
