                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE EFFECT OF RISK ON INTEREST RATES:
               A SYNTHESIS OF THE MACROECONOMIC
                      AND FINANCIAL VIEWS


                      Pentti J. K. Kouri

                     Working Paper No. 6I3




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          March 1981




I wish to thank Stanley Fischer, Jorge de Macedo and members of
Professor Paunlo's money workshop at Helsinki University for useful
discussions and comments and the Ford Foundation for financial
support. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper 11643
                                                             March 1981



               The Effect of Risk on Interest Rates: A Synthesis
                    of the Macroeconomic and Financial Views



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper analyzes the effects of real income and price level

uncertainty on equilibrium interest rates. It is demonstrated that even

if there are no outside nominal assets, the interest rate on nominal bonds

contains a risk premium, or as the case may be, a risk discount. The sign,

and the magnitude, of the deviation from the Fisher parity depends on the

covariance between the purchasing power of money on the one hand and real

income on the other.

     The second part of the paper extends the model into a model of two

countries, two monies and two bonds denominated in these two monies. It

is shown, in contrast with statements made in the literature, that the

'efficiency' of international financial markets does not imply equality of

expected real interest rates on bonds denominated in different currencies,

nor does it imply that the forward exchange rate should be an unbiased

predictor of the future spot exchange rate. This is again true even when

there are no outside nominal assets in the world economy.



                                               Pentti J.K. Kouri
                                               New York University
                                               Department of Economics
                                               8 Washington Place, 7th Floor
                                               New York, New York 10003

                                               (212) 598--7048
 Introduction


      This paper analyzes the determinants of interest rates on bonds

 denominated in different currencies, with emphasis on the effects of

 risk. Part I of the paper develops a simple stochastic monetary model

 of a closed economy. In that model the payments arrangements are explicitly

specified and money is introduced as a medium of exchange. Nominal and indexed

bonds serve as stores of value, and choice between them reflects a trade-off

between risk and return. Unlike most macroeconomic models developed in the

literature, the model explains financial flows between different groups

in the private sector. It is assumed that there is a group of "borrowers"

whose income is in the future, and a group of "lenders" whose income is

in the present. This difference in endowments explains the existence of

a capital market. A further difference between lenders and borrowers

is that the borrowers' future real income is uncertain while the income of the

lenders is known with certainty. To the extent that the future price level

is correlated with real income, borrowers can share their income risk by

issuing (or purchasing) nominal bonds. It is shown that this correlation

explains the existence of a risk premium or a risk discount on nominal bonds

even when the outside supply of nominal bonds is zero. It is shown further

that a change in the mixture of bonds supplied by the government between

nominal bonds on the one hand, and indexed bonds on the other, changes the

risk premium (or discount) on nominal bonds. These results show that the

existence of a risk premium in the bond market is fully consistent with all

the assumptions that are typically made in the models of efficient capital

markets. Thus the   Fisher   parity is not an implication of market efficiency.
                                                                                  2




         In the concluding part of section 1, I reinterpret the model as one of

 an open economy, with the indexed bond interpreted then as a foreign currency

 denominated bond. The model implies that the international Fisher parity does

 not hold in general but there is typically either a risk premium or a risk

 discount on the domestic bond. Since the nominal interest rate differential

 is equal to the forward premium by arbitrage, this result implies that the

 forward exchange rate is not an unbiased predictor of the future spot exchange

 rate.

         In part II, I develop a model of two countries, two currencies and bonds

denominated in these two currencies. The results of this model show that

equilibrium interest rates are affected by price level and real income

uncertainty in a systematic way.

         The analysis of the paper lends support to the macroeconomic portfolio

balance models that assume imperfect substitutability, and casts doubt on

the extreme "financial views" which assume equality of expected real interest

rates with no allowance for systemic changes in risk premia.

     The problems addressed in this paper have been earlier discussed in

Kouri(1976). That paper developed an international capital asset pricing

model with monies, bonds and equities, and demonstrated the existence of

risk premia on nominal bonds in market equilibrium. The present paper differs

from the earlier paper in its explicit treatment of money as a medium of

exchange. Financial flows within the private sector are also modelled

explicitly, unlike in the earlier paper which treats the private sector as

one entity, Yet another difference is that in this paper I use period

analysis rather than Continuous time analysis and thus avoid the stock-flow

dichotomy that characterizes continuous time portfolio models. Other relevant

references include the pioneering contribution of Solnik(1973), and the
                                                                              3




contributions of Grauer, Litzenberger, and Stehle(1976), Fama and Farber(1979),

Frankel(l979), de Macedo(1980), Kouri(1976), Kouri and de Macedo(l978),

Porter(1971) and Wihlborg(l978). The way that money is introduced in the

model is similar to the modelling of money by Clower(1967), Helpinan(1979),

Lucas(l980), Niehans(1978), and Shubik and Wilson(1977).

     Finally a point of clarification. Exchange rate risk is interpreted in

this paper literally as unpredictability of the nominal exchange rate,

rather than as relative price uncertainty. Indeed, relative prices are

assumed to be constant and the purchasing power parity is assumed to hold.

The purchasing power parity does not hold in practice, and unpredictable

changes in relative prices are obviously an important concern. Kouri and

de Macedo(1978) and de Macedo(1979) investigate the effects of such

uncertainty on asset demands. A more complete treatment of the problem

remains to be done. It is, however, useful to settle the question what

effects price level and exchange rate risk have in the financial markets,

before considering the more difficult questions that arise with uncertainty

of relative prices.

     Another simplification made in the paper, that needs to be dropped

in further work, is the assumption of price flexibility and full employment.
                                                                               4



                                    PART I

                            A Model with One Money

      In this section I develop a simple stochastic monetary general

 equilibrium of an economy with three assets: money, nominal one-period

 bonds and indexed one-period bonds. The structure of the model is as

 follows. Time flows continuously but it is divided into intervals by

 evenly spaced discrete points. All economic 'events' take place at

 these discrete points. Between them the economy is at stationary

equilibrium, with all prices and quantities constant. Production,

consumption and trade take place continuously, but their levels are

adjusted only at discrete points in time. At these same points in time

prices are determined in each market so as to clear supply and demand

for the duration of the following period. The demand for money derives

from transactions requirements within each period:   payments for

purchases of consumer goods must be made continuously in cash while

income is received in the form of lump sum payments at the beginning of

each period. This lack of synchronization between cash payments and

cash receipts explains stock demand for money. Transactions between

money and bonds within periods are ruled out. Otherwise, the treatment

of money in the model is the same as in the Baumol-Tobin model of

transactions demand. Money does not serve as a store of value.

Nominal and indexed bonds serve this function for savers. Bonds are

issued by private borrowers who are able in this way to exchange anticipated

future income for current consumption. The government also issues bonds

to finance deficit spending. There is no equity market in the model.
                                                                               5




In consequence, uncertainty of future real income cannot be directly traded

away. It influences the demands for and the supplies of nominal and indexed

bonds. Therefore, market equilibrium interest rates will be affected by

real income uncertainty, as well as by price level uncertainty. The price

level is determined by the quantity equation. The supply of money controlled

by the central bank.

     I assume a stationary population with overlapping generations. Each

cohort lives for two periods and is divided equally into a group of lenders

or savers on the one hand, and a group of borrowers on the other. Savers

earn income in the first period, and have to save in order to be able to

consume in the second period. Borrowers earn no income in the first period.

They have to borrow against their uncertain future income in order to be

able to consume in the first period. This difference in the endowments

of savers and borrowers explains the existence of a capital market.

Capital markets provide also the additional function of risk sharing

between borrowers whose future real income is uncertain and savers whose

real income is certain. Borrowers can share their real income risk with

lenders by issuing nominal bonds if the future price level is negatively

correlated with their future real income.

     Next, I introduce the notation of the mathematical model. Iinfor-

tunately, the notation is quite tedious.
                                                                                                        6




                        Y1 = real                income of the young lender in the first period


                        L           =    labor    input of the young =   labor   input of the old


                                    =    stochastic real income of the young borrower in the
                                         second period

                                    =    labor   productivity


        c1(c1b) =                        first   period consumption of the young lender (borrower)


                                    =    stochastic    second period consumption of the young lender
                                         (borrower)
      ob
      Y1 =                          = real       income of the older borrower in period 1 =
                                         real    income of the young lender in period 1

      oc(bc) =                           consumption of the old lender (borrower) in the
                                         current period

                                G = government         consumption


        Q1             —--- = purchasing            power of money, or the inverse of the price
                                1        level in the first period


         2
                  =                 = stochastic       pruchasing power of money in the second period




                                R1 =     nominal interest rate on nominal one-period bonds
                                         in period 1


                                    =    real interest rate on indexed bonds in period 1

r1 =(l+R1) —a-—
                                -l =     expected   real rate   of return on one-period nominal bonds
                      '<1


                                    =   expected purchasing power of money in the second period

                            b
             9.
                                    = nominal stock of nominal bonds bought or issued by
        A1 (A1 )
                                        young lenders (borTowers) in the first period
                                                                              7



       SAC =     stock    of nominal bonds issued by the 'bank holding company'


10A1 oAb) = nominal      stock of nominal bonds sold or amortized by old
                 lenders (old borrowers) in the first period

     _1s1 = stock      of nominal bonds issued by the government in the
                 previous period and amortized in the current period

      S1 = stock       of nominal bonds issued by the government in the
                 current period

      SAf =      stock    of nominal bonds issued by firms in the first period



       B13
                 stock of indexed bonds bought or issued by young lenders
                 (j=), young borrowers (j=b), or the government (j=g) in
                 the first period

      B13 =      stockof indexed bonds bought or amortized by old lenders
                 (j=), old borrowers (j=b), or the government (j=g)
       2T =      government tax revenue in real terms

        fl =     profit   of the banking system =   seignorage from money creation

             =   government expenditure in the first period


       M1S =     nominal money stock supplied by the banking system
                 in the current period

             =   nominal money stock held by young lenders (i=2),
                 young borrower (i=b), or the government (i=g)
                 at the beginning of the first period


      °M11 =     nominal money stock held by old lenders (i=2) or old
                 borrowers (i=b) at the beginning of the first period

             =   nominal money stock held by firms at the end    of   the
                 previous period

       A1 =      nominal stock of nominal bonds acquired by the banking
                 system in period 1
                                                                                      8




                 denotes a stochastic variable


                 denotes the expected value of the stochastic variable


           X     denotes the realized value of the stochastic variable


           X denotes the desired or planned value of variable X; thus:


           X2= planned expected value of variable X in the second period =
                   = expected    value of variable X2 in the second period;
                 finally, the following two terms will be used:

           X =   ex-ante   value of variable X; and


           X =   ex-post   value of variable X;


For notational convenience it is assumed that there is one member in each

group. Thus, total population is four.

       Before deriving the demand and the supply functions, I discuss the

organization of trade and payments. As was said above, prices are changed

only at evenly spaced discrete points in time, and they remain constant

between 'market days'. All production and consumption plans are also

revised only at the same discrete points in time: within market days

production and consumption remain constant. After production and consumption

plans have been co-ordinated, trade takes place at the equilibrium prices

and, by assumption, markets clear continuously until the next market day.

Money is needed in the organization of trade between households and firms.

At the beginning of each period firms buy labor services from households --

at   a constant rate per unit of time --     for   the duration of the next period.
                                                                           9




Wages are paid as a lump sum payment at the beginning of the period. During

the period firms accumulate money balances from the sale of output.

Households start the period with a money stock which is equal to their

planned consumption expenditure during the period. As they pay for their

purchases of consumer goods, they deplete their money balances. At the

end of the period, households have no money: the whole money stock is

held by firms. The government must also pay continuously for its

expenditure with money. I assume that taxes are paid lump sum at the

beginning of the period. If taxes were paid continuously the quantity

equation would look different. Figure I illustrates the circulation of

money in the economy:


                                 Figure I




        1                             2                                        3


     Consider next the conditions of market equilibrium at the beginning

of period 1. There are five equilibrium conditions and four markets:

output market, labour market, market for nominal bonds, and market for

indexed bonds. Equilibrium in the output market during period 1 requires

that planned consumption by households and the government equals the planned

supply of output by firms.
                                                                             10




          1.    C1 +
                        b
                       C1
                              +
                                      C1
                                           +
                                               ob
                                                   C1
                                                        +
                                                            G1
                                                                  =



Time is measured in such a way that the length of each period is one unit.

Thus C1, for example, denotes both the rate of consumption at a point in

time, as well as the rate of consumption per period:

        Output is produced by labor only and full employment is assumed to

prevail. Thus:


          2. Y1=q1•2.L
The condition of the labor market equilibrium determines the real wage

rate.    I assume that firms are competitive and may make zero profit.

This requires that:


          3.       •
                       P1
                            = L   •
                                       W1(1
                                               +            or:

                       w1    = ____
                               _____
               w1 =



The left-hand side of equation (3) is the cumulative value of sales

during period 1. It is also equal to the stock of money balances held by

firms at the end of period 1. L.W on the right-hand side is the lump sum

wage payment that the firm makes at the beginning of period 1. This payment

is financed by a loan with interest rate R1. The condition of zero profit

requires that firms are able to pay the principal and the interest of their

loans with the money that they have at the end of the period. This is

exactly what equation (3) says. Equation (4) shows that the equilibrium

real wage rate is a decreasing function of the nominal interest rate.

This is because the cost of working capital, or money balances in this

case, is the nominal interest rate when money pays no interest. The cost
                                                                          11




of working capital is typically ignored in models of price determination,

although it is as real as the costs of any other necessary inputs.

     The equilibrium condition for the market for nominal bonds is:


                    +   b    -   sc       -   sf   -   sg + p =
The first three terms are discussed later. Firms need to borrow (sA1f)

to finance the advance payment of wages. The governments' borrowing

requirement (sA1) arises from deficit spending. The demand for bonds

by the banking system, or the supply of bank loans (A1) is equal to

the supply of money. Note that the equilibrium condition for the bond

market is in terms of new issues or new acquisitions. This is because

all bonds are one-period bonds; there is no 'overhang' from the previous

period, Bonds acquired or issued in the previous period do, however,

enter the budget constraints.

     The market for indexed bonds is in equilibrium when the following

equation holds:


          6.   B1 +     b g  +        =



Neither   firms nor banks hold or issue indexed bonds. Both are completely

hedged against unpredictable changes in the price level because they only

hold nominal assets or liabilities.

     The fifth equilibrium condition is that between the demand for and

the supply of money:

               b +o ob jg Ms
          7, l 1
               p1       p1
                                  1

                                 p1
                                          +
                                              '1


                                              p1
                                                        1
                                                                           12




Firms' stock demand for money is zero at the beginning of the period

because they make a lump sum payment of the total wage bill. At the

end of the period the firms, however, hold the entire money stock

initially held by households and the government.

     I shall not be concerned with the details of monetary control.

I assume simply that the central bank controls the total supply of money,

and treat the banking system as a consolidated entity.

     Given the level of output from equation (2), only three of equations

(1), (5), (6) and (7) are independent by Walras' Law. The three are

sufficient to determine the price level (P1), the nominal interest rate (R1),

and the real rate of interest on indexed bonds (r1).

     Next, I discuss the balance sheet constraints of the economic agents.

Since these must hold both in terms of desired and actual values, I do not

make the distinction below. For the consolidated banking system we have:


        8.1.
               rr1 =A1 •           R   and


        2 M 1S     = A
                     --1
                           S
                               -



The first equation simply states that the profit of the banking system,

or the seignorage from money creation, is equal to the total interest

income that banks earn on their holdings of nominal bonds. The second

equation says that the supply of money in period 1 is equal to the stock

of bonds purchased by the banking system in period 1.

     The distribution of the seignorage introduces some complications.

The implicit tax on money balances causes distortions which need to be

examined more carefully in a separate paper. In this paper I assume that

there is a 'holding company' of all banks which distributes the seignorage
                                                                                   13




back to wage earners in such a way that their income is not affected by

the implicit tax on cash balances. This requires a transfer to wage
                        R
earners in the amount           which is the present value of the
                                   1
seignorage that accrues to banks in the current period and is available

at the end of the period. The holding company has to borrow to be able

to make the payment at the beginning of the period:

                                                 R
                         1                 p         1
        9    SAC        l+R            2
               1                               l+R             1 1



     The balance sheets of firms have already been discussed in connection

with equation (3). They are given more explicitly by the following two

equations:


     10.1.          =   sAf        (1 +
                                               R1)       and


             sAf =             =
     10.2.
                        2LW1                   ll *
                                       l+R1

The first equation says that the stock of money held by firms at the end

of the previous period is just sufficient to pay the outstanding loan as

well as the interest on the loan. According to the second equation,

the firms' issue of bonds in the current period is equal to their total

wage payment at the beginning of the period.

     The budget constraint of the government is given next.


                                                                        2T +   +
     10.3.   G1 +   (l+R1)S        A11'P1 +              (l+r1)5 B1 =
                                                                         14




The left-hand side of this equation is the sum of total government

expenditure on goods and services (G1) and on the service of public debt.

The right-hand side shows the two sources of finance: tax revenue (2T)

and borrowing (s/ and S)
     For the household sector we need to specify budget constraints for

four different groups: young borrowers and lenders, and old borrowers

and lenders.

     Old lenders spend all of their assets in the second period of their

lives:


               =
                    (°A1/P1)(l+R1)             + OB(l)
Old borrowers earn wage income in the current period, and receive

one-half of the seignorage. They also pay taxes to the government:


    12. OC =       Y1
                        -
                            T1   + (1÷R1) A1b/P1 + (l÷r1)B1b

     For young lenders and borrowers we need to specify budget constaints

for two periods. Young lenders earn income and pay taxes in the first

period. The tax payment is made at the beginning of the period. The

budget constaint is:


    13. C1 + A1/P1 + B1 =                  -   T
                                      V1


The second period budget constraint is stochastic:


    14.
                   (A1/12) (1+R1) + B1(1+r1)
                                                                               15




Young borrowers earn no income in the current period and, accordingly,

must borrow to finance their consumption:

                 b        b         h =
      15.      C1 +     A1 /P1 + B1
                                           0.


It is not necessary that both Ab and Bb are negative, only that their

sum   is    negative.

       The second period budget constraint of young borrowers is given by:


      16. b =                -T   +                   +
                                      (A1b/2)(l+R1)       B1b(l+r)

The accounting framework of the model is flow complete. What remains

to be done is to derive the consumption and the asset demand functions.

       I assume that the intertemporal and risk preferences of borrowers

and lenders are identical. Both seek to maximize expected utility

from current and future consumption subject to their budget constraints,

specified above.         I also assume that the different groups hold the same

expectations concerning the future. To obtain explicit results, I assume

a quadratic utility function of the form:


      17.                                       +         -   (C1 -
              max E1U (C1, C2) = E1C½C1

where E1 denotes expected value at the beginning of period 1.

       The only parameter, -y , measures both risk aversion and intertemporal

substitution, This can be seen by writing the maximand in the form:


      18.     max            ÷        -
                                          (C1-2)2 -                   where


V(2) = E1(2-C2)          =    variance of second period consumption. The interpretation
                                                                                             16




  of this equation is that the agent has equal dislike for variability

  ([C1-2]2) and variance (V[2]), or unpredictable variability of
 consumption over time.

         At this point it is necessary to specify the stochastic elements

 of the model. I assume that productivity is stochastic and therefore

 real income is also stochastic. The variance of real income is assumed

 to be constant and it is denoted by
                                                           The other exogeneous source
 of uncertainty is the uncertainty of the future money supply. To save

 on notation I shall, however,
                                            carry out the analysis directly in terms
 of price level uncertainty, or rather in terms of the uncertainty of

 the purchasing power of money (inverse of the price level). The variance

of the proportionate change in the purchasing power of money (2/Q1)

is denoted by aQ. Finally, the covariance between
                                                                          and (2/Q)
is denoted by
                     cryQ.

        Consider now the choice problem of the young lender. He seeks

to maximize (17), subject to (13) and (14).                     Upon substitution, the

unconstrained maximization problem becomes:


    19. max                                            -        -                -
                                                y{Y1       T1       A1Q1(2+r1)       B1Z(2÷r1)}2
                                                                                                   -


                     y (A1Q1)2(l+r152 csQ2}} where

    =                    - 1   =
        (l-i-R1)------             expected real return on nominal bonds, and

aQ =    V(2/2)=          variance of the purchasing power of money in the

second period. The first order conditions are:
                                                                                               17




  20.1.            YY1
                          -   T   -
                                          A1Q1(2+r1)
                                                            -
                                                                    B1(2+r1)}    (2+r1) -

                              n2           2
                                               = 0,   and
             yA1   Q1(1+r1 )

  20.2.                   -   T   -                         -                   (2+r) = 0
                   yY1                    A1LQ1(2+r15               B1(2+r)}

      The choice problem of the young borrower is to maximize (17),

subject to (15) and (16). The first order conditions are:


                               T
                                                                     B1(2+r1)} (21n) -
  21.1.                               -
                                          A1bQ1 (2+r1) -

                   b           n2 2 - y(1+rn                    )         0     and
              yA1 Q1(1+r1 )


  21.2.                       + T     -                         -                 (2+r1) = 0
                       -Y2                A1bQ1(2+r1n)               B1(2+r1)}

In both maximization problems the second order conditions are met.

      Rather than solving the first order conditions in terms of the

individual demand functions, I proceed directly to a discussion of

market equilibrium.


Market Equilibrium


      It is convenient to analyze the determination of equilibrium prices

in terms of asset demands and supplies, dropping the output market.

This can be done in a period model, in which the stock-flow dichotomy

does not arise (on this point see Tobin[l980]). The three assets in the

model under consideration are money, nominal bonds arid indexed bonds.

The   corresponding    prices are the price level, the nominal interest rate,

and the real interest rate on indexed bonds, Instead of the nominal
                                                                                                       18




interest rate, I carry the analysis in terms of the expected real interest

rate on nominal bonds (r1 )        defined   as (l+R1)—--- -      1.    It should be
                                                            '<1

remembered, however, that this variable is not observable. There is a

subtle point that has to be discussed with reference to the condition

of equilibrium between the demand for, and the supply of, money.

Equilibrium condition (7) is in terms of ex-ante demand for money.

We know that ex-ante demand for money is equal to the cumulative value

of planned expenditure during the current period. In equilibrium,

however, planned expenditure equals total output. Accordingly, the

ex-post equilibrium condition can be written in a much simpler form --

as a Fisherian quantity equation:



    22.



The distinction between ex-ante equilibrium between money demand and

money supply on the one hand, and ex-post equilibrium on the other,

does not matter when one is only concerned with equilibrium positions.

     To analyze the determination of interest rates, I rewrite equations

(5) and (6) in the form:


    23.     A1Q1 + A1bQ1      =
                                  SQ   + SAC    .
                                                    Q   +
                                                            5A1
                                                                  +   sAf   •
                                                                                Q1
                                                                                     -
                                                                                         A1
                                                                                              •
                                                                                                  Q1


    24.     B1 + B1b      =   sg
     Equation (23) can be further simplified by using the fact that

SAC +     sAf   =
                    A1:   the banks only supply working capital to firms and,

on a net basis, hold neither government bonds nor bonds issued by households,
                                                                                  19




 Thus, equation (23) becomes:


     25,    A1Q1 + A1bQ1 =        SQ
After all these efforts we have ended with two equations, (24) and (25),

which are familiar from the standard portfolio model. The two left-hand

sides of these equations are the net private sector asset demands, while

the two right—hand sides represent supplies of assets by the government.

Note that, in equation (25) the right—hand side is equal to the total

stock of government bonds, including bonds that may be held by the

banking system.


No Outside Assets


     Consider first the case when there are no government bonds, so

that both sg and sg are zero, Adding up equations (20.1) and

(21.1) on the one hand, and equations (20.2) and (21,2) on the other,

equilibrium conditions (24) and (25) become:


   26.1    r1' -             - Y1)(2   + r1H) -   (l   + r1')
                                                                YQ
                                                                     =   0, and

   26.2    r1 -             - Y1)(2   + r1) = 0


Equation (26.2) shows that the real interest rate on indexed bonds,

r, depends only on the expected change of real income.' Risk has no

effect on it. Substituting from equation (26.2) into (26.1) we get:


    27. r1 -            =
                              y(1 + rj')(2 + r1)
                   r1                                  aYQ


  1. This result does not carry over to more general models.
                                                                                                            20




Thus, whether there is a risk premium or a discount on nominal bonds

depends on whether the covariance between real income and the purchasing

power of money is positive or negative. The magnitude of the risk premium

(or discount) depends also on the size of the covariance term, rather than

on the variance of the purchasing power of money. The premium (or discount)

is an increasing function of the level of real interest rates and of the

degree of risk aversion, as measured by y

     If the covariance term is zero, there is no risk premium or discount.

In that case, however, there is no intermediation in nominal bonds either:

from equations (20) and (21), A1 and A1b are both equal to zero if

     is equal to zero. As long as there is intermediation in nominal bonds,
YQ
both borrowers and lenders are subject to price level uncertainty, and the

equilibrium interest rate will also be affected.


The General Case


     In the general case we have the following two equilibrium conditions,

obtained by adding up equations (20.1) and (21.1) on the one hand, and

equations (20.2) and (21.2), on the other.


   28.1. r1 + 1{(Y1-V2)           -
                                      A1Q1(2
                                                +
                                                    r1)    -
                                                                   1(2 + r1)}             (2 +
                                                                                                 r1)    -



                   g                  n2 2 - (1      +
                                                               n
                                                                               =0
              yA1 Q1(l +      r1      )
                                                          r1       )




   28.2. r1 +
                y{(Y1
                        -
                            Y2)           A1Q1(2 +   r1)       -
                                                                       81g(2
                                                                               +
                                                                                   r1)}    (2 +
                                                                                                  r1)
                                                                                                        =   0.

These equations are nonlinear in the two interest rates, and the implied

demand functions for outside assets are not monotonic functions of the

two interest rates. The ambiguity arises from the fact that the income
                                                                                    21




 effects of interest rate changes may offset the substitution effects.

      Substituting from equation 25.2 into equation 28.1 we get:
                n
           r1
     29.                     (1 + r1n)2 aQQ1A1 +               r1)
                    +   r                                             °YQ

This equation shows that the risk premium or discount on nominal bonds

contains two elements. The first is the compensation for the inflation

risk that the private sector is subject to if it has to hold a positive

supply of nominal government bonds. The inflation risk premium, or

perhaps more appropriately, the price level risk premium, increases with

the variance of the price level as well as with the real value of the

stock of nominal government debt. Monetary policy can change the risk

premium through the effect of price level changes on the real value

of government debt. An increase in the nominal supply of money, for

example, increases the price level, reduces the real value of nominal

government debt, and thus reduces the inflation risk premium on nominal

bonds.

     The second component of the total risk premium (or discount) could

be called the hedge premium or discount. This was already discussed

above. Since a              is equal to                where           is the correlation
                                          PyQ   ayaQ            Pyq
between     and /Q1 , an            increase in the variance of real income increases

the risk premium if the correlation is positive, and reduces it if the

correlation is negative. Note that the risk premium depends also on the

level of the two interest rates.

     I leave the analysis of the full effects of changes in risk as well

as in the supplies of government indexed and nonindexed bonds on the two

interest rates for another paper, Next, I reinterpret the model as one

of an open economy.
                                                                               22



The Open Economy


     Suppose that we call the indexed bond a foreign currency bond instead,

and assume that the foreign price level is constant. Let us further assume

that all goods are internationally traded and that the purchasing power

parity holds. Also assume that foreign investors do not hold domestic

bonds. Then, equation (29) gives the expected domestic interest rate,

     as a function of the foreign interest rate,
                                                        r1 ,   the   real value of

the outside supply of domestic currency denominated bonds as well as

the variance of the purchasing power of domestic money and its covariance

with domestic real income.

     Since the forward premium must be equal to the difference in nominal

interest rates by arbitrage, equation (29) implies that the forward premium

is not in general an unbiased predictor of the expected change in the

exchange rate. There is a systematic bias which consists of a premium

for the exchange rate, or inflation risk when there is a positive outside

supply of bonds, and of a hedge premium that derives from correlation

between   real income and the exchange rate.


                                    Part II
                            A Model with   Two Monies


     In this part I extend the model to two countries and two monies.

To simplify the analysis I assume that both countries produce only

internationally traded goods whose relative prices remain constant.

The purchasing power parity therefore holds in its absolute form.

Accordingly, the exchange rate is determined by:
                                                                                   23




      30.     e =             , where
                       P

                   =
                        price    level of country A (home country)

                   =   price    level of country B

               e =     domestic currency price of foreign currency =
                        the   exchange rate.


Domestic and foreign price levels are determined by domestic and

foreign quantity equations, as above.


     31.
              !L
                               = 2   •A          1BB =   2   B where

                  B
                (M )       = domestic     (foreign) money supply
              A B
            2Y (2Y )       = domestic   (foreign) output
              AB
              P (P )       = domestic   (foreign) price level
              A B     l/l\
             Q (Q ) = —K---J=
                                                 .
                                          purchasing power of domestic (foreign) money.
                              P 'P /
The quantity equation is written in terms of total output of domestic goods

and services, rather than in terms of total expenditure by domestic residents

on domestic and imported goods. Thus, foreign residents, too, hold domestic

money in the amount of their planned expenditure on domestic goods. This

specification of the money demand function is not necessarily the best one

in view of the way that the international payments system is actually organized.

I use it, following the standard practice, to simplify the analysis of the

problems that I am primarily interested in.

      Uncertainty enters through 1A 1B and                    and B it is more

convenient, however, to carry out the analysis in terms of real income

uncertainty and price level uncertainty, or uncertainty of the purchasing

power of money.
                                                                          24




      The rest of the model is a replica of the model developed in part I:

there are two identical models for the two countries. Using the results

and insights of that analysis, we can leave out much of the tedious accounting.

      I assume that there are no indexed bonds, only bonds denominated in

the two currencies. We know from the previous section that equilibrium in

the bond markets can be analyzed in terms of net non-bank demand for bonds

on the one hand, and outside government supply of bonds on the other.

The supplies of bonds by firms and 'bank holding companies' (see section I)

cancel out with the demand for bonds by the banking system. Thus, equilibrium

in international financial markets obtains when, in addition to equations

(29) and (30), the following two conditions hold:


   32.1.   AaQA + AbQA = A5QA


   32.2    BaQB + BbQB = BSQB   ,   where


           Aa(Ab) = demand for domestic currency bonds by domestic
                    (foreign) non-bank sector

           Ba(B') = demand for foreign currency bonds by domestic
                    (foreign) non-bank sector

               AS = supply of domestic currency bonds by the
                    (domestic or foreign) government

               BS =   supply of foreign currency bonds by the (foreign
                      or domestic) government
                  =
                      — ('b—) = purchasing power of domestic (foreign)
                      A B       money.


From part I, the asset demand equations are defined implicitly by the

following four equations:
                                                                                                                     25




         A
33,1.        +                                - AaQA(2+rA)              -
                                                                                BaQB(2+TB)} (2+rA) -
                 aA                 A2 2                     aB             A                                  A
             yA Q            (1+r    )
                                              a        -   yB Q       (1+r
                                                                                     B
                                                                                )(1+r )        -    y(1+r      )
                                                                                                                   ay
                                                                                                                      a =
                                                                                                                          0


33.2.   rB +     1{(yAA)                      -
                                                      AaQA(2+TA)        -
                                                                                BaQB(2+rB)}(2+rB)          -



                 aA                 A     B                           aB2                  B     a
             yA Q            (1+r    )(14-r °AB - yB Q
                                                       aB
                                                                                   -
                                                                                       y(1÷r )GYB = 0

34.1.   rA +     yc(yB7B)                     -
                                                      AbQA(2+rA)        -
                                                                                BbQB(2+rB)}(2÷rA)          -


                 bA                 A2 °A2 -                 bB             A     B                     A   b
             yA Q            (1+r                          yB Q   (1+r       )(1+r )tAB -          y(l+r )GYA =            0


34.2.   rB +     {(yB_7B)                     -
                                                      AbQA(2+rA)        -
                                                                             BbQB(2+rB)}       •




                 bA             A                 B                bB2                     B        b
             yA Q            (1÷r   )(1-i-r )aAB -                'Q B            -
                                                                                       y(1--r °YB = 0,             where


             rA =                                          = expected real interest rate on
                             (l+RA)               -    1
                                                             domestic bonds
                                        Q1



             rB = (l+RB2            )— -              1 =   expected real interest rate on foreign
                                                            bonds



             A
                 2
                         =   r-? A1
                                  'l A
                                     /
                 2             "SB   B
                     =
                             V(Q2 /Q1 )

             AB = Coy               2A                A "B B
                                                           2 "p1 )
                     a
             crAY = Coy
                                        AA /Q1A)
                                              ,
                                                      Q2
                 b
             crAY = Coy
                                        BA A
                                        2 ' 2              "Q1    )
                 a
             aBY = Coy (2 '
                                        AB2 B              "l )
             b
          °BY = Coy
                                         "BB    B
                                          , Q2/Q1 )
                                        (y2
                                                                                                        26




      Equations (32), (33) and (34) provide a complete model of interest

rate determination in the international financial markets in terms of

private sector demands and government supplies. After some manipulations,

the equilibrium yield differential can be written as a function of the

outside supplies of the two bonds:


           rA -         rB      = I       QA{(1÷A)2
     35.                                                        (2+rB)aA2 -      (l+rA)(l+rB)(2+rB)    GAB) -

                                                                  - (l+rA)(l+rB)(2+rB)        GAB) +

                       A     B                                      B        A
                 -y(l+r )(2+r )GYA -                          -çy(l+r   )(2+r )ciYB, where

                    =            a -            b
                                                    ,   and
                        °YA               GYA

                  =             a     +
                                             b
                        aYB               °YB


The two interest rates are equal if and only if outside supplies of

the two assets are zero and the covariances of the purchasing powers

of the two monies with the real incomes of the two countries are zero.

In this special case the equilibrium expected real interest rate can

be easily solved, it is given by-:

            r               r
                             A             r
                                            B      —
     36.          =                   =   ____ = y(Y2-Y1), where
                                A
           2+r          2+r               2+r

                        =                                     average real income of the two
                                             Y18)
                                                              countries in period 1, and
                —            1—A             —B
                        =
                             -(Y2
                                           + Y,,        )   = expected average real income of
                                                              the two countries in period 2.


In this case risk has no effect on the equilibrium values of the two

interest rates.
                                                                                      27




      The relative riskiness of the two bonds determines, however, the

currency composition of international (and also national) financial

intermediation. Subtracting equation (33.2) from equation (33.1) we get:


     37.    _(l+r)2Aa(A2cAB) + (l+r)2Ba(0B2_aAB) = 0

Therefore, the relative shares of the two currencies in total international

financial intermediation are given by:
                             2                                         2
              Aa   -     B       GAB             Ba     -         aA       AB
     38.
             a a 2
            A +B
                                 2
                                           '
                                                a
                                               A +B
                                                    a             2         2
                       UA +GB 2aAB                          cJA       +cB       2AB

The shares of the two currencies are simply given by the minimum

variance portfolio.

      Intuitively, the reason why there are no risk premia in the absence

of outside assets is that the private sector can adjust the currency

composition of their portfolios so as to minimize their risk exposure.

When the price levels are not correlated with real incomes the minimum

variance portfolio given by equation (36) minimizes the risk exposure

of lenders as well as borrowers.

      I conclude with the case when there are no outside assets but

prices are correlated with real incomes. In that case the equilibrium

interest rates are given by:

              rA   =                 -
    39.1.
                       1(V2-Y1)
             2+r                         l+rA)
                                           2+r
                                                        °YA



                                     -
    39.2.     rBB =    y(2-Y1)           1 (l+rB) YB
             2+r
                                                                            28




 In the general case the equilibrium levels of the two interest rates

 cannot be solved explicitly, although the difference between the two

 can be inferred from equation (35).


 Concluding Remarks


       It has been demonstrated that except in some special cases, interest

rates on nominal bonds contain risk premia or risk discounts. There are

two reasons for this. One is the existence of outside assets. In order

for the private sector to be willing to hold nominal assets whose real

value is uncertain it must be compensated for the risk that it assumes.

The other reason is correlation between real incomes and price levels.

A positive correlation between real income and the purchasing power of

a currency introduces a positive hedging premium on that currency.

This occurs because those subject to the real income risk will in that

case borrow in the currency that is positively correlated with their

real income so as to reduce their total risk exposure. This causes

the real interest rate of bonds denominated in that currency to increase.

      The opposite case is also interesting. Suppose that there is a

country where currency increases in value when there is an adverse supply

shock or some other disturbance in the world economy. An example might

be the pound sterling that 'benefits' from an oil crisis, or the Swiss

franc that benefits from a political crisis. Such currencies become

vehicles of hedging and, as a result, bonds denominated in these currencies

contain a risk discount, or a 'hedging premium'. In an unstable economic

economic environment market perceptions concerning the riskiness of assets
                                                                          29




are not likely to remain invariant over time, and, therefore, changes

in risk perceptions need to be taken into consideration when explaining

interest rate fluctuations in the international money markets.

     I have not discussed exchange rate fluctuations explicitly in the

model. What investors and lenders are interested in are the purchasing

powers of currencies and the relative riskiness of currencies in terms

of their purchasing powers. In the model the purchasing power parity was

assumed to hold so that there was no problem in defining the purchasing

power of a currency. Furthermore, the purchasing power of each currency

is the same for every investor. This is no longer true if there are

changes in relative prices, In that case the measurement of the real

return and its variance depends on the consumption preferences of the

investor. Kouri and de Macedo(1978) and de Macedo(l980) take up this

problem but a full general equilibrium treatment remains to be done.

     I conclude with a conjecture on the welfare implications of price

level uncertainty. As long as there is exogeneous real income uncertainty

which cannot be traded through equities, for example, stabilization of

the price level would not seem optimal. Instead, nominal demand should

be stabilized and the price level should be allowed to reflect 'supply'

disturbances. In that way nominal bonds could be used by the private

sector to optimally share the irreducible risk of real income fluctuations.

Stabilization of the price level would deprive them of this possibility.

     The same point holds for exchange rates too. Nominal demands in

different countries should he stabilized and exchange rates should be

allowed to reflect real income fluctuations. In this way holdings of

bonds denominated in different currencies would enable the private sector
                                                                        30




to share the irreducible risks of real income fluctuations. Fixity of

exchange rates would reduce the menu of portfolio choice and would

increase the total risk exposure of the private sector. Thus, both

price level and exchange rate uncertainty may be appropriate as a second

best solution to the problem of diversifying real income risks.
                                   REFERENCES

 Adler, M, and B. Dumas, "Portfolio Choices and the Demand for Forward Exchange,"
      American Economic Review, May 1976.

 Clower, R. "A Reconsideration of the Microfoundations of Monetary Theory,"
      Western Economic Journal, Vol. 4, 1967; pp. 1-9.

Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer. "Exchange Rates and the Current Account,"
     American Economic Review, December 1980.

Fama, E. and A. Farber. "Money, Banks and Foreign Exchange," American
     Economic Review, September 1979.

Frankel, J. "The Diversifiability of Exchange Risk," Journal of International
     Economics, September 1979.

Grauer, F.L.A., R.H. Litzenberger and R.E. Stehie. "Sharing Rules and
     Equilibrium in an International Capital Market Under Uncertainty,"
     Journal of Financial Economics, June 1976.

Helpman, E. "An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange Rate Regimes,"
     Working Paper No. 79-2, Department of Economics, University of
     Rochester, January 1979.

Kouri, P. "International Investment and Interest Rate Linkages Under
     Flexible Exchange Rates," in R.Z. Aliber, ed., The Political Economy
     of Monetary Reform, Cambridge University Press, 1976.

Kouri, P. and J. de Macedo. "Exchange Rates and the International Adjustment
     Process," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, 1978.

Lucas, R,E., Jr. "Notes on the Efficiency of Exchange Rate Regimes,"
     private lecture notes, dated March 1980.

Niehans, J. The Theory of Money, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978.

Porter, M.G. "A Theoretical and Empirical Framework for Analyzing the
     Term Structure of Exchange Rate Expectations," IMP Staff Papers,
     Vol. XVIII, No, 3, November 1971.
Rodriguez, C, "The Role of Trade Flows in Exchange Rate Determination:
     A Rational Expectations Approach," Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol. 88, No. 6, December 1980,

Roll, E. and B. Solnik. "A Pure Foreign Exchange Asset
                                                       Pricing '•Todel,"
     Journal of International Economics, May 1977.

Shubik, M. and C. Wilson. "The Optimum Bankruptcy Rule in
                                                          a Trading Economy
     Using Fiat Money," Zeitschrift für Nationa1ekonomi 37, 1977; pp. 337-354.

Solnik, B. European Capital Markets: Toward a General Theory of International
     Investment, Lexington Books, 1973.

Wihlhorg, C.
                   ncisksinInternatiofla1Fjflajal_Markets, Princeton
     Studies in International Finance, 44, 1978,
