NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND THE FOREIGN (CHANGE
MARKET: A DYNAMIC PARTIAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL

Pentti J.

K.

Kouri

Working Paper No. 6i

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
March 1981

The research reported here is part of the NBERts research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #644
March 1981

Balance of Payments and the Foreign Exchange Market:
A Dynamic Partial Equilibrium Model

ABSTRACT

This paper develops a dynamic partial equilibrium model of the
foreign exchange market extending the standard textbook model in two

respects. First, capital account transactions are explicitly incorporated
into the model, and secondly, 'rational' speculative behaviour is also

introduced. At a point in time, or in a given day, exchange rate
fluctuations are dominated by 'new information' that leads to revision
of speculative expectations, as well as by other disturbances on the

capital account. In the long run, fundamental factors, such as divergences
of inflation rates and real changes influencing the trade balance, become
relevant in determining the 'trend' of the exchange rate.

A variety of exercises, and numerical simulations, illustrate the
usefulness of the dynamic supply—demand model in understanding the
behaviour of floating exchange rates in a world of high capital mobility.

Pentti J.K. Kouri
New York University
Department of Economics
8 Washington Place, 7th Floor
New York, New York 10003
(212) 598—7048

BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET:
A DYNAMIC PARTIAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL
Contents
Page

INTRODUCTION

I. CAPITAL ACCOUNT AND THE EXCHANGE RATE: SHORT RUN
EQUILIBRIUM IN THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET
The Formal Model of Short Run Equilibrium

1

5

7

Comparison with the Bickerdike-Robinson-Machlup Model 14

II. INTERACTION BETWEEN THE CURRENT ACCOUNT AND THE
CAPITAL ACCOUNT: THE DYNAMICS OF THE EXCHANGE RATE

16

A Special Case

16

Multiple Equilibria and Dynamic Instability

19

The General Case

21

Comparative Dynamics

25

Balance of Payments Equilibrium with Inflation

33

III. IMPLICATIONS OF 'RATIONAL' SPECULATION IN THE
PflIPT(N1 PyrTMTiPR

'Z,l

Comparative Dynamics

37

Market Response to Anticipated Disturbances

39

CONCLUSION

44

APPENDIX I

46

APPENDIX II

51

APPENDIX III

63

REFERENCES

69

LIST CF TABLES

71

LIST OF FIGURES

72

BALANCE OF PAYMENTS AND THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET:
A DYNAMIC PARTIAL EQUILIBRIUM MODEL*

by
Pentti J.K. Kouri

Introduction

All economic transactions between countries or regions that belong
to a different currency area must go through the foreign exchange market.

Domestic residents wishing to purchase goods and services or assets abroad
must first acquire foreign currency in the amount of their planned pur-

chases. Similarly, foreign residents wishing to purchase goods and services or assets in the domestic economy must first acquire domestic currencyr

in the amount of their planned purchases. Going through the foreign
exchange market would not be necessary if domestic money was acceptable
as a means of payment abroad and foreign money as a means of payment at

home, Since this is not the case, planned domestic payments abroad translate to a demand for, and planned foreign payments at home to a supply of,

foreign currency in the foreign exchange market. In the absence of
intervention, the exchange rate is determined so as to equilibrate the
demand for foreign exchange with the supply of foreign exchange, or --

what comes to the same -- so as to equilibrate the balance of (planned)
payments.

*This paper extends and refines in part an earlier paper entitled, "Capital
Flows and the Dynamics of the Exchange Rate," Seminar Paper No. 67, Institute
for International Economic Studies, University of Stockholm, December 1976.
The paper was first written while I was in the Finnish army. At that time
the work was supported by a grant from the Yrjo Jahnsson Foundation.
I wish
to thank the Jahnsson Foundation for this support, and also the Ford Foi.indation
for their support in 1979/80. 1 also wish to thank Jorge de Macedo for many
helpful discussions. The errors that remain are mine.

2

This description of the nature of the foreign exchange market is
still valid——yet, the modern theory of flexible exchange rates appears

to have no connection with these market processes. There is no explicit
treatment of the sources of supply and demand. in the foreign exchange

market and no explicit analysis of how supply and demand interact in that

market to determine the exchange rate. In part this is because such details are hidden in the background of general equilibrium models; but in
part it is because analysis has been reduced to terms that bear no connec-

tion to supply and demand in the foreign exchange market. An example of
the latter is the monetarist theory of exchange rate determination according to which 'the exchange rate is a relative price of two monies and as

such is determined by the relative supplies of these monies on the one
hand and the relative demands for these monies on the other' (cf. Frankel

(1976), Mussa (1976) and Bilson (1978)). This cannot be a statement about
supply and demand in the foreign exchange market, because, as is described
above, they derive from demands for and supplies of all kinds of assets

and goods and services. In fact holdings of fo ei money are so small
that the direct effect of changes in money demand or supply on the exchange

rate must be insignificant. Rather, such shifts affect the exchange rate
through their effect,ex ante, on capital movements and other components
of the balance of payments.
In

many of the recent models, including Dornbusch (1976), it is

assumed thaL all other assets hut monies are perfect substitutes. In such
models halance of payments pressures have no effect on the exchange rate,

which can deviate from its purchasing power parity, or long run equilib—

3

rium, value only to the extent that monetary conditions permit differences
in interest rates, as is shown in

Kouri and de Macedo (1978). These models

cannot, however, explain observed movements in exchange rates in recent
years because these movements have been far in excess of differences in
inflation rates even if allowance is made for anticipated differences in

future inflation rates as reflected in interest rate differentials. The
models of perfect substitutability simply assume away market pressures

that could account for the observed behavior. As one example, they cannot
explain the tendency of the currencies of surplus countries to appreciate

and those of deficit countries to depreciate continuously in real terms.
This stylized fact of recent years cannot be explained either by the
'textbook' partial equilibrium model, based on Bickerdike (1920), Robinson

(1937) and Machlup (1939, 1940). In that model the capital flow account
is independent of the exchange rate-—in fact, it is treated as a transfer

payment. This implies that ex ante shifts in the current account or in

the capital flow account give rise to orce—andforall adjustments in the
exchange rate. Furthermore, shifts in the trade balance ex ante have no
effect on the current account ox past because the ex post current account
is determined independently of the exchange rate.

The purpose of this paper is to develop a dynamic supply—demand
model of the foreign exchange market, consistent with the description of
the

market in the opening paragraphs and also consistent with the modern

general equIlibrium approach——given the assumption that prices or quantities
in

other

markets are exogenous. The burden of balance of payments adjust-

ment is thus assumed to fall on the exchange rate alone.

4

It

is assumed that the foreign exchange market clears continuously,

as indeed it almost does. Therefore, at a point in time only stock demands for and supplies of foreign exchange derived from stock transactions
on the capital account matter in determining the short run equilibrium

value of the exchange rate. This is similar to the liquidity preference
theory of interest rate determination, or the theory of the determination
of the demand price of capital assets in terms of stocks rather than flows.
It is also consistent with the general equilibrium 'asset market approach'
to international monetary economics that determines all of these prices
simultaneously by conditions of stock equilibrium.

Given the short run equilibrium value, the exchange rate must change
unit of time in such a way as to equilibrate flow demands for and supplies of foreign exchange derived from capital flows on the one hand and

current account transactions on the other. Capital flows are functions
of the rate of change of the exchange rate because the stock demand for

foreign assets is a function of the level of the exchange rate. Therefore
in order for the foreign exchange market to stay in equilibrium, domestic
currency must depreciate whenever the current account is in deficit (in
excess of 'normal deficit') and appreciate whenever the current account

is in surplus (in excess of 'normal surplus'). This acceleration hypothesis
accords well with the behavior of the major currencies in recent years.

In long run equilibrium the real exchange rate is constant and is
determined by the condition that the

current

accountis at its normal level,

which is taken to be zero in the analysis of this paper.

Section

I devclop in detail the analysis of the short run deter—

5

mination

of the exchange and Section II develops the complete dynamic model

along the lines indicated above. Section III brings in rational speculative behavior, and thus brings the analysis one step closer to the reality
of the foreign exchange market which is undoubtedly one of the most sensitive and best organized speculative markets in existence.

I.

CAPITAL ACCOUNT AND THE EXCHANGE RATE: SHORT RUN EQUILIBRIUM IN THE
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET

The foreign exchange market is but one of many interconnected f 1—
nancial markets. Its special nature is that intermediation and arbitrage
between financial markets in different currency areas must go through it:
to invest abroad in excess of their current holdings of foreign assets
domestic residents must first acquire foreign currency in the amount of
their planned investment; to add to their asset holdings in the domestic
economy foreign residents must similarly first acquire domestic currency

in the foreign exchange market. Demand for and supply of foreign currency,
or what comes to the same, demand for and supply of domestic currency at
a point in time can thus be derived from domestic demand for foreign assets
in excess of already existing holdings on the one hand, and foreign demand
for domestic assets in excess of existing holdings on the other. This
description must be qualified when domestic residents lend to foreign
residents in domestic currency or when foreign residents lend to domestic
residents

In foreign currency: this case Is analyzed separately in

Appendix III.

6

Consider now how domestic demand for foreign assets and foreign demand for domestic assets depend on the exchange rate. For this purpose
assume that prices and rates of return of all assets in the domestic economy
are exogenously given in domestic currency, and that prices and rates of

return of foreign assets are exogenously given in foreign currency. Thus
all domestic assets can be aggregated into a single 'domestic asset' whose
price for a foreign investor is the foreign currency price of domestic
currency; and similarly all foreign assets can be aggregated into a single
foreign asset whose price for a domestic investor is the domestic currency
price of foreign currency, ceteris paribus.
Portfolio theory suggests that, given total domestic marketable

wealth, domestic residents want to hold some fraction of it in foreign
assets, this fraction depending on expected returns and risk characteris—

tics of domestic and foreign assets.1 Therefore, taking prices of foreign
assets as exogenous in foreign currency and the stock of domestic marketable wealth as exogenous in domestic currency, it follows that domestic
demand for foreign assets is a declining function of the price of foreign

currency with elasticity of minus one.2 By the same reasoning demand for

'For a theory of portfolio diversification between assets of different
currcncy denmination, see Kouri and de Macedo (1978), pp. 118—130.
2Strictly

speaking, domestic marketable wealth cannot be taken as exog—

(foils even In partial ('qul I ibrium analysis because of capital gains
and losses resul ting from exchange rate changes. This is not a real
problem, however, because we could equally take the domestic component
o1 wealth as exogenous. This is not done for expositional convenience.

7

domestic assets by foreign resIdents is a declining function of the price
of domestic currency in ternis of foreign currency with elasticity of minus

one. This simple result linking stock transactions on the capital account
to the level of the exchange rate has not, surprisingly, been noted in

the literature. Thus in a recent paper on foreign exchange market intervention John Williamson (1976) states that "in striking contrast... {to
the current account].. .there are rather few reasons for expecting the capi-

tal account to depend on the level of the exchange rate, but compelling
reasons for expecting it to depend on the expected change in the rate."1
Similarly in his well—known paper on flexible rates Dornbusch (1976) assumes
away the dependence of capital account transactions on the level of the
exchange rate with the assumption of perfect substitutability between

domestic and foreign assets, except for money. Therefore the exchange
rateis indeterminate in his model in a system of dual exchange rates,
when the capital account is isolated from the trade account.2

The Formal Model of Short Run Equilibrium

To develop the model formally let F0

be the stock of foreign assets

held by domestic residents at time 0 valued in foreign currency, and
let

be the stock of domestic assets held by foreign residents at time

0 valued in domestic currency. F0 and C0 are both given at the initial
moment. In contrast, the desired holdings of foreign assets by domestic

'J. Williamson (1976), p. 331.
2

Dorubusclt (1976) ,

footuot&

on pig' 271

8

residents (Fd) and of domestic assets by foreign residents (Cd) are
subject to choice. Let s be the domestic currency price of foreign ex-

change. Then (Fd — F0)

is the stock demand for foreign exchange derived

from domestic excess demand for foreign assets (in excess of initial hold-

ings) and (Gd —G0)Is

the stock supply of foreign exchange derived from

foreign excess demand for domestic assets. Momentary equilibrium in the
foreign exchange market is then defined by:

(Fd_F0) + (1d1) = (Gd_C0)/s

(1)

where

10 =

initial

stock of central bank's foreign exchange reserves

=

desired

stock of foreign exchange reserves

=

central

bank's purchase of foreign exchange at time 0

With fixed exchange rates change in reserves (1d.. 'o is the residual
that equilibrates the foreign exchange market; with clean floating
(1d —

'o

is zero and the exchange rate adjusts to equilibrate private

demand and supply. Between these two extremes there are other types of
regimes which can be specified by appropriate characterization of inter-

vention behavior. In the present paper we restrict the analysis to floating with no systematic intervention.

Next we need to specify the asset demand functions. Let V be
the value of domestic marketable wealth in domestic currency and V*
the

value

of foreign marketable wealth in foreign currency. Then, with

reference to earlier discussion:

(2)

Fd.s

f(R, R*±, z)V; Cd/s g(R—, R*, z)V*

9

R =

where

R* =

nominal rate of return on domestic assets in domestic currency
nominal rate of return on foreign assets in foreign currency
expected rate of change in the domestic currency price of
foreign currency

z =

vector

of other determinants of international investment.

Substituting these demand functions in equation (1) above and setting
—

10

equal to zero, we get the condition of short run equilibrium in

the foreign exchange market with no intervention:

(3)

The

f(R, R*+ir, z)V/s —

left

F0

= g(R—w, R*, z)V* —
G0/s

hand side gives the stock demand for foreign exchange at time 0

derived from desired domestic purchases of foreign assets at time 0

It is illustrated by the downward sloping DD schedule in Figure 1. The
right hand side gives the stock supply of foreign exchange derived from

desired foreign purchases of domestic assets at time 0

by the upward sloping SS schedule in Figure I.

.

It

is illustrated

Short run equilibrium

in the foreign exchange market, which clearly is unique, obtains at the
intersection of these demand and supply schedules at

A0 .

As the schedules

are drawn no transactions take place at the equilibrium exchange rate
s0
because initfal. asset holdings :iust happen to equal desired asset holdings.

This

does

not mean, however, that the exchange rate is indeterminate, for

a small increase In the price of foreign currency would bring forward an
excess suppi) of foreign exchange and a small decrease, an excess demand

for foreign exchange. Thus, although no transactions take place, potential

transactions keep th

exchange rate at s0 .

It

is clear then that short

10

FIGURE I

SHORT RUN EQUILIBRIUM IN THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET

ID
I

price of
foreign currency
S

A2

D

S

2

demand for and supply of foreign exchange

j 1

run equilibrium is not only unique but also stable. It will be assumed
from now on that the foreign exchange market is always in short run equi—
lib r ium.

Suppose now that domestic residents want to increase their holdings
of foreign assets for some reason; for example, because of an increase

in foreign interest rates. In Figure I the demand schedule shifts to the

right, to D'D' ,

by 0B2 at the initial exchange rate s0 .

central bank pegged the exchange rate at

s0 ,

If

the

it would, of course, lose

reserves in that amount. With no intervention, domestic currency instead

depreciates to s1 .

This

enables domestic residents to increase their

foreign asset holdings by 0B1 ——which is equal in value to the additional
purchases of the now cheaper domestic assets by foreign residents (measured

in foreign currency). Once the new equilibrium position has been reached,
and by assumption it is reached instantaneously, the exchange rate stays

at s1 and again no transactions take place in the market (ignoring for
now 'marginal' supplies and demands coming from flow transactions). Tech-

nically, the origin shifts to B1 in Figure I: the initial stock of
foreign assets is now

C1R1 (F1) rather than C10 (F0)
It Is not necessary [or transact ions to actually take place in order
for the exchange rate to change, as is the case above. For example, suppose
that foreign residents do not hold domestic assets, a case typically assumed
in recent literature. Then an attempt by domestic residents as a group
to increase their holdings of foreign assets would only succeed, in the
short run, in raising the
a

price

of foreign assets, or the exchange rate, to

level at which the existing stock ou1d he willingly held and thus to

a I ev*'J at whiich no transact ions would actually take place in the market.

12

To develop the above analysis formally, let f and g be the mi—
tial portfolio proportions, and

the initial asset holdings.

F0 and

From equatIon (3), equilibrium exchange rate,

(

)

s0 inFigurel, is given by:

fV+G0

s

gv*+F0

Let f1 and g1 be the new portfolio properties at time 0 (unlike in
the figure, the supply schedule is allowed to shift at well). The new
equilibrium value of the exchange rate,

-

f1V

s1 in Figure I, is then:

+

1

0

At this new exchange rate, asset holdings are:

(6)

F1 =

f1V/s1

G

,

g1V*s1

F1 and C. become the new Initial condItIons. If nothIng changes after

the shift from •(f,g) to (f1, g1) at the initial moment, the exchange
rate will stay at s1 with no transactions taking place thereafter. To
check this apply formula (4) again to the new situation:

+ G1
(7)

Sj

g1v*+11

=

f1V + g1V*s1
=

g1V*+f1V/s1

S1

which confirms that the exchange rate will indeed stay at
Figure II illustrates the effect of a once—and—for—all sale of

foreign exchange by the central bank. The market is initially in equi—

13

FIGURE II
EFFECT OF A ONCE—AND-FOR-ALL SALE
OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE BY THE CENTRAL BA1'K

price

of
foreign currency

S

D

SI

B,

I

—z

S.

demand for and supply of foreign exchange

14

librium at A0 with exchange rate s0 .
exchange in the amount B1B2
currency down to s1 .

The central bank sells foreign

thus

(

forcing the price of foreign

At this new exchange rate, B1A1 of the decline

in central bank reserves finances an increase in domestic holdings of foreign

assets, while the rest, A1B2 in the figure, finances a reduction in
foreign holdings of domestic assets. The exchange rate will not return

to s0 ixmnediately as the central bank leaves the market: instead it
stays at s1 because the initial conditions change thus shifting the
demand and supply schedules so that they intersect at s1 .

From equation

(1) the new equilibrium exchange rate s1 is:

(8

—

)

S1

fV+G0
gV* + F0 +tT

This formulals useful because it shows the limited possibilities that
central banks have to Influence the exchange rate when official reserves
are only a small fraction of private asset holdings.

Comparison with the Bickerdike—Robinson—Machiup Model
The supply—demand model developed above resembles the 'textbookt

model of the foreign exchange market based on the work of Bickerdike (1920),
Robinson (1937) and Machlup (1939, 1940) in that the supply and demand
schedu]es In the foreign exchange market are derived from economic transactions between
that

the

the

the two countries or

currency areas. The difference is

textbook model derives these schedules from flow transactions on

trade account, while the

actions on the capital

present model derives them from stock trans-

account. In the

textbook

model depreciation of

15

domestic currency increases net supply of foreign exchange p unit of time
by inducing a reduction in domestic purchases of foreign goods and services,

and an increase in foreign purchases of domestic goods and services, provided that the 'elasticities condition' holds; while capital movements
are treated as 'transfer payments' that do not depend on the level of the
exchange rate.

In contrast, in the present model depreciation of domes-

tic currency brings forward an excess supply of foreign currency at a ppint
in time by inducing a reduction in domestic holdings of foreign assets

and an increase in foreign holdings of domestic assets. Furthermore, net
supply of foreign exchange is everywhere an increasing function of the

price of foreign currency; thus equilibrium is both unique and globally

stable. The elasticities condition is met because the elasticities of
domestic demand for foreign assets, and of foreign demand for domestic
assets with respect to the exchange rate are both equal to one in absolute
value (see, however, the discussion in Appendix I).
If there was a dual exchange rate system with capital account transactions going through one market, market A, and current account transactions,
including interest payments going through another market——market B——the

model developed above would be a complete partial equilibrium model of
market A, while the Bickerdike—Robinson—Machlup model would be a complete

partial equilibrium model of market B. Market B would be linked to mar—
ket A because the
be

net inflow

or outflow of interest income would have to

effected through exchange rate

floating rate system

there J.

adjustments in

as it

were,

market B. In a unified

also a feedback from market

R to market. A because the Initial conditions on which equilibrium in mar-

ket A depends change whenever the current account is different from zero.

16

We now turn to study this dynamic process.

IL. INTERACTION BETWEEN THE CURRENT ACCOUNT AND THE CAPITAL ACCOUNT:
THE DYNAMICS OF THE EXCHANGE RATE
To study the dynamics of the foreign exchange market we make two

simplifying assumptions initially: first, that there is no inflation or
real growth in either country; and second, that all interest earnings on

foreign assets are spent on imports. The first assumption implies that
current account must be zero in long run equilibrium while the second as—
sumption implies that the long run equilibrium value of the exchange rate,

associated with zero current account, does not depend on the level or di—

rection of international investment. The reason for these assumptions is
to abstract from the complex problems of intertemporal transfer whose sa-

tisfactory treatment requires general equilibrium analysis.

A Special Case
We begin the analysis with the special case, typically assumed in
recent literature, when foreign residents do not hold domestic assets.
Short run equilibrium condition (3) becomes then:

(9)

F.s =

f(R,

R*+IT, z)V

where r Is still set equal to zero. This equilibrium condition is illustrated by the FF schedule in Figure 111(h).
assets equal to F0 ,

rate s0

initial

With initial stock of foreign

equilibrium obtains at A0 with exchange

17

FIGURE III

INTERACTION BETWEEN CURRENT AND CAPITAL ACCOINTS 1:
A SPECIAL CASE

(a)

(b)

price of

price of

foreign currency

foreign currency

F
B

A0

so

s*

A*

B

F

current account

deficit

'urrent account surplus

stock of foreign assets

18

The stock of foreign assets changes whenever the current account
is different from zero, or

=

(10)

B(s;y)

where B is current account surplus in
tor of determinants of the current

foreign currency and y is a vec-

account, including domestic and foreign

prices and activity levels. Equations (9) and (10) together with the ini-

tial condition F =

F0

define the complete dynamic

partial

equilibrium

model of the foreign exchange market.

Assume first that the current account is everywhere an increasing
function of the price of foreign currency, as illustrated by the BB

schedule in Figure 111(a). At the initial exchange rate s0 the current
account Is in surplus by

B0 .

Thus, thereafter the stock of foreign assets

Increases and domestic currency appreciates as the market converges to

long run equilibrium at A* with exchange rate s and stock of foreign

assets F* .

If

instead the stock of foreign assets was initially above

its long run level, the price of foreign currency would be below its long
run equilibrium value, and the market would converge to equilibrium at

A* along FF from the right hand side with domestic currency depreciating and the current account In deficit. It is thus

the monotonicity of the BB

evident that, given

schedule, long run equilibrium is both unique

and globally stable.

The dynamics of the foreign exchange market, illustrated in Figure
111, is consistent with observed exchange rate behavior in recent years

with the currencies of surplus

countries appreciating and those of deficit

countries depreciating in excess of differences in inflation rates. It

19

is useful to restate this implication of the model as the acceleration

hypothesis: domestic currency appreciates whenever the current account
is in surplus and depreciates whenever it is deficit.

Multiple Equilibria and Dynamic Instability
Consider next the possibility that long run equilibrium is not unique
because the current account is not a monotonic function of the exchange

rate. Figure IV gives an example where there are three long run equilibria,

namely A ,

A

,

and

A .

Of these, only A and A are stable.

Which one of these the market will converge to depends on where it starts.

As is indicated in Figure IV(a) it converges to A if it is initially

on the right hand side of A ,

left hand side of A ;

and to

if it is initially on the

and stays at A if it happens to be there.

With multiple equilibria foreign exchange market is thus dynamically unstable in that perturbations may move it from one equilibrium to another,
unlike aboye where it always ended in the same long run equilibrium.
Before considering the general case it is illuminating to derive

the results of the above analysis in a slightly different way. In order
for the foreign exchange market to stay in equilibrium after the initial
moment the exchange rate has to change per unit of time in such a way as
to equilibrate the net flow supply of foreign exchange from current account
transactions with the net flow demand for foreign exchange from marginal
additions to domestic holdings of foreign assets, or capital outflow for

short. Rut

capital outflow is a function of the rate

exchange rate, namely:

of

change

of the

20

FIGURE IV

INTERACTION BETWEEN CURRENT AND CAPITAL ACCOUNTS 2:
MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA

(a)

(b)

A

A
price of foreign currency

current accouni
defic it

current account surplus

F* F*2
3

stock

F*

1

of foreign assets

21

=

—f

where expectations and other determinants of f are held constant. Along
the adjustment path the exchange rate must then satisfy a 'dynamical balance of payments equilibrium condItion':

(12)

= B(s;x)

.d =

This can be rewritten as

l3'/
'

s

s —

sB(s;x)
fV

B

F'

which is an algebraic statement of the acceleration hypothesis: domestic
currency appreciates ihenever the current account is in surplus, and de-

preciates when It is in deficit. Furthermore, the rate of appreciation
(depreciation) is equal to the ratio of the current account surplus (de—
ficit) to the stock of foreign assets.1

The General Case
To build on the previous section it is useful to rearrange short
run equilibrium condition (3) in the form:

(14)

f(R, R*+ii, z)V/s —

g(R—,

R*; z)V*

NFAd = NFA5 E

dimensions of s/s and B/F are the same because both
are flow variables while s and F are stock variables.

F0

—

G0/s

and B

22

The right hand side can be interpreted as net supply of foreign assets
and the left hand side as net demand f or foreign assets.1 These two

schedules are illustrated by the FF and SS schedules in Figure V.

The FF schedule corresponds to the FF schedule in Figures III and IV
above; they are the same when foreign residents do not hold domestic assets.
Unlike in the special case, however, net stock of foreign assets is not
predetermined at a point in time——its value in foreign currency increases

as domestic currency depreciates. For any exchange rate excess demand
for foreign exchange at a point in time can be read as the horizontal dis-

tance between the FF and DD schedules (cf. Figure I). Excess demand
is zero at AQ ,

which is the same short run equilibrium position as

A0 in Figure I.
Given its initial value s0 ,

the exchange rate must change in

such a way as to equilibrate the current account with 'marginal' net out-

flow of capital. Net outflow of capital is a function of the rate of chan8e
of the exchange rate, namely:

(15)

CF=-—V= [gv*+4)= [F+-.

where /s gV*(/s) = inflow

of capital and

=

—f-(/s)

=

outflow

of capital.

11t is not necessary that the net stock of foreign assets is positive.
The analysis applies equally if domestic residents are net debtors abroad.
Problems arise only if domestic residents are net debtors in foreign currency, that is either fV/s , or F0 or both are negative (see Appendix I).
2Note that along the equilibrium path, after portfolio adjustment at the

initial moment, Fd = F

and Gd C

23

FIGURE V
INTERACTION 3: THE GENERAL CASE

price of
foreign currency

A*

NFAØ

net stock of foreign

liabilities

F0

NFA*

net stock of foreign assets,
valued in foreign currency

24

For the foreign exchange market to stay in flow equilibrium, it is then
necessary that the exchange rate satisfies the dynamical balance of payments equilibrium condition:

CF =

(16)

{gv*

+ f-} = B(s;x)

where B is the current account surplus in foreign currency as before.
This can be written as:

- = _B(s;x)/[f
+

(17)

gv*J

which is simply the 'acceleration equation.' Thus the rate of apprecia—
tion (depreciation) of domestic currency is equal to the ratio of the
current account to the level of international investment as measured by
the sum of domestic holdings of foreign assets on the one hand and foreign
holdings of domestic assets on the other.

Change in the net stock of foreign assets, valued on foreign currency, is governed by the dynamical equation:

NFA =

(ld)

which

Is

similar to

fV

S

SS

fYi

S

—B(s;x)
fY+gV*

eq(Iatlon(Ii) above.

issets Is constant whenever the
it

is

in

surplus

current

In particular, net stock of foreign
account is in zero, increases when

and decreases when it is in deficit.

The complete dynamic partial equilibrium model of the foreign e—
change market consists of equations (14) and (18). It is illustrated in

25

Figure V where the horizontal BB line is the schedule of long run
equilibrium in the balance of payments (zero current account). It is
assumed to be unique.' Short run equilibrium obtains at the intersec-

tion of the FF and SS schedules at A0

long run equilibrium

obtains at the intersection of the FF and BB schedules at A* ; and
adjustment from short run to long run equilibrium takes place along

the FF schedule as indicated by the arrows, Given that long run
equilibrium is unique it is clearly also globally stable: whenever
the market starts it always ends there.

Comparative Dynamics

We now apply the model to study the dynamic response of the foreign
exchange market to (i) a decline in foreign demand for domestic assets;

(ii) a once-and-for-all purchase of foreign exchange by the central
bank; and (iii) an increase in domestic demand for imported foreign goods

and services. Except for the analysis in Figure VII it is assumed that
long run equilibrium is unique.

26

Figure

VI illustrates the dynamic

response

of the foreign exchange

market to a decline in foreign demand for domestic assets from an initial
situation of long run equilibrium at

the right to F'F' :

A0 .

The

FF schedule shifts to

at the initial exchange rate there is excess supply

of domestic currency and thus excess demand for foreign currency in the

amount A0A* .

Short run equilibrium is restored as domestic currency

depreciates to s .

Foreign residents are able to reduce their holdings

of domestic assets immediately to the extent that domestic residents re-

duce their holdings of the now more expensive foreign assets. They are
able to do so over time by importing more from and exporting less to the
domestic economy; in effect by gradually exchanging their assets for goods

and services. As is shown in Figure VI the exchange rate eventually re-

turns back to its 'normal' level s
The cumulative current account surplus in the course of the adjust-

ment process Is approximately equal to A0A* :

the initial excess demand

for foreign exchange In the amount A0A* translates over time into an
equal cumulative current account surplus)
1From equation (7) in Appendix I the cumulative current account surplus, S, is:

(i)

v*

S [f* + g*v*

S0_S*

where f* and g* are the desired portfolio proportions corresponding
to the F'F' schedule. From equation (5) in Appendix I
s0 is given by:
f*v

+ 10

=

V*+F0
where f and g correspond
equation (1) above we get:

(iii)

S =

f*V* + gV*s*

g*V*+f(V/s*)

to the FF schedule. Substituting this in

f*v.fv — (g*V*_gV)
_______

NFM NPA =

A0A*

When foreign residents do not hold domestic assets (g*V* = gV = 0)
approximation Is exact: the cumulative surplus equals

F*_F0

this

27

FIGURE VI
DYNAMIC RESPONSE 1:
EFFECT OF A DECLINE IN FOREIGN DEMAND FOR DOMESTIC ASSETS

price of

foreign irrency

F'

F,

S*

s

F'

NFAØ

net stock of foreign
liabilities

NFA1

net stock of foreign assets

28

One can interpret the capital account disturbance as a once—and--

for—all financial transfer payment that is effected over a period of time
through surpluses In the current account brought about by transitory de—

predation of the domestic currency. The time it takes the foreign exchange
market to effect such capital transfers depends on the level of trade in
relation to the level of asset holdings on the one hand, and the exchange
rate elasticity of the current account on the other (see Appendix I and
in particular Table I).

When long run equilibrium is unique, as above, the exchange rate

effect of a capital account disturbance is only transitory. With multiple
equilibria, however, the effect may be permanent because the market may

move from one equilibrium to another in response to a disturbance. Figure
VII illustrates such a possibility. There are three possible long run

equilibrium values of the exchange rate, namely s ,

of which only s and s

s

,

and

s

are stable. The market is initially at A1

with exchange rate s and net stock of foreign assets NFA1 .

Reduction

in foreign demand for domestic assets shifts the FF schedule to the right

to F'F' .

To restore equilibrium domestic currency depreciates to s0

which is above the exchange rate associated with the unstable equilibrium,

namely s .

Therefore the exchange rate will not come back to s but

instead increases to s -

Thus there is a permanent decline in the value

of domestic currency and a period of deficits in the current account which
may in fact cause the net stock of foreign assets to decline in the long

run. Thus with multiple equilibria, it is difficult to infer whether observed currency depreciation is caused, cx ante, by 'capital outflow' or
an

adversc. shift in the trade balance, because, as the example shows, cx

29

FICURE VII
DYNANIC RESPONSE WITH MULTIPLE EQUILIBRIA

F'
S

price of
foreign
A'1

S
NFA1
net

NFA0

stock of foreign assets

30

ante 'capital outflow' may turn into ex post 'capital inflow.'
Consider next the response of the market to a once—and—for—all pur-

chase of foreign exchange by the central bank. This is shown in Figure

VIII as a leftward shift of the SS schedule by A1A* at the initial

exchange rate s ,

assumed to be the long run equilibrium exchange rate.

The ex ante excess demand of A1A* is eliminated by depreciation of the
domestic currency to s0 .

At this exchange rate, A2A* of the increase

in the central bank's foreign exchange reserves comes from domestic resi-

dents who reduce their holdings of foreign assets by this amount, and the
rest from foreign residents who supply foreign exchange in the amount

A1A2 in order to increase their holdings of domestic assets. Over time,
however, the purchase of foreign exchange translates to an exactly equal
cUmulative surplus in the current account, and after the initial depreciation domestic currency appreciates back to the same long run equilibrium

level. The initial impact of intervention on the exchange rate depends
on the size of the central bank's purchase of foreign exchange In relation
to total international investment while the duration of the impact depends

on the strength of the induced current account response, as is clear from
earlier analysis.

To conclude this section we show in Figure IX the response of the
foreign exchange market to a permanent increase in domestic demand for

imported goods and services. 1n
an

the textbook

model such shift would cause

immediate depreciation of domestic currency with no change in the cur-

rent account balance which is determined ex post by the capital flow

account independently of the exchange rate. In contrast, in Figure IX
the 1ncreae In import demand causes an equal increase in the current

31

FIGURE VIII
DYNAMIC RESPONSE 2:
EFFECT OF A ONCE-AND-FOR--ALL PURCHASE
OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE BY. THE CENTRAL BANK

F.

SI

price of
foreign

S

currency

so

net stock of foreign assets

32

FIGURE IX
DYNAMIC RESPONSE 3:
EFFECT OF A PERMANENT INCREASE
IN THE DOMESTIC DEMAND FOR FOREIGN GOODS

F

price of

price of
foreign

foreign

currency

currency

*

0

current account

deficit

current account
surplus

net stock of foreign assets

33

account deficit at the initial moment (B0) .

Domestic currency depreci—

ates to its new long run equilibrium value s*1 only gradually as successive,
although diminishing, current account deficits are financed by reductions
In domestic holdings of foreign assets on the one hand, and increases in

foreign holdings of domestic assets, on the other. The total cumulative
current account deficit resulting from the increase in import demand is

approximately equal to NFA1 —

NFA0

Balance of Payments Equilibrium with Inflation
We have assumed so far that there is no inflation in either country.
Suppose now that prices in the domestic economy are increasing at a con-

stant rate

and prices in the foreign country at constant rate

it

The rate of change of the price of foreign currency in long run equilibrium

Is then it —
p

71*

p

Even in the absence o real growth the current account

.

is not zero in long run

equilibrium:

In order to maintain a Constant real

stock of foreign assets domestic residents must purchase new assets at

the rate of ir*(F/p*) in real terms, where (F/p*) is the real value of
domestic holdings of foreign assets in long run equilibrium. Similarly,
foreign residents must purchase new domestic assets at the rate of
in order to keep the real value of their holdings of domestic

assets constant, where (Gip) is the real value of foreign holdings
of domestic assets in long run equilibrium. The current account surplus
is thus equal to

1T(F/p*) -

Tr(G/P*).

If the balance of payments accounts

were properly measured this notional surplus of the current account would
instead be counted as outflow of interest income:
of interest, income in

real terms is

(R*_ir;) (F/p) -

for clearly net inflow

(R-r) (G/p*)

If

34

we continue to assume that real interest earnings are spent on imports,

the above analysis still applies to the real exchange rate s(p*/p) and
the real, or inflation adjusted, balance of payments. A satisfactory treatment of inflation as well as of real growth requires, however, an analysis

of its own. For this reason we continue to assume in the following that
there is no inflation or real growth.

III. IMPLICATIONS OF 'RATIONAL' SPECULATION IN THE FOREIGN EXCHANGES
In this section we study the implications of 'rational' specula-

tive behavior for the dynamics of the foreign exchange market. Such behavior is technically interpreted as perfect foresight, that is 11

in

s/s

,

contrast to the assumption of stationary expectations maintained so

far. The analysis is limited to the special case when foreigners do not
hold domestic assets because space does not permit satisfactory treatment

of the general case. For the same reason long run equilibrium is assumed
to be unique.

The dynamic partial equilibrium model of the foreign exchange mar—
ket is now defined by the following two differential equations:

(19)

(20)

f[R R*+,
=

F (cf. equation (9))

B(s;x)

The dynamics of this system can be studied with the aid of Figure X. The

FF schedule, defined by setting /s equal to zero in equation (18),

35

FIGURE X

RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS EQUILIBRIUM

price of

F

foreign

currency

so

*
B

T

stock of forefgii assets

36

gives for each stock of foreign assets the exchange rate that is consistent

with no expected appreciation or depreciation. It is the same as the FF
schedule in Figure III. As the arrows indicate, domestic currency must

be expected to appreciate at any point above the FF schedule, and depreciate at any point below it for such a point to be an equilibrium point.
The dynamics of the stock of foreign assets can be determined with the

aid of the BB schedule, defined by setting

equal to zero in equation

(20) (cf. equation(23) in Appendix I). As indicated by the arrows, the

stock of foreign assets increases above the BB schedule and decreases
below it. Inspection of the direction of movement in each of the four

regions separated by the FF and BB schedules reveals that there is
only one path along which expectations are continuously realized such that

it takes the market to long run equilibrium at A*

.

This

is the

'rational expectations' path and it is illustrated by the TT schedule
in the figure. With initial stock of foreign assets equal to F0 the
equilibrium value of the exchange rate consistent with 'iational expectation'
of subsequent appreciation is

s in comparison with s that would

obtain with stationary expectations (cf. Figure III). How the market
could reach

s and stay on TT , which is the only path that takes it

to long run equilibrium, is an open question and an answer will not be
attempted here.

37

Comparative Dynamics

The response of the foreign exchange market to unanticipated perinanent disturbances with rational expectations differs from the response

pattern with stationary expectations only in that the short run effect
of capital account disturbances on the exchange rate is weakened while
the short run effect of trade account disturbances on the exchange rate
is strengthened.

Figure XI illustrates response to an increase in domestic demand
for foreign assets on an initial situation of long run equilibrium with

exchange rate s0 and stock of foreign assets F0 .

The exchange rate

jumps to s from s which is consistent with equilibrium under
stationary expectations. Thereafter, the market converges back to

equilibrium at A* along the TT schedule. The analysis of Appendix I
and Appendix II permits a quantitative illustration. The numbers reported

in the figure give an example with a = 0.50

and

= 1

.

The initial

impact of the trade account disturbance on the exchange rate is to increase

it from 1 to 1.03. The average exchange rate for the first year is 1.04
compared to 1.02 under stationary expectations. However, the market
reaches long run equilibrium faster under stationary expectations than
it does under rational expectati.ons: from Table IV the market reaches
1.09 in 4.6 years under stationary expectations and only in 6 years under

rational expectations. The cumulative current account deficit along the

adjustment path from A0 to A* is 10 units. From Table VI the deficit
is 3.1 in the first year, compared to 3.9 under stationary expectations.
This example shows that when the level of international investment is
high in relation to trade flows, permanent shifts in the trade account
give rise to long periods of deficits or surpluses in the current

38

I"ICIJRE XI
EFFECT OF" AN (JNANTICIPAJEL) INCREASE tN DOMESTIC DEMAND
FOR FORE1CN ASSETS UNDER RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS 1

price of
foreign currency

F

s*

B'

SO

slock ol foreign assets

39

account associated with continuous currency depreciation or appreciation,
ceteris paribus.

Figure XII illustrates the response of market to a permanent increase in domestic demand for foreign assets in an initial situation of

long run equilibrium at A with exchange rate s0 and stock of foreign

assets F0 (s0 = 1

,

F0

= 100)

and the TT schedule to T'T' .

The

.

FF schedule shifts to F'F'

Rational

expectations equilibrium obtains

and thereafter the market converges to long run equilib—

initially at

rium at A along the TT schedule. Using the same parameter values
as in the above example (a = 0.5

,

=

1)

,

s

is equal to 1.07. Aver-

age exchange rate in the first year is, from Table VII, 1.06 compared to

1.08 under stationary expectations. However, the exchange rate reaches
1.09 only in 6 years under rational expectations compared to 4.6 years
under stationary expectations (Table IV). This is also the time it takes
the niarket to effect 90 percent of the total transfer of (F1 — F0)

Market Response to Anticipated Disturbances
As an efficient speculative market, the foreign exchange market
responds to disturbances when they are anticipated rather than when they

occur: disturbances that have been correctly discounted in advance have
no effect when they actually occur. Using another terminology, the market
responds only to new information. In this section we show the effects
of permanent capital account and trade account disturbances when they are
ant

icipated in

advance.

Figure XIII

shows market response to an anticipated central bank

purchase of foreign exchange at some future date T .

The market is

40

FIGURE XII

EFFECT OF A PERMANENT UNANTICIPATED INCREASE IN DOMESTIC DEMAND 2

price of
foreign currency

F
F'

1

stock of foreign assets

41

FIGURE XIII
EFFECT OF AN ANTICIPATED CENTRAL BANK PURCHASE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE

price of

foreign currency
F

s
Si
s

LT
A1

S*

S

F

stock of foreign assets

42

initially in equilibrium at A0 with exchange rate s and stock of foreign

assets F0 .

If

the central bank purchase of foreign exchange occurred

immediately at time 0 ,

domestic currency would depreciate to

Thereafter, the market would return back to equilibrium along the TT

schedule. If, in contrast, the intervention is expected to occur at some

future date T ,

domestic currency depreciates immediately to

.

There-

after it continues to depreciate while the current account is in surplus.

When the intervention actually occurs at time T there is no effect on
the exchange rate, and after the intervention domestic currency gradually

appreciates back to its normal value s* .

If

the intervention, although

anticipated, does not occur, domestic currency appreciates discretely to

s and thereafter depreciates gradually back to equilibrium at A0
In summary, only new information, whether in the form of current unanticipated events, anticipated future events, or mistakes in past expectations,
gives rise to discrete and noticeable movements in the exchange rate.
To conclude the analysis, Figure XIV illustrates market response to
an anticipated permanent increase in import demand at some future date

T from an initial situation of equilibrium at A0 .
preciates immediately to

Domestic currency de-

and thereafter continues to depreciate while

the current account is in surplus in reflection of the expectations induced
outflow of capital——an obvious modification to the acceleration hypothesis.

the turnaround in the trade balance occurs at time T there is again
no not Iceahie jump In the exchange, although there is a discrete change

When

of payments. Adjustment to equilibrium at A2 takes now
a longer time than in the case when the disturbance is not anticipated
in the

baauce

43

FIGURE XIV

EFFECT OF AN ANTICIPATED INCREASE IN IMPORT DENAND

price of
fore

stock of foreign assets

44

in advance because the market has to eliminate the 'overhang' of
speculative holdings of foreign assets.

CONCLUSION

This paper has synthesized the modern theory of exchange rate
determination with the older balance of payments approach in the
framework of a dynamic partial equilibrium model that is consistent

with the nature of the foreign exchange market as an intermediary
between the markets for goods and services and assets in two separate

currency areas. Explicit analysis of the sources of supply and demand --

stocks as well as flows -- makes the model a useful tool in empirical
analysis of exchange rate behavior. As one example, the model explains
the observed tendency of the currencies of countries in current account
surplus to appreciate, and those of countries in current account deficit

to depreciate. This phenomena cannot be explained by the monetarist
theory of exchange rate determination nor can it be explained by the
'textbook' supply-demand model.

The partial equilibrium nature of the model is an obvious qualification to the analysis of this paper, although simple general equilibrium
models (Kouri(l976, 1980), Kouri and de Macedo(l978), Branson(l978),

Calvo and Rodriguez(1977), Dornbusch and

Fischer(1980),

Niehans(1978)

and Rodgriquez(1980)) yield similar response patterns for the exchange

rate. Staying in the partial equilibrium framework there are, however,
a number of problems that still need to be analyzed. One problem
is the observed slow, and initially perverse, response of the trade
balance to changes in the exchange rate, known as the J-curve problem.

45

Another is the distinction between the currency denomination of an asset

and its country of origin. This brings in the forward currency market
that enables investors to decide separately about currency composition

of assets on the one hand and the 'nàtionalit' of assets on the other.
A third problem, connected with the J—curve problem is the problem of

leads and lags in trade payments. In the present paper trade credit is
treated as any other asset. Finally, models of the foreign exchanges should
clearly recognize the existence of more than two currencies, and of more
than one exchange rate.

46

APPENDIX I

Linear Approximation of the Model
The diagram developed in section II enables us to study

qualitatively the dynamic response of the foreign exchange market

to capital account as well as current account disturbances. To get
some idea of the quantitative effects of such disturbances, or

rather to identify the crucial parameters, we need to consider

the approximate solution of the nonlinear model. For this
purpose we write the current account equation more explicitly as

(21)

B(s;x) =

E(s;x)/s

—

M(s;x)

where E is the value of exports in domestic currency and M is
the value of imports in foreign currency.2 Substituting this in

equation (17) in section II and linearizing around s we obtain:

1The case of multiple long run equilibria is discussed in the next section.
2Because of the assumption that interest earnings are spent on imports
in both countries, the interest service account and the implied net
imports cancel out.

47

and linearizing around s* we obtain:

=

(22)

—I

f— +

(s*
where

elasticity

nlE =

(nE+_1)(s*) _a(s_s*)
gV*I
J

of export earnings in domestic currency with respect

to the exchange rate

elasticity of

=

imports in foreign currency with respect to the

exchange rate

s = long

run equilibrium value of the exchange rate.

Long run equilibrium value of the exchange rate is determined by

B(s*; x) =

(23)

0

A necessary and sufficient condition for long run equilibrium s to he
>

locally stable is that

+

—

1

> 0

0

,

or

that the 'elasticities condition'

holds. The solution of the linear differential equation

defined by equation (22) is:

(24)

where

s =

s+

(s0_s*)e_t

is the initial equilibrium value of the exchange rate as deter-

mined by equation (4) (or (14)), repeated below for convenience:

fV + C0
(25)

s =

Equal ion!;

cpi tal

account

(23),

(24)

and (25) enable us to study the effects of

as w'1 1 as t radc' account disturbances in the short run

48

as well as in the long run, starting from an liii tial situation of equilibrium. Equations (23) and (24) seem to suggest that 'only capital account
disturbances

matter

in the short run'

while 'only trade account disturbances

matter in the long run.' This asymmetry disappears, however, when allowance
is made for speculative expectations, as is shown in the next section;

and when the analysis applies to any period of time. To show this consider
the approximate discrete solution of the above model in terms of annual

averages. For this purpose we adopt the convention of measuring all flow
variables and flow parameters 'at annual rates.' By integration of equa-

tion (24) we can write the average annual exchange rate for the th year as:

= (l_e1)s*

(26)

Sj

where

—a
1 —a(i—i)
8. = —e
(1— e ) ,

+ e1s0

i

= 1,

2

The average exchange rate for any year after time 0 is thus a weighted
average of the long run equilibrium exchange rate (s*) on the one hand,

and the short run equilibrium value of the exchange rate (s0) at time
0 on the other. The weight of the long run equilibrium exchange rate
increases with tIme.

rate elasticity of the

It also increases with an increase in the exchange

current

account (nE+nM_l) and with an increase

In the level of trade in relation to the level of asset holdings
(1*/Ef(V/g*) +gV*J) ,

for

a

(M*/[f(V/s*) +gV*])(n+r_l)

The cumulative current account surplus associated with the adjustment path is approximately:

49

If

fBdt

S =

(27)

S0

=

[f*Y_

g*v*}

foreign residents do not hold domestic assets, the cumulative current

account surplus is exactly equal to (F*_F0) .

Current account surplus

in the 1th year after the initial moment is a fraction of the cumulative
surplus, this fraction decreasing over time:

(28)

B1 =

where

lpi =

Finally,

e(l—e)
there are two possible measures of the speed of adjustment.

One is the time it takes the market to eliminate x percent of theinitial

exchange rate discrepancy (s0.-s*) ,

or

x percent of the cumulative

current account surplus S ; namely:

r I .\ —— --

where

5T — s0 =

'
and ST = xS

x(s*_s0)

.

This measure is independent

of the size of the disturbance. An alternative measure is the time it

takes the exchange rate to get to within x percent of its long run equi—
ilbrhim value, namely:

x

(30)

T2(x)

where x0 =

I(s0_s*)/s*j

x
is the initial deviation of the exchange rate

from its long run equilibrium value. T2(x) is also the time it takes

50

TABLE I

Speeds of Adjustment for Different Values of a

a

0

0.10

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.0

2.0

2.5

5.0

10.0

ea

1

0.90

0.78

0.61

0.47

0.37

0.14

0.08

0.01

0.00

*j

0

0.10

0.22

0.39

0.53

0.63

0.86

0.92

0.99

1.00

2

0

0.09

0.17

0.24

0.25

0.23

0.12

0.08

0.01

0.00

01

0

0.00

0.12

0.21

0.30

0.37

0.57

0.63

0.80

0.90

02

0

0.10

0.31

0.52

0.67

0.77

0.94

0.97

1.00

1.00

9.2

4.6

3.1

2.3

1.2

0.9

0.5

0.2

1 —
1 —

T1(0.90)
(years)

23.0

51

APPENDIX II

Linear Approximation of the Model
To get an idea of the quantitative effects of disturbances we again
consider a linear approximation of the dynamic model defined by equations

(19) and (20) in section III. The linear differential equation corres-

i

ponding to equation (22) in Appendix lis:
(31)

s =

lIs_s*)

*j

affa

where

+

l(F_F*)
F* J

= the elasticity of demand for foreign assets with
respect to the expected rate of depreciation of
domestic currency, evaluated at long run equilibrium.

The linear approximation of differential equation (30) around long run
equilibrium is:

s__s*
(32)

W=c s*

where

a =

(nE+nM_l)
gV*0.

as before, except for the assuniption that

The characteristic roots of this system of two linear differential equations

are 4(l/) /(1/)2 + 4c/ . If

the 'elasticities condition'

holds a is positive and therefore the characteristic roots are real and
of opposite sign, which means that the rest point of the system is a

saddlepoint) There is therefore only one initial value of the free variable, in this case the exchange rate, such that, starting from that value

the system converges to equilibrium. To determine the stable solution

11f the elasticities condition is not met

and thus a is negative, there

< O.25(1/)

is

the
where
,
al
arc two possibilities. First, if 41a
characteristic
roots
are
real
and
positive;
absolute value of a , both

second, if 4a >

0.25(1f3) the

1)ositive real part (1/13)
a rat tonal expr'c

tati.o

.tes with a
roots are complex conj
there
does
nor
therefore
exist
In both cases

equ i lihr tim.

52

of

the above system consider the solution:

st —s

(33)

Ft —
(34)

=

—At
Xt
1
2
+
p2A2e
jjA1e

F*

F*

=

—A1t

A1e

+

A2t

A2e

where A1 and A2 are the absolute values of the negative and positive
characteristic roots respectively; (p1, 1)
ciated characteristic vectors; and

and (p2. 1) are the asso-

A1 and A2 are constants to be de-

termined by initial and terminal conditions. The terminal condition is
that the system converges to equilibrium, and it restricts A2 to equal.

zero. The initial condition on the stock of foreign assets restricts A1

to equal (F0—F*)/F* .

From equation (33) the rationa1 expectations'

equilibrium value of the exchange rate at the inItial moment, denoted by

S,must thenequal Jj1(F0_F)*)/F* .

From this we get the linear approxi-

mation of the rational expectations equilibrium schedule as:

ss* =

(35)

F—F*
F*

This is illustrated by the IT schedule in Figure I. The linear approxi—
mation of the stationary expectations equilibrium schedule, FF
I

is

,

'.

The

'

simply

____ ——

s

FF*

Bil schedu1, also

shown in

Figure 1 is defined by:

in Figure

53

FIGURE IA
LINEAR APPROXII4ATIONS TO THE RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS EQUILIBRIUM

price of
foreign currency
F

A0

sO

T

F*

stock of foreign assets

54

s=s*

(37)

The rational expectations equilibrium value of the exchange rate
s(

time 0 is thus related to the stationary expectations value

s —

(38)

s

=

—111(s0_s*)

The value of parameter

s0 by:

(cf. Figure X)

is given by:

-

=

(39)

at

+

4y

where y
The value of

p1 goes from zero to minus one as y increases from

zero to infinity. The higher are the interest elasticity of the capital
account on the one hand and the exchange rate elasticity of the current

account on the other, the closer is the TT schedule to the horizontal
BB schedule. Also, an increase in the level of trade in relation to the

of asset holdings brings the TT schedule closer to the BB schedule.
Table II shows different values of p1j corresponding to different valucs
level

of

(.1

and

Given s and F0

,

the time path of the market under rational

expectations is characterized by:
(40)

s — s*

=

(41)

Ft — F*

=

(s_s*)e
(F0_F*)1

A1t

55

TABLE II

Different Values of

0

0.1

0.25

0.5

1

2

2.5

5

10

10

1

0.62

0.44

0.36

0.27

0.25

0.18

0.13

0.10

5

1

0.73

0.58

0.46

0.36

0.27

0.25

0.18

0.13

2.5

1

0.83

0.61

0.58

0.46

0.36

0.33

0.25

0.18

2

1

0.85

0.73

0.62

0.50

0.37

0.36

0.27

0.25

1

1

0.92

0.83

0.73

0.62

0.50

0.44

0.36

0.27

0.5

1

0.95

0.90

0.83

0.72

0.62

0.58

0.46

0.36

0.25

1

0.98

0.95

0.90

0.83

0.73

0.61

0.58

0.44

0.1

1

0.99

0.98

0.95

0.92

0.85

0.83

0.73

0.62

Note:

=

— <2

+ 4y

,

where

y =

1/

56

where

A1 =

(l/) l/)2
-

+

4(/)

Table III shows different values of
values of

and

<

-

A1

0

corresponding to the same

as above. The speed of adjustment of the stock of

foreign assets decreases as the interest rate elasticity of the capital

account ()

increases.

This is illustrated in Table IV that reports

different values of T1(O.10) corresponding to different values of
and

(42)

,

where

T1(x) is defined by

T1(x) =

— --ln(l—x)
1

The column with

equal to zero is the same as the last row of Table I.

T1(x) does not, however, correctly measure the speed of adjustment
of the exchange rate because the exchange rate jumps discretely at the

initial moment. An appropriate measure is instead the time it takes to

eliminate x percent of deviation (s0_s*) of which (s0—s) is eliminated immediately. This time is given by:

(43)

which

T3(x) =

— -ln

1 l

Is 1ss than T1(x) .

Table

V reports different values of T3(x)

for the same range of values of c and

as used in Table II.

Finally, the discrete solution of the model is given by:
(44)

(1—

+ Ipileiso

57

TABLE III

Different Values of A1

0

0.1

0.25

0.5

1

2

2.5

5

10

10

10

6.20

4.40

3.60

2.70

2.50

1.80

1.30

1

5

5

3.65

2.90

2.30

1.80

1.35

1.25

0.90

0.65

2.5

2.5

2.08

1.53

1.45

1.15

0.90

0.83

0.63

0.45

2

2

1.70

1.46

1.24

1.00

0.78

0.72

0.54

0.50

1

1

0.92

0.83

0.73

0.62

0.50

0.44

0.36

0.27

0.5

0.5

0.48

0.45

0.42

0.37

0.31

0.29

0.23

0.18

0.25 0.25

0.25

0.24

0.23

0.21

0.18

0.15

0.15

0.11

0.1 0.10

0.10

0.10

0.10

0.09

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.06

Note: A1 =

(1/) - /(l/)2 + 4(a/) =

58

TABLE IV
Different Values of T1

(years)

0

0.1

0.25

0.5

1

2

2.5

5

10

10

0.23

0.37

0.52

0.64

0.85

0.92

1.28

1.77

2.30

S

0.46

0.63

0.79

1.28

1.70

1.84

2.56

3.54

4.60

2.5

0.83

1.11

1.50

1.59

2.00

2.56

2.77

3.65

5.11

2

0.87

1.35

1.58

1.85

2.30

2.95

3.19

4.26

4.60

1

2.30

2.50

2.77

3.15

3.71

4.60

5.23

6.39

8.52

0.5

4.60

4.80

5.12

5.48

6.22

7.42

7.93

10.01

12.79

0.25

9.20

9.20

9.58

10.00

10.25

12.78

15.33

15.33

20.91

23.0

25.6

28.8

28.8

32.9

38.3

0.1

23.0

23.0

23.0

Note: T1(x) = — ---1n(1—x)
1

,

x = 0.90

59

TABLE V

Different Values of T3

0

0.1

10

0.23

5

0.25

0.5

1

0.29

0.34

0.36

0.37

0.37

0.33

0.20

0

0.46

0.55

0.61

0.94

1.13

0.87

1.45

1.64

1.46

2.5

0.83

1.02

1.18

1.22

1.32

1.43

1.43

1.44

1.31

2

0.87

1.26

1.37

1.46

1.61

1.75

1.77

1.80

1.82

1

2.30

2.41

2.55

2.72

2.94

3.22

3.37

3.56

3.68

0.5

4.60

4.70

4.90

4.69

5.38

5.87

6.07

6.62

7.12

0.25

9.20

9.12

9.37

9.57 10.05 11.06 12.06 11.73 13.46

0.1

23.0

Note: T3(x) =

2

2.5

5

10

22.90 22.80 22.50 24.71 26.80 26.43 28.47 30.47

—
1 ln1j

=

T1(x) + ---1nIii1t
•1

<

T1(x)

60
-

—A(i—l) (1

where 8j

----e

—

_l

e

I

) ,

=

1,

2,

s = average exchange rate for the 1th year
s = long

run equilibrium value of the exchange rate

initial

s0 =

exchange rate as determined by (36).

This equation is of the same form as equation (26).

Current account in the 1th year is a fraction of the cumulative

surplus F* —

B. =
1

(45)

where

F0

S =

F* —

i!S
1
F0 ,

and

(1—c

)

is

Because A1 is smaller than a ,

is

smaller than

greater than 81 for sufficiently high values of I .

while e!

This

is, of

course, another indication of the fact that, under rational expectations,

adjustment to long run equilibrium is slower, ceteris paribus. Tables
VI and VII report different values of
of

values of a and B .

as

the rows for

and

and 1 —

IP1J8

for a range

The columns with B equal to zero are the same
1—

in

Table

I.

61

TABLE VI

Different Values of

0

0.1

0.25

0.5

1

2

2.5

5

10

10

1.00

1.00

0.99

0.97

0.93

0.92

0.83

0.73

0.63

5

0.99

0.97

0.94

0.90

0.83

0.74

0.71

0.59

0.48

2.5

0.92

0.87

0.78

0,76

0.68

0.59

0.56

0.47

0.36

2

0.86

0.82

0.77

0.71

0.63

0.54

0.51

0.42

0.39

1

0.63

0.60

0.56

0.52

0.46

0.39

0.35

0.30

0.24

0.5

0.39

0.38

0.36

0.34

0.31

0.27

0.25

0.21

0.16

0.25

0.22

0.22

0.21

0.20

0.19

0.16

0.14

0.14

0.10

0.1

0.09

0.09

0.09

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.06

—

Note:

A1

62

TABLE VII

Different Values of 1 —

0

0.1

0.25

0.5

1

2

2.5

5

10

10

0.90

0.90

0.90

0.90

0.91

0.91

0.92

0.93

0.94

5

0.80

0.81

0.81

0.82

0.83

0.85

0.86

0.88

0.90

2.5

0.63

0.65

0.69

0.70

0.73

0.76

0.78

0.81

0.86

2

0.57

0.59

0.61

0.64

0.68

0.73

0.74

0.79

0.80

1

0.37

0.40

0.44

0.48

0.54

0.61

0.65

0.70

0.76

0.5

0.21

0.25

0.28

0.33

0.39

0.46

0.50

0.58

0.68

0.25

0.12

0.14

0.17

0.22

0.25

0.35

0.43

0.46

0.60

0.1

0.10

0.11

0.12

0.14

0.02

0.15

0.17

0.27

0.38

Note: 81
7

1

--—(1—e
1

)

63

APPENDIX III
Implications of Borrowing in Foreign Currency

Residents of most small countries cannot borrow in their own currency in the international capital market, but instead have to borrow in

one of the major currencies. Many of the small countries are furthermore
net debtors. This introduces problems in the foreign exchange market.
To analyze these problems, consider first the case when domestic residents

currently are net debtors in foreign currency (F0 < 0)
to hold a positive stock of foreign assets (fV > 0)

.

but would like

If

foreign demand

for other types of domestic assets but bonds is larger (measured in foreign

currency) than the foreign debt of domestic residents (gV* >

F)

,

equi-

librium still exists, and is unique and stable as is shown in Figure I,

where the market reaches equilibrium at A0 with exchange rate
Suppose, however, that in this situation foreign demand for domestic assets

declines so much as to shift the supply schedule to SS' (g'V* <

F)

Then clearly there does not exist any equilibriun with stationary expec-

tations: domestic currency would tend to depreciate without limit.
Consider next the case when the desired stock of foreign assets is

negative (fV < 0)

(46)

where

.

The equilibrium condition is now

—f(R, R*+ii, z)V/s — F0 =

f is replaced by —f

to

g(R—,

indicate

to borrow foreign currency. f(R, R*+n,

R*, z)V* — G0/s

that domestic residents want

z)V/s

is

the

supply schedule

64

FIGURE hA

THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET WITH FOREIGN
CURRENCY DENOMINATED DEBT (1)

price of
foreign currency

s,

SI

D

S

demand for and

supply

of foreign currency

65

of

foreign currency denominated domestic loans. It is assumed that foreign

demand for these loans is infinitely elastic at interest rate R*

The

equilibrium value of the exchange rate implied by equation (1) is

(47)

- G0
s0

- fV

F0+gV*

There are four possible constellations in terms of initial asset holdings

(F0, C0) and desired asset holdings (fV, gV*) as illustrated in Figures
11(a) to 11(d).

Given stationary expectations short run equilibrium exists if and

only if G0 > fV and —F0 c gV* or G0 < fV and —F0 > gV* ((a) and
(c) in Figure II). However, equilibrium is stable if and only if

C0 > fV and —F0 < gV* ; losely speaking it is stable only if actual
and desired foreign holdings of domestic currency denominated assets are
large enough.

Rational Expectations Equilibrium
Figure III shows that
of nouex.tstencc of

run

equilibrium

when expectations

short run equilibrium

is unique.

are rational the problem

does not arise provided that long

It is as.suincd

in

the

figure that

foreign resi-

dents do not hold domestic currency denominated assets. Domestic residents

have initially a positive stock of foreign assets, equal to F0 in the
figure while they would like to be net debtors——in other words they would

'This analysis is not meant to be rigorous, only suggestive.

FIGURE lilA
66

ThE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET WITh FOREIGN
CURRENCY DENOMINATED DEBT (2)

(a)
C0 >

fV

(b)

—F0 <

gV

price of
foreign
currency

G0<fV ,
1

price of
foreign
currency

I:

demand for and supply of foreign currency

demand for and supply of foreign currency

(c)

C0 <

fV

,

—F0

(d)

>

gV'

price of
foreign
currency

G0 >

fV

,

—F0

>

gV

price of
foreign
currency

A0
gV*J

demand for and supply of foreign currency

demand for and supply of foreign currency

67

FIGURE IVA

THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET WITH FOREIGN
CURRENCY DENOMINATED DEBT (3)

F0

F

B

B

C,

.-, 0

68

like to borrow in foreign currency to invest in domestic assets. Clearly,

there is no equilibrium under stationary expectations——the FF and the
F0F0 schedules do not intersect. However, there is a rational expecta-

tions equilibrium at A0 where the TT schedule intersects the vertical
F0F0 schedule.

