                    NBEH WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EXCHANGE RATE BEHAVIOR UNDER FULL MONETARY
              EQUILIBRIUM: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS


                          John H. ,kin

                     Working Paper No. 6147




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          March 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and netary Economics and also the research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #647
                                                             March 1981



                     Exchange Rate Behavior under Full Monetary
                        Equilibrium: An Empirical Analysis



                                     ABSTRACT



     This   paper aims to remedy difficulties with some extant empirical

tests of the monetary approach to exchange rate determination. Four

problems are addressed: explication of and allowance for real exchange

rate changes; imposition of interest parity; use of the forward rate as

an unbiased predictor of the spot rate; and modeling implications of

official intervention in foreign exchange markets and of possible efforts

to sterilize effects of intervention in the monetary base.

     Empirical tests conducted with monthly data on the dollar—DM exchange

rate from March, 1973 — December, 1979 do not permit rejection of the

complex joint hypothesis represented by equations estimated to test the

monetary approach. Still, there remained unexplained a large portion of

the behavior of the dollar—DM exchange rate in the 1973—79 monthly sample

employed. This result suggests that exchange rates may be viewed as

prices determined in asset markets where a large and unsystematic flow of

information, not captured by monetary or other variables, produces large,

unsystematic movements.



                                                Professor John H. Makin
                                                Department of Economics, DK—30
                                                University of Washington
                                                Seattle, Washington 98195

                                                (206) 543—5955 (5865)
      Empirical tests of the monetary approach to exchange rate deter--

mination have not so far been very satisfactory. To my knowledge no

study has yet attempted to incorporate, either in theory or testing,

the fact that exchange rates have not ever been freely flexible and

that the most recent episode of "floatingt' has seen widespread offi-

cial intervention in foreign exchange markets. Sterilization has, in

many instances, been evident as well.


Problems With Empirical Tests of the
Monetary Approach


      Further difficulties have persisted. Many tests of the monetary

approach include an interest differential (or equivalently, given in-

terest parity, a forward premium) among independent, "exogenous" vari-

ables which are to explain exchange rate behavior. Included in this

group are studies by Bilson (1978, 1979), Hodrick (1978), Bisignano

(1980) and Dornbusch (1980). Inclusion of an interest differential

as an exogenous variable in an exchange rate equation is not consis-

tent with imposing interest parity and unbiasedness of the forward rate

as a predictor of the spot rate. Once these conditions, for which

there is considerable empirical support, are imposed, a rational solu-

tion for an exchange rate does not involve an interest differential or

forward premium. This is well—known and has been demonstrated by

Bilson (1978, 1979) for freely flexible exchange rates and extended to

the case of limited flexibility of exchange rates by Makin (1980). In

fact, inclusion of an interest differential term is likely to cause

rejection of the monetary approach. This will be demonstrated below.
                                   2



      One   study   by Caves and Feige (1980) properly incorporates im-

plications of rationality into proposed empirical tests of the mone-

tary approach. Unfortunately, however, Caves and Fe:Lge conduct all

of their tests using relative money supplies instead of relative excess

money supplies as specified by the monetary approach under rationality.

      This study proposes to remedy some of these difficulties. Em-

pirical results obtained so far, which are reported below, are consis-

tent with monetary approach to exchange rate determination, though ex-

planatory power of the estimated equations is not high. While tests

of a single exchange rate, the DM—dollar rate, cannot be regarded as

definitive, it is clear that, so far, empirical testing fails to con-

tradict the hypothesis that foreign exchange markets are best viewed

as securities markets where behavior of asset prices is largely deter-

mined by large and steady volume of new information, most of which is

impossible to predict ex ante or even to measure systematically, ex post.


Alternatives to the Monetary Approach


      An obvious alternative hypothesis to explain results obtained

here would be that the monetary approach to exchange rate determination

is an inadequate or crucially incomplete theory. Various forms of what

may be called an "asset approach" to exchange rate determination are

developed in Dornbusch (1980) and Dornbusch and Fischer (1980). While

the asset approach embodies a useful extension of the fundamental mone-

tary approach notion that exchange rates are determined by stock equili-

brium conditions, it has in some cases been construed to imply aban-

donment of the monetary approach for what, it will be argued here, may

be the wrong reasons. Further, in some cases there are advanced,
                               3



alternative empirical tests which require fulfillment of a very complex

joint hypothesis in order to test primary hypotheses about "asset

approach" .ehavior.

      In choosing to refine the monetary approach rather than follow the

alternative asset approach this study expands that monetary—equilibrium—

rational—expectations (MERE) model of Bilson (1978, 1979). The aim is

to derive a MERE model which adequately represents to post—Bretton—Woods

system of controlled and varying degrees of permissible flexibility of

exchange rates.


Joint Hypothesis Under Monetary Approach

      The HERE approach as developed here yields a reduced—form expres-

sion for an exchange rate, estimation of which involves testing a joint

hypothesis maintaining simultaneous satisfaction of:   (1) a stable de-

mand function for money; (2) purchasing power parity (PPP); (3)

interest parity;   (4) the forward exchange rate as an unbiased pre-

dictor of the spot rate; (5) stable intervention and sterilization

behavior; (6) representation of real exchange or interest rate

changes which may occur and (7) a model employed to project expected

future behavior of relevant exogenous variables.

      Each of these hypotheses was tested separately using relevant

monthly data from March, 1973 through December, 1979 for determinants

of the U.S. dollar price of Deutsche Marks (DM). While none of the

relationships held perfectly, most glaring inconsistencies arose from,

first, the well—known failure of PPP in the presence of persistent real

appreciation of the DM against the dollar and second, evidence of
                                 4



distinct episodes of altered intervention and sterilization behavior

within the sample period. These matters are given close attention

in tests of the MERE joint hypothesis conducted in Section 3.


Risk and "Real" Exchange Rates


      Attention to riskiness of nominal assets as a determinant of

real interest rates constitutes another part of the attempted exten-

sion of MERE under discussion here. Emphasis is placed upon riski-

ness of financial assets as a store of purchasing power over commodities.

A rise in inflation volatility causes risk—averse holders of financial

assets to demand a risk premium to compensate for uncertainty of

purchasing power over commodities. The result is a rise in the real

interest rate which adds to the positive impact upon nominal interest

arising from a higher level of inflation. While the higher real rate

is required for those whose purchases are largely denominated in

local currency, it represents an above—equilibrium return for those

(foreigners) whose commodity purchases are largely denominated in some

other currency. If, for example, a rise in inflation—volatility in

Germany relative to inflation volatility in the U.S. causes inflation

level adjusted real returns (for U.S. investors) to rise in Germany

relative to the U.S., the DM will appreciate. This proposition is

tested with measures of U.S. and German inflation volatility. In

effect, changes in relative inflation uncertainty are taken as a

proxy for exogenous changes in real interest rates.
                               5


Overview


      The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 1 presents a brief

discussion of the relationship between MERE and the portfolio approach

to exchange rate determination. Section 2 outlines the extended MERE

theory of exchange rate behavior and derives a testable rational ex-

pression for an exchange rate. That expression is incorporated into

a theory of international capital flows. Section 3 presents empiri-

cal tests of the MERE formulation of exchange rate behavior. Section

4 presents some concluding remarks.
                                6



1.    MONETARY AND ASSET APPROACHES TO EXCHANGE
      RATE DETERMINATION


Asset Approach

      An extensive comparison of monetary and asset approaches to ex-

change rate determination is presented in Dornbusch (1980). Offered

here are comments on some of the more salient features of the distinc-

tion. Clearly, neither approach is superior in every respect. The

monetary approach, which really is a restricted form of asset approach

is more analytically precise and therefore lends itself more readily

to refutation by empirical testing. Therefore, it may be preferable

at a time when relatively little is known about explaining a large

part of the observable movements in exchange rates.

      Distinguishing features of the asset approach are:    (1) depen-

dence of money demand (and aggregate demand) on wealth in addition to

income; (2) emphasis upon, though not a requirement of, imperfect

substitutability of assets; (3) possible movements in real yields on

securities traded internationally.

      These features deserve some comment. Dependence of money demand

on wealth and consideration of ttrealtt yields leads to estimation of

exchange rate equations which include proxies for these variables such

as current account "surprises" employed by Dornbusch (1980). Both

wealth and real yields are notoriously difficult to measure and so one

always ends up testing the compound hypothesis that (a) the theory

is correct and (b) one has properly measured some concept of wealth

or real yields. In many cases this is unavoidable and, indeed, the
                                 7



 "proxy—use—syndrome" appears later in this paper. Empirical tests

discussed in Section 3 contain a proxy for real interest rates. But

this is an "add—on" part of the investigation and not an integral

part as it is with most empirical tests of the asset approach.

      A basic reservation about the asset approach arises from the fact

that an investigator ends up estimating exchange rate equations with

numerous prefiltered series on "exogenous" variables on the right—

hand—side. Using Dornbusch (1980) as an example, we find that ex-

change rate depreciation depends on:1 (1) unanticipated current

account imbalances: (2) unanticipated real output growth at home

and abroad; (3) unanticipated (from autoregression) home—foreign

interest differentials and (4) "residuals from a regression of

(home—foreign) short term interest differentials on differentials be-

tween (home) and (foreign) country on long—term and short—term interest

rates, unemployment rates, and inflation rates, with all explanatory

variables lagged one period."2

      This specification contains a very large number of maintained

hypotheses regarding adequacy of various proxies for "news" about cur-

rent account cyclical movements and interest rates, and requires that "un—

anticipated" movements, variously defined, of exchange rates and interest

rate differentials are not simultaneously determined in a manner defined by

the interest parity equation. While the proxy problem is impossible

to avoid completely, it is necessary to recognize that use of "un-

anticipated" variables requires satisfaction of the hypothesis that

the investigator has ex post measured "anticipated" behavior of
                                8


variables as seen ex ante by decision—makers within the actual sample

period under investigation. This may be a questionable assumption

in view of the fact that most "unanticipated" filters are estimated

using data from the full sample period under investigation which on

average was only partially available to those whose expectations

formations are being modeled.


Monetary Approach


      The monetary approach to exchange rate determination is often

rejected on the grounds that the purchasing power parity condition which

it imposes is not empirically valid. While empirical failure of PPP

is well—documented, this may not be the major difficulty with fre-

quently reported tests of the simple monetary approach. Most descrip-

tions of the monetary approach, like that of Dornbusch (1980), do not

impose upon their formulations either interest parity or rationality

(which follows from imposition of the condition whereby the forward

rate is an unbiased predictor of the spot rate and then solving for

the spot rate). As a result the exchange rate ends up being deter-

mined by relative excess money supplies and an interest differential

(as in equation (3) of Dornbusch (1980)).
                                            9


                          *           *          *
                s     rn—rn —   b(r   —r)   h(y—y )                       (I)

where (all natural logarithms):


        s =   logarithm of spot exchange rate (home currency price of
              foreign exchange)

        m =   logarithm   of nominal money

        y =   logarithm   of real income

        r     logarithm of one plus nominal interest rate

        h = income elasticity of money demand

        b =   interest   elasticity of money demand with respect to "r"

        "*" denotes foreign


Note that interest parity implies


               s—f=r * —r                                                 (2)



where f =     logarithm   of forward rate. If we let


                                                                          (3)



where               = a constant

               E    = random error term with mean zero and variance

equations (2) and (3) imply:



               st=c+(r*_r)+E                                          (4)



Equation (4) suggests that estimation of (1) with a constant term will,

given interest parity, leave measures of relative excess money as re-

dundant variables in what is reai.1.y an interest parity equation.
                                 10


Actual results may differ somewhat if (3) mis—specifies behavior of

the forward rate and measures of relative excess money operate on

it.3 The result anticipated here is, however consistent with the

finding by Dornbusch (1980) that the interest differential emerges as

the only significant variable in an equation like (1) [with nominal

interest rates in place of rJ.

      An adequate representation of any theory of exchange rate behavior

should impose the interest parity condition which represents steady

state arbitrage in asset markets. This condition, with considerable

empirical support, enters the forward rate into an equation such as

(1). Then, representation of the forward rate as an unbiased predictor

of the future spot rate enables a rational solution for the exchange rate

exclusively in terms of exogenous determinants of all expected future

values of the relative [home versus foreign) excess supply of money.

This is the Bilson (1978, 1979) MERE solution which is extended below

in Section 2 to include intervention and sterilization behavior.


Eliminating The PPP Problem


      The monetary approach still suffers from the assumption of pur-

chasing power parity which is not sustained by the data. An obvious

way to deal with this problem, which will be employed in empirical

tests of MERE,is to Investigate the nature of "real" exchange rate

behavior over the sample period under investigation. Write PPP as:


               =
                   (pt_pt*) +                                      (5)
                                               11


where       is the log of the "real" exchange rate. For the dollar—DM

exchange rate during the 1973—79 sample period,                  follows a random

walk (Box—Pierce test for autocorrelations: Q(12)                 17.9;

Q(24) =    25.7;   Q(36) =          34.6):

                       =
                           -.l + v                                             (5.a)



where v = "white noise" residuals from an AR—l model on                   (v   n,a2).


                        =
                            A(p_p*)t + v                                       (5.b)



Equation (5.b) indicates that PPP is satisfied by first differencing

logs. All exchange rate equations reported below in Section 3 are

estimated in log first—difference form.


2.       A RATIONAL MONETARY MODEL OF EXCHANGE RATE
         DETERJyIINATION: THE ROLE OF INTERVENTION
         AND STERILIZATION


Money Demand


         The model to be presented here draws on Makin (1980). The log

linear money demand function has the form


                   —                k + ay —
                           Pt
                                =
                                               br                              (6)




where:

         m =     log    of money supply (m =        m
                                                        =
                                                            m)
         Pt = log of the price level
             =   log    of real income
                                                   12



         r =          log   of (1+1) (1 =         nominal interest rate)
        (a>O) = income elasticity of money demand

        (b>O) = minus the negative elasticity of money demand with
                respect to (1+i).5
        k     = constant.
         If an identical "foreign" money demand function is specified with

"*"   superscripts          indicating foreign values, subtracting from (6) the

foreign equivalent of (6) gives, setting k =                    k*:

                                          *                 *
                                                                                (7)


where

                       =            —
                            (mt          m)
                                          *
                  v    =    (y  t   —    yt   )




Money Supply: Sterilization and Intervention


         Money supply is represented by a log linear money "production

function" which determines money supply in terms of domestic and foreign

assets of the central bank. For country 1, let:

                            ii
                   1_       1        1



where:

        M = money               supply

              =    domestic assets of central bank in country "1"
         D1

         X1 = foreign               exchange reserves of central bank in country "1"


         j1
              =    elasticity             of money supply with respect to

              =    elasticity             of money supply with respect to X1.
                                                13


In logs (8) becomes:


                          =
                              j1d1   + j2x1                                          (9)




        Sterlization links d negatively to reserves


                          =          —
                              de1        (l—st1) x1                                  (10)
                      t          t                   t



where
                  =   log     of autonomous portion of domestic assets of central
        de1
              j       bank in country 1

        st1
                  =   sterlization         coefficient in country 1 [St1       0 implies
                      full sterlization; St1 =           1.0   implies zero sterlization and
                      d1 =     d1t    ].
                          t

        Intervention links reserves to the exchange rate where:



                  x1 =_'y1s                                                          (11)



   measures the elasticity of official reserves with respect to the ex-

change rate, s. The faster currency 1 depreciates (a rise in s) the

faster country one reserves are lost (and the faster "foreign't reserves

rise). If analogous expressions apply for country 2, then                         the re—

lative money supply term for countries 1 and 2, can be written as:


                      =         +                                                   (12)
                                     t1s
                                        14


where:
                                        *
                            = j1 de — j1 de


                        E                        —
                            [—y1(j2—j1(1—st1))       'y'2(j—j(1—st2))]


If intervention dominates sterlization so that currency depreciation

lowers x1 and raises x2 then 4)        is   unambiguously negative. If steri-

lization eradicates intervention's affect on the monetary base 4)        = 0.
In this case        =
                        de    and there is no need to take account of either

intervention or sterlization in modeling the money supply. The impor-

tant thing about (12) from the forecasting standpoint is the fact that

it links to "4)",    the     value of all reduced—forms describing the impact

upon the exchange rate of exogenous variables. And "4)"in turn depends

upon intervention and sterlization policy parameters y. and st

(i =   1,2)   which are likely to change over time.

       Equations (7) and (12) along with purchasing power parity, in-

terest parity and the condition that the forward rate is an unbiased

measure of the public's expected spot rate enable a rational MERE solu-

tion for the exchange rate.


A General Formulation for PPP and "Real"
Exchange Rate Changes


       Purchasing power parity is expanded here to include systematic

and random "real" exchange rate changes.
                                     15


              s =          — p) + dz + u                          (13)



Here z represents a vector of real factors which systematically

operate to cause deviations from PPP while u represents non—systematic

divergences of the exchange rate from PPP.

        Interest parity is written as:


                                                                  (14)



where      is the log of the forward domestic currency price of foreign

currency as of time "t" for time "t+l." Here "r's" refer to one plus

nominal interest rates on instruments of term "t" to "t+l." The simple

efficient market hypothesis states that under conditions of risk neu-

trality, zero transactions costs, rational use of information and com-

petitive markets:


                   =                                              (15)
                       Et [5+ilmnf0rmatb0nt]

Equation (15) sets the forward rate at t?tI for time "t+l" equal to

the mathematical expectation of the spot rate at time "t+l" conditional

on the information set available at time "t."


A Solution for the Exchange Rate


        Equations (14) and (15) imply:


               s
                e
              t t+l
                        —st =rt —r *t
                                                  16


where se+1 E E[s+iJinformation]. Equation (16) can be substi-

tuted into equation (7) for (r_r*) while PPP (equation (13)) sets
      *
          =                   —
              St
                   —
                        hz        u.    These substitutions along with expresssions

for money supply behavior enable a rational solution for the exchange

rate of the form:


                          =                             — Wd
                              T1 [(1+wd)                       4e_1}

                         -                          -
                              [-] [(l+W)                W




                         +
                              []        [(l+W)   z — W Z1]                         (17)



where AR—i processes define growth of exogenous variables


                              =
                                  d    '-t—1 + Ud                                  (18.a)



                          = p              + u                                     (l8.b)



                       Lz =    p tzi       + u                                     (18.c)



and


                   W.(j =         d,y,z)   =                    =      (with pi)
                                               (1_)+b(1_P)

With p all equal one (growth of exogenous variables a random walk),

letting a =            1.0 and ignoring, for now, z, the result is a basic form
of the extended MERE model useful for elucidating its basic features:
                                     17



            s =      [l/(l—)][(l+)[R.xM]    —
                                                1[RXM]tiJ      (18)
where b [b/(1—q)}.
where RXM    [de —      or   relative excess money supply.

      Equation (18) implies a cyclical response of the exchange rate

to relative excess money supply (RXM). If sterlization cancels the

impact of intervention on the monetary base (=O), the elasticity

of the exchange rate with respect to RXM is (l+b), implying an initial

"overshoot" of amount "b" which is subsequently removed at t—1. Sharp-

ness of the cyclical response of the exchange rate to RXN is proportional

to the interest elasticity of money demand. This result is most easily

understood by first noting that interest parity, PPP and unbiasedness

of the forward rate as a predictor of the expected spot rate together

imply that Fisher equations describe nominal interest rates in each

country.6 These conditions are all implicit in (18). Given these con-

ditions a rise in RXM is exacerbated by a drop in money demand at home

relative to abroad which in turn results from higher nominal interest

rates at home relative to abroad. The latter results from a relative

increase in expected inflation at home. The size of the additional

negative effect on money demand depends on the size of b, the interest

elasticity of money demand. In short a rise in RXM feeds on itself by

causing anticipated inflation which lowers steady—state money demand.

Therefore the exchange rate must depreciate by more than a change in

RXM to reduce domestic excess money supply. Once the initial overshoot

reduces steady state real money balances at home, the extra pressure

on the exchange rate is removed and the overshoot portion of deprecia-

tion disappears.
                                 18


Intervention and Sterilization


      These results are modified by intervention and/or sterilization.

In the longer run can not be zero, with intervention not allowed to

affect the monetary base. If the base is not affected by balance of

payments disequilibria under non—zero intervention reserve gains or

losses will persist until some rapid adjustment of exchange rates to

perceived equilibrium levels is permitted. This outcome implies that

attempts to hold   = 0 will eventually cause y (intervention) to fall

until exchange rates reach perceived equilibrium levels. In any case,

  can be expected to vary over time.

      If intervention is heavy and 4   takes on a large negative value,

the "overshoot" may seem to disappear, say over some sample period.

The reason will be the market's perception of intervention to prevent

exchange rate movement and not any "failure" of the monetary theory of

exchange rate determination. A believable announcement of or concrete

evidence of a significant change in intervention policy will alter ""

and thereby alter the measured impact upon the exchange rate during some

finite sample period of a given change in RXM. The basic MERE theory

which postulates a fixed impact would be contradicted by data drawn

for that sample period. The reason would not be invalidity of MERE

but rather failure to allow for a change in intervention (or sterili-

zation) policy.
                                 19


3.    TESTING THE EXTENDED MERE MODEL


Implications of Theory


      The theory developed in Section 2 anticipates some specific forms

of observable behavior. The response of exchange rates to components

of RXM should be cyclical. Separate components of R.XM may produce dif—

ferent cyclical impacts upon exchange rates due to: differences in

income elasticity of money demand (impact on response to real income

variables)7; and different projections of future, expected behavior of

determinants of RXM from observable current and lagged values.8 Over

time, estimatedparameteTs may vary due to changes in intervention and/or

sterilization policy.

      The full sample period runs from March, 1973 through December,

1979. During that time there has been steady "real" depreciation of

the dollar against DM. As noted earlier, the log of the real dollar--DM

exchange rate follows a random walk during the 1973—79 sample period.

Therefore the rate of change of the exchange rate (log—first--difference)

obeys PPP. All variables discussed here are in log—first—difference

form. Any possible remaining systematic, temporal behavior of the

differenced dollar—DM exchange rate is captured by a noise model in the

transfer function estimates reported below. Given this formulation,

RX1I components must explain some part of the white—noise residuals of

a prefiltered series on the rate of change of the exchange rate. The

measure of relative inflation volatility on real relative risk (herein-

after "o") described earlier is also included as a possible source of

trealtt dollar—DM exchange rate movement to be held constant when con-

sidering the impact of RxM.9
                                20


Methodology


      Transfer function estimation procedures following Box and Jenkins

(1970) were employed to estimate exchange rate equations. This methodo-

logy enables parsimonious representation of lengthy, cyclical distri-

buted—lag effects running from exogenous variables to the endogenous

variable along with simultaneous pre—filtering of the endogenous vari-

ables to ttwhite_noiseI by means of an AR, MA or ARMA model. In addi-

tion, cross—correlations between the endogenous variable and lagged

and leading values of the exogenous variables (pre—filtered to white

noise) can be obtained. The cross correlations for lagged exogenous

variables enable the investigator to see if any additional explanatory

power remains once some relationship between exogenous and endogenous

variables has been estimated. Cross correlations between the endogenous

variable and leading values of exogenous variables enable a check on

feedback running from the endogenous variable to later values of the

exogenous variable.

      Initial estimation using 82 monthly observations running from

March, 1973 through December, 1979 indicated that most impact from exo-

genous to endogenous variables occurred (via numerator parameters)

contemporaneously and with a lag of one month. Further explanatory

power appeared to be distributed over a long lag. Therefore a para-

meter (second order denominator) was included to allow for a cyclical

distributed lag impact running from exogenous variables to the endo—

genous variables.
                                21


Estimation Results


      Table 1 reports on estimation of a transfer function model with

numerator parameters at lags zero and one (0—n. and 1—n.) and a second—

order denominator parameters (2—dn.). "Total gain" in Table 1 refers

to the full distributed—lag impact of the exogenous variable over a

period of damped, cyclical oscillations. The top portion of Table 1

excludes the relative risk (a) term while the lower portion includes it.

The impact of a is estimated by a numerator parameter at lag 3 only.

The estimation program employed estimates a maximum of 15 parameters

which left only one parameter attributable to relative risk)0

      Obviously many alternative formulations including first and third—

order denominator parameters and other numerator parameters could pro-

duce an oscillatory distributed—lag impact running from RXN variables

to the exchange rate. Some were tried. Numerator parameters beyond

lag—one—month were generally insignificant (with the notable exception

of relative real risk). In most cases third—order denominator parameters

resulted in explosive oscillatory distributed lags for one or more RXM

variables. The formulation reported in Table 1 has uniformity and

relative simplicity to recommend it. However, any significant change in

intervention or sterilization policy can and will disturb the appro-

priate form of the model as we shall see be1ow.

      Overall, Table 1 indicates that RXM variables explain some part

of dollar—DM exchange rate behavior in a manner predicted by MERE theory.

Still, a large part of exchange rate behavior is unexplained as indi-

cated by low R2's. F—tests of the overall significance of equations (1.1)

and (1.2) are very close to crucial values at the 5 percent level.
                                           TABLE 1

            TRANSFER FUNCTION ESTIMATION OF THE DOLLAR PRICE OF DM
                        (t—Statistics in Parentheses)



                              Equation (1.1) (Real Risk Omitted)
            R2(R2) =         0.26(0.12) F(l3,66) = 1.83 [F°513,16 = 1.87:1 Cons.: 0.0150

Exog. Var.                        0—n.        1—n.        2—dn.         Total Gain
d        (1,2)                    0.1438      0.3696     —0.2286        0.4179
    US
                                  (1.04)      (2.60)      (0.59)
    US
                                  0.2405     —0.2772     —0.8676       —0.0196
                                  (0.61)      (0.72)      (2.96)
d                               —0.0265       0.0215     —0.5936       —0.0032
    g
                                  (3.17)      (2.21)      (2.86)
y                                0.0099       0.1800      0.9869        14.49
    g
                                  (0.13)      (2.34)      (16.72)
                       (4)
Noise (MA—6)                                                            .5245
                                                                        (4.41)
                             Equation (l.2)(Including Real Risk)
           R ( ) = 0.28(0.13)          F(14,65) = 1.84 [F°514,65 =   1.85]   Cons.: —0.0168

d                                0.1639       0.3805     —0.2795        0.4255
    US
                                  (1.23)      (2.78)      (0.79)
yUS                              0.3144     —0.3600      —0.8443       —0.0248
                                  (0.79)     (0.90)       (3.23)
d                               —0.0219      0.0226      —0.6414        0.0004
    g                             (2.49)      (2.41)      (3.06)

y                                0.0262      0.1903       0.9864        15.98
    g                             (0.33)      (2.55)      (17.75)

Noise(MA—6)                                                             0.5598
                                                                        (4.70)

Relative Risk:5                                                         0.0086
                                                                        (1.33)
NOTES:           (1) All variables    are in log—first—difference.
                 (2)     "d" measuresthe log of the domestic portion of the monetary
                        base. For both the U.S. and Germany, the domestic portion of
                        the monetary base Is measured by "monetary authority reserve
                        money (line 14) less "monetary authority foreign assets"
                        (line 11) in IMF International Financial Statistics.
                 (3)   "y" is "industrial—production" (line 66c of IFS).
                 (4)   The spot exchange rate s is taken from the Harris Bank Tape of
                        international financial statistics. Data are as of the last
                        available reporting day of the month.
                 (5)   Numerator parameter at lag 3 only.
                                22


      It is clear from Table 1 that a serious mis—specification is very

likely to result from the coon practice of estimating exchange rate

equations which impose the same absolute parameter values on coeff i—

dents attached to domestic and foreign money and income variables.

Dollar appreciation from U.S. income growth, y, is far less than DM

appreciation implied by German income growth,         This result is con-
                                                Yg•
sistent with the higher income elasticity of money demand in Germany

alluded to earlier. Likewise, dollar depreciation from U.S. money ex-

pansion, d, is considerably above the level of DM depreciation im-

plied by German money expansion, dg•

      Part of the U.S.—German difference in the estimated elasticity

of the exchange rate with respect to the domestic portion of the mone-

tary base results from the fact that during the 1973—79 sample period,

the elasticity of the U.S. money supply (M—2) with respect to d was

about 3 times that for Germany. Even adjusting for this, however, the

conclusion remains that U.S. money—base or money growth has resulted

in more dollar depreciation than the DM—depreciation resulting from

German money—base or money growth.

      The estimated impact on the exchange rate of a rise in German

money is quite robust. Initial DM depreciation is followed, in 1 month,

by almost equal appreciation and subsequent cycling which eventually

leaves only a very small net impact on the rate. The total gain changes

sign from equation (1.1) to equation (1.2). This is an odd result which

is due proximately to the form of the estimated oscillatory distributed—

lag impact of dg on the exchange rate. More fundamentally the small

overall response of the exchange rate to d, especially when compared
                                 23



to the response to d, may be due to the tendency of German money

growth to revert to a stable mean over the sample period while U.S.

money growth rates have tended to accelerate. The latter implies far

more anticipated inflation from a given rise in money growth and,

therefore, more currency depreciation.

      "Relative risk" change is meant to proxy for a real interest rate

change in Germany relative to the U.S. Equation (1.2) indicates the

anticipated DM appreciation resulting from a rise in • although the esti-

mated coefficient differs from zero at only about the 20 percent level

of significance.


Feedback From Exchange Rates to Exogenous Variables


      Table 2 reports Box—Pierce test statistics for autocorrelation

and cross correlation of variables in equation (1.2). Perhaps most

notable is the indicated feedback running from the exchange rate to

the domestic portion of the U.S. monetary base. Examination of the

cross correlations between pre—filtered s and pre—filtered d mdi—
                                                            us
cates significant feedback at lags of 2 and 11 months. The indication,

in conjunction with estimated intervention equations to be discussed

below, is that when dollar depreciation against the DM results in

official U.S. "leaning against the wind" and a consequent loss of

reserves, part or all of the impact on the monetary base is removed

by a rise in d. Estimated intervention and money supply functions

for the United States indicate that during the 1973—79 sample period

implied sterilization by the U.S. more than offset the impact of
                              TABLE 2


                           CR1—SQUARE TESTS
          (Box—Pierce Statistic—Adjusted For Downward Bias)
                          (For Equation 1.2)



Autocorrelation:                  Degrees of Freedotn    P—Value
  Q(12) = 7.09                           11              .791
  Q(24) = 10.1                           23              .990

Cross—Correlation:
(1) d
    us
       ons
      s(0,12) =   7.24                   10              .703
      S(0,24) =   14.3                   21              .857

(2) sondus
      S(—1,—l2) =   30.0                 12              .00279
      S(—l,—24) =   41.1                 24              .0162

(3) us        s

      S(0,12) =   8.70                   10              .561
      s(0,24) =   14.0                   21              .872

(4)   s

      S(—1,—12) =   22.8                  12             .0299
      S(—l,—24) =   38.3                  24             .0324
(5) d ons
      S(0,12) = 14.2                     10              .164
      S(0,24) = 25.9                     21              .211

(6) sondg
      S(—1,—12) = 18.7                    12             .096
      S(—1,—24) = 34.0                    24             .084

(7) Ygons
      S(0,12) = 17.7                      10             .061
      S(0,24) = 22.2                      21             .388



(Continued)
TABLE 2 (Continued)



Cross—Correlation: (Cont'd)   Degrees of Freedom   P—Value
     S   Ofl Yg
    s(—l,—12) =    13.1             12             .359
    s(—l,—24) =    23.2             24             .507

(8) aons
    s(0,12) =     7.76              12             .803
    S(0,24) =     21.1              23             .573

(9) sona
    S(—l,—12) = 8.95                12             .707
    S(—l,—24) = 16.2                24             .881
                                 24


 intervention on the monetary base. In addition there is some mdi—

 cation of sterilization feedback from s to d at lag 3 months. These
                                            g
 results suggest a further explanation for the powerful impact of changes

in d    on the exchange rate indicated in Table 1.   If exchange rate

movements are blunted by intervention behavior which is not allowed

to produce a stabilizing impact on the monetary base, excess money

supply conditions created by a rise in d    can be expected to persist

for some time. The powerful response of the exchange rate to a rise

in d
    us that is indicated in Table 1 reflects the expectation that
effects upon the U.S. monetary base arising from "leaning against the

wind" by U.S. authorities will be overwhelmed by sterilization.

       Some feedback from the exchange rate to U.S. industrial produc-

tion is also indicated in Table 2. Strong positive feedback appears

at a lag of 5 months. It may be that dollar depreciation which ini-

tially "overshoots" is sharp enough to stimulate a real increase in

demand for U.S. exports which in turn requires a rise in industrial

production.


Changes in Intervention and Sterilization Policy


       The extended MERE model suggests that changes in intervention

and sterilization policy within a sample period ought to alter the

measured impact upon the exchange rate of changes in money, real income

and other disturbances. The first step to check for this possibility

was to estimate "leaning against the wind" intervention equations for

the U.S. and Germany for the full March, 1973 — December, 1979 sample

period.11 Then the sample period was sp]it after December 1975.
                                  25


This split, as noted by Bilson (1979), is suggested by the December,

1975 meetings at Rambouillet where major countries attempted to formu-

late some exchange—rate—policy "rules of the game." Intervention

equations of the form obtained for the full sample period were then

estimated for the March, 1973 — December, 1975 period and the January,

1976 — December, 1979 period.

      For the United States it was not possible to reject the null

hypothesis that the intervention model was unchanged. The relevant

F—statistic calculated was 1.03, well below the critical value of

1.93 required for rejection of the null hypothesis at the 5 percent

level of significance. For Germany, it was possible to reject the

null hypothesis of unchanged intervention at the 5 percent level

(calculated F =   2.81 versus critical 5 percent F = 2.74).
      Inspection of cross correlations of residuals for the sub—periods

suggested that sterilization policy for both Germany and the United

States was largely unchanged between the two sub—periods.

      German intervention became more pronounced during the latter part

of the sample period. A one percent change in the exchange rate was

accompanied by a nearly one percent change in reserves in the January,

1976 — December, 1979 period. The comparable "elasticity of interven-

tion" in the March, 1973 — December, 1975 period was only about one—

third. For the full period [March, 1973 — December, 19791 the estimated

"elasticity of intervention" for Germany was about 0.5.

      An attempt to estimate equations (1.1) and (1.2) in Table 1 for

the shorter sample periods clearly indicated that the fit of the model

employed over the full period deteriorated sharply in the sub—periods.
                                  26


 A major difficulty was the implied oscillatory distributed lag impact

 running from money and income variables to the exchange rate. In a

 number of cases it became explosive. Another problem is likely the

 fact that the shorter sample periods afforded few degrees of freedom.

 Given the need to estimate 15 parameters only 15 degrees of freedom

 exist for the early period and 29, for the later period. Therefore,

 these results are far from conclusive. The suggestion which remains

is the possibility that significant changes in intervention policy can

and may have altered the "true" values of reduced—form parameters

within the 1973—79 sample period. The results for the full sample

period reflect a composite of distinct intervention policies in each

of the sub—periods.


4.      CONCLUDING REMARKS


        The primary aim of this paper has been to deal with shortcomings

of extant empirical tests of the monetary approach to exchange rate

determination. Four major difficulties exist:        (1) Failure to deal

explicitly with real exchange rate changes;    (2)    Failure to impose

interest parity; (3) Failure to represent the forward rate as an

unbiased predictor of the spot rate; and (4) Failure to model impli-

cations of official intervention in foreign exchange markets and of

possible efforts to sterilize effects of intervention on the monetary

base.

        Theoretical discussion of exchange rate behavior by other investi-

gators has dealt adequately with the first three failures and the
                                27


fourth has been addressed in Makin (1980). But empirical investiga-

tions have tended to incorporate at least one failure and usually,

all four, as in the representation by Dornbusch (1980) of an empiri-

cal test of the monetary approach. It would be inappropriate, on the

basis of poorly formulated empirical tests, to abandon the monetary

approach to exchange rate determination, distinguished by its analyti-

cal tractability and derivative refutable hypotheses expressed in terms

of directly observable variables.

      Results of empirical tests conducted here do not permit rejection

of the complex joint hypothesis represented by equations estimated to

test the monetary approach. In spite of this, there remained unexplained

a large portion of the behavior of the dollar—DM exchange rate in the

1973—79 monthly sample employed. This fact is not inconsistent with

the view that exchange rates are prices determined in asset markets

where a large, unsystematic flow of information, not captured by mone-

tary or other variables, produces large, unsystematic movements of

exchange rates.

      Results reported here are proximte1y at variance with those of

Caves and Feige (1980). They found that, in the presence of explanatory

power of an exchange rate's own past history, monetary variables have

no additional explanatory power. They also employed, as this study does,

log—first—differences of all variables. They considered a different

(U.S.—Canadian dollar) exchange rate. The main difference is their

failure to measure excess money supply and to allow for different,

reduced—form coefficients measuring the impact of money on exchange

rates. In short, the difference between results reported here and
                                28


those of Caves and Feige may   well   be due to problems of specification

error and omitted variables.

      The extended MERE model of exchange rate behavior which includes

"leaning against the wind" intervention suggests hypotheses about be-

havior of international capital flows as well as exchange rates. A

basic balance of payments identity which sets the change in official

reserves (intervention) equal to the sum of private capital flows and

the current account combined with the extended—MERE, exchange rate model

yields a theory of international capital flows. Capital flows, like

exchange rates, can be shown to depend only on the current expectation

of all future, relative excess money supplies. Makin and Nelson (1981)

find that a measure of excess money supply produces the predicted

cyclical response of U.S. international capital flows over the 1969—80

sample period. Explanatory power of the transfer function is consi-

derably higher than that of the exchange rate equation. This is likely

due partly to the fact that the dependent variable is a quantity mea-

sure sampled quarterly instead of a price measure sampled over a finer,

monthly interval. If asset prices are absorbing a large part of the

impact of random information shocks, measured flows which reallocate

assets may be more related to behavior of systematic information such

as measures of relative excess money.

      There remains considerably more work to be done if exchange rate

behavior in an era of quasi—floating is to be fully understood. It

would be useful to isolate more of the systematic, measurable and

testable sources of "real" exchange rate movements. The role of risk
                              29


premia discussed in Makin (1980) needs to be more fully understood.

As more data from the quasi—floating period after March, 1973 become

available, it will be necessary to investigate further the implica-

tions for exchange rate behavior of any identifiable changes in inter-

vention and/or sterilization policy.
                                  30


                             FOOTNOTES

 *   Thanks are due to Charles Nelson and to students in my seminar

     on Advanced Macroeconomics for help in distilling ideas presented

     here. Responsibility for any errors is my own.

1.   Dornbusch (1980) uses unanticipated depreciation of the dollar

     against the yen and DM, but as is clear from his Figure 3 (p. 160)

     this is almost the same as actual depreciation since most deprec-

     iation was unanticipated.

2.   Dornbusch (1980), Footnote to Table 4, p. 162.

3.   Equation (3) may   contain   a time trend as in:

                =   a+ t +

     In this   case some "time" proxy would appear in (4) or a low

     Durbin—Watson statistic would likely result in differencing.

4.   Frenkel (1977) among others provides convincing evidence regarding

     unbiasedness of the forward rate as a predictor of the spot rate

     (exchange market efficiency). However, Tryon (1979) finds that the

     forward market fails to supply an unbiased predictor of the change

     in the future spot rate in 4 of 6 cases examined. While failure

     of this more stringent test of market efficiency does not expli-

     citly violate the usual efficiency condition employed here, Tryon's

     results raise questions worthy of note and further investigation.

5.   "b" will be slightly below interest elasticity of money demand with

     respect to "i", with the difference falling as i rises. The

     "1 + i" formulation turns out to be particularly convenient for

     capturing interest parity and introduces no substantive changes

     in the nature of money demand.

6.   This condition holds given a constant ratio of domestic to foreign

     real interest rates.
                                31


7.    Estimation of U.S. and German money demand equations for the

      sample period under investigation revealed German income elas-

      ticity of money demand (about 1.5) significantly above that

      for the U.S. (about 0.4). This implies that real growth in

      Germany ought to strengthen the DM by more than growth in the

      U.S. strengthens the dollar.

8.    In terms of the model, the "p" values describing the (AR—i)

      growth path of exogenous variables may differ. Alternatively,

      a more complex ARMA model may imply alternative cyclical re-

      sponse patterns.

9.    A measure of a was obtained as follows. First, an ARMA model

      was estimated for the producer price index in the U.S. and

      Germany. A monthly moving average of contemporary and six

      lagged residuals was calculated for the 1973—79 sample period

      for each country. The German series less the U.S. series is a.

            The rationale behind a   is   simple. The larger are current

      and past residuals on a forecasting equation for prices, the

      more uncertainty there is about future price levels and antici-

      pated inflation. More uncertainty requires a risk premium for

      local country holders of local currency assets who are risk—

      averse. The higher real return measured in the local currency

      attracts foreign investors.


10.   Some experimentation was conducted with alternative formulations

      enabling a denominator parameter for relative risk (by dropping
                                32



      one of the numerator parameters on another variable). Results

      did not alter conclusions reported here, although in some cases

      the change in specification caused explosive oscillatory distri-

      buted lags to be estimated for RXM variables.


11.   Equations estimated were transfer functions with noise models.

      The dependent variable was the rate of change of monetary authority

      reserve money (IFS, line 14). The independent variable was a

      distributed lag on the rate of change of the dollar—DM exchange

      rate. In the case of the U.S. the dollar—yen exchange rate proved

      to be highly significant along with the dollar—DM rate unexplain—

      ing intervention.
                               33



                           REFERENCES


Bilson,  John F.O. (1978). "Rational Expectations and the Exchange
       Rate," Ch. 5 in The Economics of Exchange Rates: Selected
       Studies, ed. by Jacob A. Frenkel and Harry C. Johnson, Addison—
       Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1978: 75—96.

____   (1979). "The Deutsche Mark/Dollar Rate: A Monetary Analysis,"
       in Policies for Employment, Prices and Exchange Rates, (Carnegie—
       Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy), Volume 11, ed. by
       Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer, North Holland, Amsterdam, 1979.

Bisignano, J. and K. Hoover (1980). "Alternative Asset Market Approaches
      to Exchange Rate Determination," Federal Reserve Bank of San
      Francisco, August, 1980.

Box, G.E.P. and G.M. Jenkins (1970). Time Series Analysis, Forecasting
      and Control, Holden—Day, Inc., San Francisco, 1970.

Caves, D.W. and E.L. Feige (1980). "Efficient Foreign Exchange Markets
      and the Monetary Approach to Exchange Rate Determination,"
      American Economic Review (March, 1980): 120—34.

Dornbusch, R. (1980). "Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?"
      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1980: 143—85.

Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer (1980). "Exchange Rates and the Current
      Account," American Economic Review (December, 1980): 960—71.

Frenkel, J.A. (1977). "The Forward Exchange Rate, Expectations and the
      Demand for Money: The German Hyperinflation," American Economic
      Review (September, 1977): 653—70.

Hodrick, R.J. (1978). "An Empirical Analysis of the Monetary Approach
      to the Determination of the Exchange Rate," Ch. 6 in The Economics
      of Exchange Rates: Selected Studies, ed. by Jacob A. Frenkel and
      Harry C. Johnson, Addison—Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1978: 97—116.

Makin, J.H. (1980). "Techniques and Success in Forecasting Exchange
      Rates: Should It Be Done? Does It Matter? The Long and the
      Short of It." Forthcoming in Conference Volume on
      zation of Financial Markets and National Economic Policy, New
      York University.

Makin, J.H. and C.R. Nelson (1981). "International Capital Flows Under
      Full Monetary Equilibrium: An Empirical Analysis," University
      of Washington, Department of Economics, January, 1981.

Tryon, R. (1979). "Testing for Rational Expectations in Foreign Exchange
      Markts," International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 139, May,
      1979, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Washington, D.C.
