                      NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               I STERNAT TONAL CAP ITAL FLOWS UNDER FULL
            MONETARY EQUILIBRIUM: AN EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS


                           John H. Makin
                        Working Paper No. 6)8




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge MA 02138

                            March 1981




The research reported here is part of the NTER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and also the research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #648
                                                            March 1981




                     International Capital Flows under Full
                  Monetary Equilibrium: An Empirical Analysis



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper develops a theory of international capital flows based upon

a monetary—equilibrium, rational—expectation theory of exchanged rate

determination extended to include the official intervention and possible

sterilization of its effects upon the monetary base that are part of the

post—1973 system of limited flexibility of exchange rates. Capital flows

are shown to depend only on the current expectation of a future relative

excess money supplies once all arbitrage conditions are imposed along with

rationality.

     Empirical testing reveals that U.S. international capital flows

respond with persistent, damped oscillations to growth of relative excess

money. This phenomenon is a quantity adjustment corollary of 'overshooting"

of exchange rates in response to changes in relative excess money supply.

Inclusion of a relative interest rate term along with measures of growth of

relative excess money supply results in rejection of the hypothesis that such

a variable provides any additional explanatory power regarding behavior of

U.S. international capital flows.



                                               Professor John H. Makin
                                               Department of Economics, DK—30
                                               University of Washington
                                               Seattle, Washington 98195

                                               (206) 543—5955 (5865)
       This paper develops a theory of international capital flows

based upon the monetary—equilibrium, rational—expectation (MERE)

theory of exchange rate determination, developed by Bilson (1979)

and extended to include official intervention and sterilization by

Makin (1980.a, 1980.b). The MERE approach to exchange rate determina-

tion clearly indicates that when the asset market arbitrage equili-

brium condition (interest parity) is Imposed along with rationality

and conditions of market efficiency in the foreign exchange market,

a monetary equilibrium expression for the exchange rate includes

only the current expectation of a future relative excess money supplies

and no interest rate terms.

      The extended MERE exchange rate formulation provides for off i—

cial intervention In foreign exchange markets and possible steriliza-

tion of resultant effects on the monetary base. This formulation

combined with a basic balance of payments identity which sets the

change in official reserves (intervention) equal to the sum of private

capital flows and the current account, yields a theory of international

capital flows in a world of less than freely flexible exchange rates.

Capital flows, like exchange rates, are shown to depend only on the

current expectation of all future relative excess money supplies

once all arbitrage conditions are imposed along with rationality.1

If growth of relative excess money supplies is assumed

to follow a random walk, the extended MERE formulation implies a

cyclical response of capital flows to changes in growth of relative

excess money supplies.
                               2


      Development and testing of the extended MERE approach to analy-

sis of capital flows in a world of limited flexibility of exchange

rates occupies much of this paper. Section 1 briefly describes major

developments in the portfolio—asset approach to determination of

international capital flows and their relationship to this study.

Section 2 describes the theory of capital flows that is implied by

the extended MERE approach to exchange rate behavior. Section 3 pre-

sents empirical tests of the theory. Some concluding remarks are

presented in Section 4.


1.    Developments in the Asset Approach to Analysis
      of Capital Flows


      Two major developments have affected the manner in which models

of capital flow behavior have been formulated to reflect the essential

stock—adjustment nature of international capital flows. These are the

work of Branson (1968, 1970) and Branson and Hill (1971) and the work

of Kouri and Porter (1974).

      Consider first the portfolio formulation of Branson et al.,

(herafter BP). The B? formulation follows from Markowitz (1952) port-

folio theory and yields an equilibrium expression for net holdings of

financial claims on foreigners expressed in terms of interest rates,

risk variables and wealth. It is based only on arbitrage possibilities

among various financial assets with different risk—return properties.

The extended MERE theory of capital flows is, like BP, an asset

equilibrium model. However, it is based upon simultaneous arbitrage

between money assets and goods as well as between money assets
                                3


denominated in different currencies. And MERE results in an expres-

sion describing capital flows only in terms of growth of relative

excess monies.

      Although in recognizing the stock—equilibrating nature of inter-

national capital flows the BP formulation represented a significant

conceptual advance in modeling of international capital flows, it

proved difficult to implement econometrically. This was largely due

to simultaneity and multicollinearity problems which arose from failure

to consider capital flows in a general equilibrium context and failure

to impose equilibrium arbitrage conditions that linked together se-

parate interest rates which often appeared in estimated capital flow

equations as independent, explanatory variables. Measures of risk

and wealth, also called for under the stock equilibrium approach,

proved difficult to find on the frequent,periodic basis necessary

for estimation and so were typically omitted from empirical applica-

tions. Estimation was done under the BP approach but estimated coef-

ficients measuring behavior such as responsiveness of capital flows

to changes in interest rates tended to be highly unstable. This

phenomenon, discussed in a survey of such works by Kohlhagen (1977)

likely arose because of multicollinearity problems caused by a high

degree of correlation among explanatory variables, particularly domes-

tic and foreign interest rates, and because exchange rates and capital

flows are appropriately viewed as simultaneously determined endogenous

variables in a general equilibrium model of an open economy.

      Kouri and Porter (1974) combined Bransons stock equilibrium

formulation with the monetary—asset approach tc;• the balance of
                               4



payments developed originally by Hume (1752), extended by Johnson (1958),

and Mundell (1968) and later more fully articulated by Dornbusch

(1973) and others in Frenkel and Johnson (1976). They specified a

model with three assets, domestic base money, domestic bonds and foreign

bonds which permitted derivation of a reduced—form expression for

capital flows in terms of changes in the domestic portion of the mone—

tary base, the current account balance and changes in "foreign" interest

rates, nominal income and wealth. Their particular specification, in-

cluding the monetary base instead of the money supply, permitted test-

ing of the hypothesis that capital flows tend partially to offset

changes in the monetary base and thereby lessen ability to control

the domestic money supply. The current account balance and capital

flows were viewed in their fixed exchange rate model as sources of

change in the foreign component of the monetary base. Their domestic

economy was "small" and a price—taker in the bond market so that the

domestic interest rate was taken as given. Only the "foreign" in-

terest rate appeared in their estimated equations thereby eliminating

a source of multicollinearity by making explicit virtually perfect

correlation between domestic and foreign interest rates. Essentially,

Kouri and Porter determined capital flows as the temporary flow which

resolves disequilibrium in the asset—money market.

      Empirically, Kouri and Porter found evidence that supports the

asset—equilibrium approach to capital flows determination. Changes

in the monetary base tended to be somewhat offset by capital flows,

and a rise in income change which elevates growth of money demand and
                                5



tended to produce an accommodating capital inflow, The foreign interest

rate variable was not significant. In effect, money served as the wealth

variable in "monetary—approach" models and therefore Kouri and Porter

escaped the problem of trying to measure some broader wealth aggregate.

The risk variable received little explicit attention in their study,

being represented by a dummy variable. Results of the Kouri and Porter

study suggested that a measure of excess money supply is the best single

variable to include in a parsimonious attempt to explain capital flows

and that omission of heretofore ubiquitous interest rate(s) will not

significantly lower explanatory power.

      As useful as the Kouri and Porter approach was, it did not fully

integrate asset market arbitrage conditions and implications of market

efficiency and rationality into a theory of international capital flows

appropriate for a world of limited flexibility of exchange rates.

In such a world, exchange rate adjustments and capital flows combine

to resolve stock—disequilibria in money markets suggesting a need for

simultaneous consideration of exchange rate and capital flow behavior.

This is the basis of the extended MERE approach to behavior of inter--

national capital flows.


2.    A Monetary—Equilibrium, Rational—Expectations Theory
      of Capital Flows


Overview


      Development of the theory of capital flows to be tested here

requires first, that the MERE theory of exchange rate behavior postu—

lated by Bilson (1979) be extended following Makin (l980.a, l980.b) to
                                6



 incorporate official, "leaning—against_the_wjn" intervention in foreign

 exchange markets and possible sterilization of effects of intervention

 on the monetary base. Once this is done, some simple manipulation of

 a basic balance of payments identity and an intervention equation enable

 a capital flows corrollary of the extended MERE theory of exchange

 rate behavior. An additional advantage of this approach is that it

 employs the differenced log form of the extended MERE expression for

 the exchange rate. This particular formulation will be seen to bypass

 the need to represent explicitly the "real" exchange rate changes which

measure large and persistent deviations from purchasing power parity

 (PPP) where the log levels of real exchange rates have tended to follow

a random walk.

      Log linear equations for money supply and money demand are speci-

fied, with the latter including explicit provision for representation

of intervention and sterilization behavior. Then, equating money supply

and money demand, imposing interest parity and purchasing power parity

and setting the forward exchange rate equal to the expected spot rate,

a rational solution for the exchange rate is obtained in terms of

current expectations about all future excess money supplies. A full

enunciation of the joint hypothesis being tests with this formulations,

along with evidence on tests of each of the separate hypotheses is

presented in Makin (1980.b).


Money Demand


      Begin with a log linear money demand function of the form:
                                              7



                         Pt =      k + ay —   br                            (1)



where:


                     = log                            s    d
                in             of money supply (nit       m = nit);
                     =   log   of the price level;

                     =   log   of real income;

                rt =     log   of (1+1) (1 =      nominal interest rate);
             (a>O) = income elasticity of money demand;

             (b>O) = minus the negative elasticity of money demand with
                     respect to (l+i);2

                k = constant.

         If an identical tforeign money demand function is specified with

t'*tt
        superscripts     indicating foreign values, subtracting from (1) the
                                                               *
foreign    equivalent of (1) gives, setting k =            k

                                                                            (2)



where

                     =         —
                         (mt       m)

                     =         — y)

Money Supply: Sterilization and Intervention


         Money supply is represented by a log linear money "production

function" which determines money supply in terms of domestic and foreign

assets of the central bank. For country 1, let:
                                              8


                    s  l 2
                   M1=D1 X1                                                (3)



where:


              = money supply;

              =   domestic assets of central bank in country "1";
              =   foreign     exchange reserves of central bank in country "1";
         X1
              =   elasticity        of money supply with respect to D1;
              =   elasticity        of money supply with respect to X1.


In   logs (3) becomes:


                         =
                             j1d1   + j2x1                                 (4)




        Sterilization links d negatively to reserves


                  d1 = de1          —
                                        (l—st1) x1t                        (5)
                    t      t

where

                  de1 = log of autonomous portion of domestic assets of
                     t       central     bank in country 1;

                  St1 =      sterilization coefficient in country 1 [St1 = 0
                             implies full sterilization; St1 = 1.0 implies zero
                             sterilization and d1 =            ].
                                                         de1


        Intervention         links reserves to the exchange rate where:


                                                                           (6)
                                      9



      measures the elasticity of official reserves with respect to the

exchange rate, s. The faster currency 1 depreciates ( a rise in s)

the faster country one reserves are lost (and the faster "foreign"

reserves rise). If analogous expressions apply for country 2, ("rest

of world") then , the relative money supply term for countries 1 and

2, can be written as:


                                                                     (7)



where:


                   =
                       l   de1 —   j1 de

               (< 0)       [-i1(j2-j1(1-st1)) -   y2(j-j(l-st2))]
If intervention dominates sterilization so that currency depreciation

lowers x1 and raises x2 then         is unambiguously negative. If steri-

lization eradicates intervention's affect on the monetary base c =         0.
In this case      =        and there is no need to take account of either

intervention or sterlization in modeling the money supply. From (7)

it is clear that the value of all reduced—forms describing the impact

upon the exchange rate of exogenous variables are linked to "."

And   "" in   turn depends upon intervention and sterilization policy

parameters y1 and st. (i =      1,2) which may change over time.
        Equations (2) and (7) along with purchasing power parity, in-

terest parity and the condition that the forward rate is an unbiased

measure of the public's expected spot rate enable a rational MERE solu-

tion for the exchange rate.
                                   10


A Solution for the Exchange Rate


        Interest parity is written as:


                                                                    (8)



where      is the log of the forward domestic currency price of foreign

currency as of time "t" for time "t+l." Here "r's" refer to one plus

nominal interest rates on instruments of term "t" to "t+l." The simple

efficient market hypothesis states that under conditions of risk neu-

trality, zero transactions costs, rational use of information and com-

petitive markets:


                 =
                     Et [st÷iinformation]                           (9)



Equation (9) sets the forward rate at "t" for time "t+l" equal to

the mathematical expectation of the spot rate at time 't+l" condi-

tional on the information set available at time "t."

        Equations (8) and (9) imply:


                  t+l —
                          S   =
                                  r r
                                   —                                (10)



where tse t+l E E{s+1Iinformation}. Equation (10) can be substi-

tuted into equation (2) for (r—r )      while PPP sets PP =   S.   These

substitutions along with expressions for money supply behavior enable

a rational solution for the exchange rate of the form:3
                                         ii



              s =                                  — Wd
                     [-j-]     [(l+Wd)                         de1J

                 —             [(l+W)             —
                                                      WY   t—l1               (11)



where AR—i processes define growth of exogenous variables


                     =
                          d   Ade.i + Ud
                                              t
                                                                              (12.a)



                     =p           + u                                         (l2.b)



and


                                                       =
              W(i=d) =         (l-)+b(l-p.)                    (l-)   (with



With p. all equal one (growth of exogenous variables a random walk),

letting a =   1.0,   the result is a basic form of the extended MERE

model useful for elucidating its basic features:


                                                           —
              St =   [l/(l_ct)][(l+1)[RXN]                     1RxM]i]        (13)

where b    [b/(l—)].
where RXM E [de —         or   relative excess money supply.

      Equation (13) implies a cyclical response of the exchange rate

to relative excess money supply (RXM). If sterilization cancels the

impact of intervention on the monetary base (0), the elasticity of

the exchange rate with respect to RXN is (l+b), implying an initial

uovershootfl of amount ltbtt which is subsequently removed at t—l. Sharp-

ness of the cyclical response of the exchange rate to RXM is propor-

tional to the interest elasticity of money demand. This result is
                              12



most easily understood by first noting that interest parity, PPP and

unbiasedness of the forward rate as a predictor of the expected spot

rate together imply that Fisher equations describe nominal interest

rates in each country.4 These conditions are all implicit in (13).

Given these conditions a rise in RXN is exacerbated by a drop in money

demand at home relative to abroad which in turn results from higher

nominal interest rates at home relative to abroad. The latter results

from a relative increase in expected inflation at home. The size of

the additional negative effect on money demand depends on the size of

b, the interest elasticity of money demand. In short a rise in RXM

feeds on itself by causing anticipated inflation which lowers steady—

state money demand. Therefore the exchange rate must depreciate by

more than a change in RXM to reduce domestic excess money supply. Once

the initial overshoot reduces steady state real money balances at home,

the extra pressure on the exchange rate is removed and the overshoot

portion of depreciation disappears.


Implications of Extended MERE for
Capital Flows


      Further testable implications of MERE and perhaps a more thorough

comprehension of observable behavior can be obtained by expanding it

to develop a hypothesis about behavior of international capital flows.

The basic balance of payments identity sets the (positive) change in

official reserves AR (intervention) equal to the sum of net surplusses

in private capital flows, PR, and the current account, CA.
                                 13


                 =
                     PKt + CAt                                        (14)



Recall that the intervention equation (6) can be differenced in log

form to link the rate of change of reserves to the rate of change of

the exchange rate:



                                                                     (6.a)



Rearranging (14), dividing through by R and substituting from equation

(13) for As (where CA is viewed as a disturbance term,
                                                              e) gives:



            ()       =
                         [1][A(Io)] + [()][A(RxN) ] + e
                                                                     (15)


Equation (15) indicates that the extended MERE model of exchange rate

behavior implies a cyclical (outflow—inflow) response of private capital

flows to a change in the growth of relative excess money.

      This result is a straightforward extension of the extended MERE

theory of exchange rate behavior. Notice first that with freely

flexible exchange rates, (y=O) A(RXM) produces no impact on capital

flows. This follows because the exchange rate is absorbing all adjust-

ment pressure in the face of an excess money supply. "Leaning—against—

the—wind" (y>O) prevents full adjustment of the exchange rate to its

perceived equilibrium level and so some of the excess money supply

pressure is relieved by a capital outflow which rises with the degree

of intervention measured by           The outflow also rises with b (interest
                                 14



elasticity of money demand) which in turn determines underlying pres-

sure on the exchange rate. Finally, as more sterilization drives

(negative) 4    toward zero, outflows pick up in anticipation of prolonged

pressure on the exchange rate arising from chronic relative excess

money.

         The lagged inflow of capital on response to a rise in growth of

RXM indicated by (15) is the quantity—adjustment counterpart of the

cyclical response of the exchange rate to RXM described earlier.

Because rational projection of RXM into the future requires a reduction

in the equilibrium stock of money demanded, a temporary price (exchange

rate) overshoot is required to reduce the stock of money held. Once

completed the overshoot pressure is removed and the overshoot is re-

versed. With intervention this results in a capital inf low.


PPP and "Real" Exchange Rate Movements


      Equation (15) constitutes a test of the extended MERE model of

exchange rate behavior in first difference form augmented with "leaning—

against—the--wind" intervention. The MERE expression for As required

to yield equation (15) avoids some of the difficulties associated with

failure of purchasing power parity to hold in log level form. Suppose

we write PPP as:


              s =      — p) +                                     (16)
                                 15


where      is the log of the "real" exchange rate. If     follows a

random walk:


                 =       +
                             v                                     (17)



where v = "white noise" residuals from an AR—i model on       (v    n,c52).

Then, given (16) and (17):


                  =
                      A(p_p*) + v                                  (18)



Equation (18) indicates that PPP is satisfied by first differencing

logs whenever the "real" exchange rate, q, follows a random walk.

During the sample period to be investigated here it is not possible

to reject the hypothesis that q followed a random walk for major ex-

change rates such as the U.S. dollar prices of DM and yen.6

        The implication of these observations on the real exchange rate

is clear. Testing the extended MERE model by investigating behavior

of capital flows automatically implies testing the differenced log

form of that model which is in turn more likely to avoid the widely

observed failure of exchange rate levels to behave according to PPP.

Alternatively, direct tests of exchange rate behavior under the ex-

tended MERE formulation ought to be in first—difference form as in

Caves and Feige (1980) and Makin (l980.b).
                                 16


3.    Testing the Theory: U.S. International Capital
      Flows


Raw Data and Sample Period


      Commerce Department data on private U.S. capital flows published

in the Survey of Current Business is employed to test the theory out-

lined in Section 2. U.S. financial capital flows include net changes

in claims reported by U.S. banks and non—banks and net changes in

overall ownership of foreign securities. These items together with

direct investment comprise total private capital flows in the U.S.

balance of payments scheme.

      A continuous quarterly series on total U.S. private capital flows

is available beginning in 1969: I. The sample employed in this study

consists of quarterly, seasonally unadjusted data running from 1969:

through 1980: II. The 46 quarterly observations are drawn from data
                                 7
available as of October, 1980.

      Some investigators, including Branson (1968), have suggested that

the statistical discrepancy category in the U.S. balance of payments

accounts is in reality composed largely of unrecorded capital flows.

Empirical tests reported in Makin and Nelson (1980) do not permit re-

jection of this hypothesis. In view of this finding and those by other

investigators, measurement of actual capital flows as recorded flows

only would result in an errors—in—variables problem. Therefore the

measure of actual capital flows employed here is the sum of recorded

capital flows and statistical discrepancy.
                              17



      The major explanatory variable indicated by equation (15) is

a measure of growth of relative excess money, that is, growth of U.S.

excess money relative to growth of "rest of world" (ROW) excess money.

A measure of U.S. excess money growth is easy to obtain. Growth of

"new" M3 less growth of industrial production is employed here.8 An

adequate measure of ROW excess money growth is harder to obtain.

Various weighted averages of excess money growth for major industrial

countries added only insignificantly to the explanatory power of U.S.

excess money growth alone. A number of difficulties arise in trying

to obtain comparable series, suitable for aggregation across major

industrial countries. Some weighting scheme has to be devised as well

and it is not clear that a fixed weighting scheme over time is appro-

priate.

      In view of these problems and in the interest of obtaining data

of consistent quality without enduring long and variable reporting

lags for some countries' data, an alternative measure of ROW excess

money growth was sought. An initial thought was that actual ROW in-

flation provides a simple measure of ROW excess money growth. But

ROW inflation involves all of the aggregation problems just alluded to.

If commodity arbitrage is operative, actual U.S. inflation ought to

measure the consequences of ROW excess money growth. In addition,

such a number has the advantage of ready availability and avoidance

of complex aggregation problems. These considerations led to employ-

ment of U.S. actual inflation as a proxy for ROW excess money growth.

The result is a measure of relative excess money growth equal to
                               18



growth of "new," U.S. M3 less growth of U.S. industrial production

less the rate of U.S. (CPI) inflation.9 Alternatively, one could view

this construct as a measure of incipient excess dollars where the

ratio of dollar assets to the flow of real commodities is rising

faster than the current rate of depreciation of dollars against com-

modities.


Exchange Rate Regime Changes


      Obviously the 1969—80 sample period spans various nominal ex-

change rate regimes from "fixed" to "floating." Such nomenclature may

exaggerate the extent of changes in the exchange rate regime during

our sample period. While significant changes in foreign exchange market

intervention policy of central banks did occur during this period,

exchange rates were never rigidly fixed or freely flexible. Rather

the preannounced intervention policy of the Bretton Woods regime

evolved, during the period from August, 1971 to March, 1973, to an

era of unannounced intervention policy. Throughout the period, large

scale intervention by central banks in foreign exchange markets has

meant that capital flows have served to eliminate such disequilibria

in markets for internationally traded assets as are not eliminated

by constrained movement of exchange rates.

      Examination of the raw series measuring the sum of U.S. private

capital flows and statistical discrepancy (KSD) reveals that movement

away from the Bretton Woods system after 1971 is accompanied by a

marked increase in variability of KSD about the sample mean over the

1969: I — 1980: II sample period. Deflating the series by nominal
                              19


GNP effectively stabilizes the variance. Alternatively, as suggested

by equation (15), it would be appropriate to employ the total stock of

official reserves as a scale variable to remove heteroschedasticity.

Some experimentation revealed that a reserve asset variable did not

eliminate heteroschedastic disturbances as effectively as did nominal

GNP. Therefore the dependent variable employed in estimated equations

was the ratio of U.S. private capital flows plus statistical discrepancy

to U.S. nominal GNP.

     Within the quarter that a sharp change in the exchange rate regime

occurs, however, there may still result large capital flows in response

to changed expectations about optimal portfolio holdings. Within our

sample period, such changes did occur during the third quarter of 1971

(end of gold exchange standard) and the first quarter of 1973 (end of

Smithsonian System). A separate dummy variable for each of these

quarters is included in equations estimated for capital flows. The

effect is to acknowledge significant changes in the exchange rate regime

under the hypothesis that the initial stock—adjustment effects of such

changes upon capital flows are largely over within a quarter.


Capital Controls


      In addition to changes in intervention policy within the sample

period, U.S. controls on capital flows were in place until January,

1974. It remains an empirical question as to whether such controls had

any effect on actual capital flows. No significant change was detected

after 1974 in behavior of residuals for estimated capital flows equa-

tions reported below. This may     be   due to avoidance of capital controls
                               20


 which led actual capital flows to appear in the statistical discre—
                 10
 pancy category.


 Estimation Results



      Transfer function estimation procedures following Box and Jenkins

 (1970) were employed to estimate capital flow equations. This methodo-

logy enables parsimonious representation of possible lengthy, cyclical

distributed—lag effects running from growth of relative excess money

to capital flows along with simultaneous pre—filtering of capital flows

by means of an AR, MA or ARMA model. Under this specification excess

money supply must improve on the ability of past values of capital flows

to explain future capital flows. This constitutes a more stringent test

of the theory since any correlation between past capital and past growth

of relative excess money will tend to lower the explanatory power of

a distributed lag on growth of relative excess money.

      In effect, estimation of equation (15),given modifications of

dependent and independent variables just discussed,amounts to estima-

tion of the elasticity of U.S. capital flows (as a share of GNP) with

respect to relative excess money growth. In addition to relative

excess money growth, dummy variables for 1971—Ill and 1973—I are in-

cluded along with a univariate noise model on capital flows.

      Table 1 reports on estimation of the transfer function model of

U.S. capital flows. Numerator parameters at lags zero and one (0—n.

and 1—n.) and first and third order denominator parameters (l—dn. and

3—dn.) describe a cyclical distributed—lag impact of relative excess
                                      21


                                  TABLE     1


             U.S. PRIVATE INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL FLOWS
              INCLUDING STATISTICAL DISCREPANCY
       [DEFLATED BY U.S. NOMINAL GNP:   1969—1—1980—Il]
                Ct—Statistics in Parentheses)



               R2(R2)   = 0.69    (0.62)        F(8,34)   = 9.28
                         0—n.        1—n.       1—dn.       3—dn.    Total Gain
U.S. Excess Money:
                        —0.1302    —0.0617      1.1491    —0.4518   —0.226
                        (2.25)      (—0.89)     (10.19)    (4.57)

Dummies: 1971—Ill:
                        —7.283                                      —7.283
                        (4.79)
            1973—I:
                        —8.561                                      —8.561
                        (5.34)

Noise Model:             AR—3         MA—4

                         0.6127       —0.6644
                        (4.33)        (4.44)

Constant:               —1.8363
                        (1.36)
                               22



 money growth on capital flows. Figure 1 displays the full distributed

 lag. Translated into capital flows, the estimated parameters indicate

 roughly a "one—for—one" rule whereby a one percent rise in relative

 excess money growth causes a capital outflow, over the contemporaneous

and four subsequent quarters, of about $1.0 billion (1980 dollars).

The "total gain" for the relative excess money variable as a result of

subsequent cyclical inflows and outflows over about four years leaves

a net outflow of about $0.6 billion. Subsequent cycling persists after

four years as indicated in Figure 1, but at a low level.

      It is also clear from Table 1 that large U.S. capital outflows

over and above what were implied by relative excess money growth con-

ditions resulted from events in 1971—111 and 1973—I. Estimated out-

flows of about $7.8 billion and $10.8 billion respectively within each

of these quarters seem large, but it should be remembered that during

1971—111 especially foreign central banks were supporting the dollar

very heavily in a manner that prevented exchange rate adjustments

required for a move to equlibrium. Japan alone accumulated $5—$6

billion during 1971—Ill. The first quarter of 1973 was also a period of

very heavy intervention.

      The noise model on capital flows includes a third order autoregres-

sive terms [AR—3} and a fourth—order moving average term [MA—4].    As

indicated earlier, relative excess money growth and dummy variables are

explaining the residuals from the univariate noise model. As such,

any correlation between relative excess money and past capital flows

will tend to bias against finding significant explanatory power for
                    LAU(,NuI M1p'LC. U. t ; %                                                 'iic -v         •                                                         Figure         1

                                                                                               I


                                                                                      --_______
                                                                                                                                                  Ut—iiOd--——----—Th---—-—.6431Ej1                                                                     —----                              —
                                                                   •                                        ..      -;--.--.—-;-.--.—-.---;-.---—-—                 ;—.-;-r.           o1 -..-;-;-;-j--.                                .. .
—
                                                                   .*             -
                I—;draf—aoii-I-                                    .—----—                                           -----      ——---—---—---          —-
                                                                                                   —--——---—-—-*-                                                                                                —                                -——                   -
——
                                                                                                                                    —
                                                                   •

—-                      ----—                       -   -               ---   -
                                -. .-n,I-* —UI                                                 ——------—--—-— -- --—                                  -—                               —-—----   ——----—---- ---.-- -—- -----—---                 --           --           ---   ----- -
                                  a414p..I)I                   •                                                                                                                                                          .
                                  •44i-—uI                     •                                                                                                                                                                                   -
          -
— L)_i
              II                  'ltbJrUl                     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                         ___-_--—--—1                                                                                             ----—-        -——-— --—                 —
              1'                  .Jr—Ij                       •                                                                                 *                                                  —-—--—
—-            1                       —rj
                                .5lr-                          .                       —-                 —-————--——--—-—------——-—                                                                                                                        -        -
              It)                .JIUrI)j                      •              -                                                                                                                                                /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S
              i t——. 1-so,,I                                   .                                                                                                                                                                                                                      —
              Iti                                              •
—    --       I,        -         •
                                              t                i—---                        —-——-———-                                                                                                                 *5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            - ---—-—

                    -
                                  •n,U',.jI                    .
                                      d"br-'.4j     -                                                                                                                                                                     5                        *
                                             —%iI              •
                                                                                  -                                                                                                                                       •                                *
—&,                               .-k-—-—-*---—-—--——---————
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   --
                                                                                        -                                                                                                                                          *
          if3                    -.,,#.-,j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      •.
                                —. l_-.J-    —'C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   —                                                  -—
                                                               •                                                                                                                                             *
                                                                                       —                                                                                                                                  S
——-(                        ——-•-i                          -—-.--— --                      ---—-——-——                                         ———-—                           -—    -- -—                                                  ——-   —- -——--- -_____________
                                —. 1•).j__     I               •                                                                                                                             -—--—I  *                    S
                                                                                                      -                                                                         -                                                           -

                                —.                                                                                                                                                   -—-----—_—*--_-_-_-----——.
                                               I               •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S                            -                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                    - --   —-
                                                               .                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     *-
                                                                                                                                                      ---   -                                     -—--——-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .*            -                                             -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     --—.      *
                                  .b'- (.—.)c                  .
                                  •                            S                                                                                                                    -——-—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                               •                                                                             .5.                    •S..•..eS•......S....•........•.......••5S•.•S.
                              23


relative excess money. In view of this fact, the strong explanatory

power of relative excess money growth is more impressive than it would

be if an OLS equation indicated that relative excess money growth

"explained" some part of capital flows. Further, if the theory sum-

marized in equation (15) is correct, this result also supports the

hypothesis that the measure of relative excess money growth being em-

ployed here is a good proxy for actual relative excess money growth.


Response Pattern of Capital Flows to Relative
Excess Money Growth


      The oscillatory response of capital flows to relative excess money

supply growth is suggested by the extended MERE model of capital flows

developed in Section 2, Still, the result presented there reflects

a very simple (AR—i) process on growth rates of exogenous variables.

Other, more complex representations may be appropriate. Further,

intervention and sterilization policies may play a crucial role in ex-

tending the oscillatory response of capital flows to excess money

supply conditions in a manner like that displayed in Figure 1. More

specifically, capital flows are seen here as the response to conditions

where official intervention in foreign exchange markets prevents ad-

justment of an exchange rate to its equilibrium level while, simul-

taneously, the impact upon the monetary base of the intervention acti-

vity is sterilized. A reversal of policy comes when authorities

realize that the market's evaluation of the equilibrium exchange rate

differs from their own and that this coupled with intervention and

sterilization implies a chronic disequilibrium reflected in chronic

capital flows.
                              24



      Consider a concrete example of this basic idea. Suppose that

a rise in money growth creates pressure for what would, under freely

flexible exchange rates, result in an overshoot depreciation of local

currency. However, the central bank, considering such depreciation

excessive, intervenes to support the home currency. Foreign exchange

is sold from official holdings to satisfy excess demand in the market.

The contractionary impact upon the monetary base is offset through

sterilization since the authorities see such "excessive" pressure as

being only temporary. Capital outflows will result under these condi—

tions if market participants perceive that such levels of intervention

and sterilization do not represent sustainable, equilibrium values.

In effect, foreign currency will be viewed as a bargain and capital

outflows will likely accelerate as the strains on official foreign ex-

change reserves make imminent reversal likely.

      This combination of events will lead authorities eventually to

reverse their stance Of course this usually occurs only after a

protracted delay which consumes large amounts of foreign exchange

reserves. The delay follows because the authorities had thought that

outflows were to be temporary and therefore were tempted to wait for

a market turnaround. Since the policy reversal occurs often in a

crisis atmosphere with foreign exchange reserves depleted, it has to

be overdone. Money is tightened sharply and, in order to rebuild

reserves, the exchange rate is not allowed to appreciate to its long

run equilibrium value. Foreign exchange is purchased, at a price

above that at which it was sold during the expansionary phase of

domestic monetary policy, and the impact on the monetary base
                               25


 sterilized. Again market participants perceive that such levels of

 intervention and sterilization do not represent sustainable, equili-

 brium values. Capital inf lows result as domestic currency is viewed

 by foreigners as a bargain at prevailing exchange rates. The inf low

 phase ends once restoration of reserves and/or pressures to allow

more money growth result in an end to sterilization of inf lows or even

a new phase of monetary stimulation. In the latter case the cycle

may be repeated, although somewhat irregularly over an extended period

of time.

      The key to cyclical capital flows lies with maintenance of of f 1—

cial intervention and sterilization policies which market participants

do not expect to persist. This implies that policy—makers do not follow

error—learning behavior and on net are consistently losing money to

private foreign exchange market participants who are able to buy and

sell foreign exchange at favorable prices. Consistent losses by central

banks on foreign exchange market intervention would therefore be con-

sistent with our hypothesis. In a recent study by Taylor (1980) it

is reported that: "from 1973 to 1979 (within our sample period) the

combined losses of the central banks of France, Germany, Italy, Japan,

Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States have exceeded

$10 billion... ."   This finding is consistent with our scenario whereby

cyclical behavior of capital flows persists throughout our sample period

due to the presence of irrational official participants in the foreign

exchange markets.
                                26


Testing for Additional Explanatory Power of
Interest Rates


      Inclusion of an interest rate term in the equation reported in

Table 1 results in decisive rejection of the hypothesis that, in the

presence of relative excess money growth, additional explanatory

power comes from the rate of change of U.S. interest rates relative

to the rate of change of a major, foreign (DM) interest rate.11 More

precisely, the contemporary relative interest term was insignificantly

different from zero Ct =   0.35) while the rest of the parameter esti-
mates reported in Table 1 were largely unaffected. The Chi—Square

test of cross correlations between residuals from the estimated equa--

tion and the pre—whitened interest differentials for lags zero through

twelve quarters was s(0,l2) =   6.05.   This result decisively rejects

the notion of any additional explanatory power coming from a distributed

lag on the interest differential term.


4.    Concluding Remarks


      A rational, monetary—equilibrium theory of exchange rate be-

havior determines exchange rates in terms of currently anticipated

values of relative excess money supply. In a world of limited flexi-

bility of exchange rates, the same theory determines international

capital flows in terms of growth of relative excess money supplies.

      The interest rates which traditionally have played a dominant

role in portfolio—based theories of capital flows are redundant in

a full equilibrium model. This is because capital flows register the

response to changes in the relative outlook regarding the ability
                               27


 of different monies to store purchasing power over commodities and

 the relevant exogenous variables affecting this outlook are quantities

of different monies relative to available commodities. An econometric

corrollary of this view of capital flows is the opportunity it affords

to avoid simultaneity and multicollinearity problems which abound in

efforts to estimate capital flows largely in terms of changes in

interest rates with some risk or wealth proxies possibly included.

      Among the more interesting empirical results obtained in testing

the theory put forward here was the finding that U.S. international

capital flows respond with persistent, damped oscillations to growth

of relative excess money. This phenomenon is a quantity adjustment

corrollary of exchange rate "overshooting" of exchange rates in response

to changes in relative excess money supply. Central banks which have

a record of persistently accelerating money growth can expect over-

shooting in response to current actual money growth as soon as past

behavior comes to be extrapolated into the future. Intervention

efforts to cut exchange rate depreciation will result in capital out-

flows which can in turn trigger a series of events consistent with

persistent and yet somewhat irregular oscillation of such flows as

sterilization and intervention policy are changed over time.

      More generally the results presented here are meant to suggest

new directions for empirical research on international capital flows.

Success in this area has so far been modest despite the important theo—

retical breakthroughs represented by the portfolio approach of Branson

(1968) and the monetary analysis by Kouri and Porter (1974). Promise

lies with the rational—monetary—equilibrium approach to exchange rate
                              28



determination coupled with an understanding of the role of capital

flows as residual shock absorbers when exchange market intervention

prevents full price adjustment to a currently perceived change in the

future path of excess money supply conditions.
                               FOOTNOTE S


*    I   owe special thanks to Charles Nelson without whose help this

     paper would not have been written. Responsibility for any

     errors Is mine.

1.   Purchasing power parity (PPP) or commodity arbitrage is included

     among the arbitrage conditions. As noted by Dornbusch (1980)

     and others, large "real" exchange rate movements, particularly

     among U.S. dollar exchange rates during the 1970's, have caused

     significant deviations from PPP. It will be seen below that this

     deviation from PPP in levels of prices and exchange rates presents

     no difficulty for empirical testing of the extended MERE model

     of capital flows which requires only that the differenced log

     form of PPP is satisfied.


2.   "b" will be slightly below interest elasticity of money demand with

     respect to "I," with the difference falling as i rises. The "l+i"

     formulation turns out to be particularly convenient for capturing

     interest parity and introduces no substantive changes in the nature

     of money demand.


3.   The general form of the rational solution for the exchange rate

     before capturing behavior of exogenous variables in specific AR—i

     form given by (12.a) and (12.b) is (where a1.0; c=(b—)):


                   = i jO           3
                                            — )31                 (1l.a)
     where

               (-is:—)
                         0 as n +   .
     (l1.a)     determines the current, spot exchange rate in terms of

     current expectations of all future relative excess money supplies,

           —
4.   This condition holds given a constant ratio of domestic to

     foreign real interest rates.

5.   This effect is mitigated by the rise in negative "" as    "y" rises.

6.   For monthly data running from June, 1970 through December, 1979

     differenced "q" for Germany and Japan leave white noise residuals.

     Relevant Box—Pierce tests for autocorrelations are:


     [Germany] Q(12)=l7.9, Q(24)=25.7, Q(36)=34.6;

     [Japan]      Q(12)11.7, Q(24)22.0, Q(36)26.4.

7.   All   data on capital flows is drawn from the Survey of Current

     Business. Data is frequently revised and series definitions are

     redefined at times. The latter accounts for the necessity to

     begin the sample in 1969—IV if a continuous, consistent series on

     total U.S. capital flows is to be employed.


8.   Both series are seasonally unadjusted. This permits estimation

     of pre—filters on excess money which reflect seasonal patterns

     implicit on the raw data and not those imposed by some pre—

     specified seasonal filter.

            New N3 was selected because it includes the large time de-

     posits at commercial banks which are likely to be held by investors

     whose regular portfolio management includes attention to an

     international array of interest rates.


9.   The producer price index was tried as well with little impact on

     results.
10.   A number of reports on effects of U.S. capital control programs

      presented at a U.S. Treasury—sponsored conference in December,

      1972 found little impact of U.S. capital controls on overall

      capital flows and U.S. monetary independence. Such input may

      have been instrumental in reaching the decision to end capital

      control programs in January, 1974.

11.   The interest rate variable was the rate of change of the 3 month

      dollar interest rate in the euromarket less the rate of change

      of the 3 month euro—DN rate, with both series drawn from the

      Harris Bank tape.
                          REFERENCES


Bilson, John F.0. (1979). "Recent Developments in Monetary Models of
      Exchange Rate Determination," IMP Staff Papers (June, 1979):
       201—23.

Box, G.E. P. and G.M. Jenkins (1970), Time Series Forecasting and
      Control. San Francisco, Holden—Day, 1970.

Branson, W.H. (1968), Financial Capital Flows in the U.S. Balance of
      Payments. Amsterdam, North Holland, 1968.

____   (1970), "Monetary Policy and the New View of International Capital
       Movements," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, 1970.

Branson, W.H. and R.D. Hill (1971), "Capital Movements Among Major OECD
      Countries: Some Preliminary Results." The Journal of Finance
      (May, 1971): 267—86.

Caves, D.W. and E.L. Feige (1980), "Efficient Foreign Exchange Markets
      and the Monetary Approach to Exchange Rate Determination," American
      Economic Review (March, 1980): 120—34.

Dornbusch, R. (1976), "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal
      of Political Economy (December, 1976): 1161—76.

____   (1980), "Exchange Rates and the Capital Mobility Problem," pre-
       sented at the Tenth Anniversary Meeting of the Brookings Panel
       on Economic Activity, May 8—9, 1980.

Frenkel, J.A. and H.G. Johnson (1976), The Monetary Approach to the
      Balance of Payments, London, George Allen and Unwin, Ltd., 1976.

Hume, D. (1752), "Of the Balance of Trade." Essays, Moral, Political and
      Literary, Vol. 1, London, Longmans Green, 1898: 330—41 and 343—5.

Johnson, H.G. (1958), "Towards a General Theory of the Balance of Payments,"
      reprinted in J.A. Frenkel and H.G. Johnson, The Monetary Approach
      to the Balance of Payments, London, George Allen and Unwin, Ltd.,
       1976.

Kohihagen, S. (1977), "Empirical Estimates of Capital Flow Determination,"
      U.S. Department of Treasury Memorandum (Willett to Shields and
      Curtis), June 16, 1977.

Kouri, P.J.K. and M.G. Porter (1974), "International Capital Flows and
      Portfolio Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy (May/June,
      1974): 443—468.
Makin, John H. (1980.a), "Techniques and Success in Forecasting Ex-
      change Rates: Should It Be Done? Does It Matter? The Long and
      the Short of It." Presented at the New York University Con-
      ference on Internationalization of Financial Markets and National
      Economic Policy, April 10—11, 1980. Forthcoming in conference
      volume.

____   (1980.b), "Exchange Rate Behavior Under Full Monetary Equlibrium:
       An Empirical Analysis," University of Washington, Dept. of Economics
       Working Paper, December, 1980.

Makin, J.H. and C.R. Nelson (1980), "Empirical Analysis of U.S. Inter-
      national Capital Flows," University of Washington, Dept. of
      Economics Working Paper, August, 1980.

Markowitz, H. (1952), "Portfolio Selection," The Journal of Finance,
      (March, 1952): 77—91.

Mundell, R.A. (1968), International Economics, New York, Macmillan, 1968.

Taylor, Dean (1980), "Official Intervention in Foreign Exchange Markets:
      Or Bet Against the Central Bank," Working Paper, Dept. of Economics,
      SUNY—Albany, 1980, [as cited by Lindley Clarke, Wall Street
      Journal, July, 1980].
