                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            SOME THEORETICAL ASPECTS OF BASE CONTROL


                        Charles Freedman


                      Working Paper No. 650




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           March 1981




This paper was originally prepared for the first John Deutsch
Round—Table on Economic Policy held at Queen's University, October
31 — November 2, 1980. The author would like to thank Gordon
Thiessen whose probing comments aided, the development of many of
the ideas discussed in this paper. The opinions expressed in this
paper are those of the author and no responsibility for them should
be attributed to the Bank of Canada or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The research reported here is part of the
NBER'S research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics.
                                               NBER Working Paper #650
                                               March 1981



                    Some Theoretical Aspects of Base Control



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper focuses on the implications of using the monetary base

or bank reserves as an instrument to control a monetary aggregate. Fol-

lowing analysis of a series of theoretical models of increasing complexity,

it is concluded that in a system with either institutional or structural

lags base control may entail very sharp and possibly undamped oscillations

of short—term interest rates. The shorter the time period over which the

authorities choose to bring the monetary aggregate back to its target,

the more volatile will be the movements of interest rates. Furthermore,

there is an asymmetry in the U.S. institutional structure such that rigid

implementation of the base control system will under certain circumstances

lead to a decline in short—term interest rates to very low levels. The

final section of the paper is devoted to the examination of the Canadian

institutional structure emphasizing the differences between the U.S. and

Canadian systems.



                                               Charles Freedman
                                               Chief
                                               Department of Monetary
                                               and Financial Analysis
                                               Bank of Canada
                                               Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0G9

                                               (613) 563—8045
                SOME THEORETICAL ASPECTS OF BASE CONTROL


 1.   Introduction

               One can divide into two groups the decisions
                                                              surrounding
the implementation of a monetary policy based on the use of monetary

aggregates as intermediate targets —— one group is composed of strategic

decisions, the other of tactical decisions. The former include such

questions as which monetary aggregate provides the most appropriate

target (narrow versus broad aggregates) and how rapidly should the rate

of growth of that target be brought down (gradualism versus cold—shower

policies). In addition there is the even more basic question as to how

one interprets a strategy of targeting on a monetary aggregate. Of the

three principal contending approaches one can be derived from the work

of Poole (1970), one is related to the reduced—form types of equations,

and the third can be thought of as feedback mechanism in which interest

rates respond in the appropriate direction to nominal income growth that

is too rapid or too slow.1

               The tactical questions presuppose that a choice has been

made regarding the target rate of growth of a specific monetary aggregate

over some horizon period. In this category of questions one can place

the choice of fan versus band and the width of the fan or band (i.e.,

the difference between upper and lower targets), whether the authorities
                                      —2—


 are   prepared to allow the monetary aggregate to remain outside the limits

 for a period of time or will respond to movements of the monetary

aggregate within the band, and the horizon over which they attempt

 to bring the monetary aggregate back within the band should it move

outside the limits. Perhaps the most important of these taccical

questions    is whether the authorities should try   to achieve their

monetary    target by operating on interest rates, i.e., by sliding up
and down the demand curve for money, or by operating on the base or bank
reserves.2 A recent interchange on this question of the relative merits
of the use of base control versus interest rate
                                                control as the mechanism          for

influencing the movements of the monetary aggregates can be found in
White (1979) and Courchene (1979)
                In Canada the authorities have used interest     rates as
the    proximate instrent in   the   achievement of the   intermediate—run   narrow
money target. Until October 1979 this was also the mechanism

used in the United States where the authorities placed most emphasis

on the federal funds rate in their operating procedures. However, on

October 6, 1979, the Federal Reserve announced a change in these

procedures that moved the focus away from the federal funds rate        and
towards   reserve measures as a means of controlling the monetary

aggregates.3 The subject of short run procedures is also a current

issue in the United Kingdom where debate is now going on over

the optimal methods of implementing a monetary aggregate policy.4

Switzerland, which appears to have opted for a system of base as both
                                     —3-.

 a target and instrument, is used as an example by those who wish

 the authorities to drop monetary aggregates altogether and focus

 only on base.5 In Germany, central bank money (which is very similar

 to base) has been used as a target but a combination of interest rates

and other control techniques have been used to achieve this target.

Thus there is a variety of international experience on which one could

draw in assessing the relative merits of different techniques although

one would have to take into account the different institutional

environments in different countries.

                In this paper I carry Out   a theoretical   analysis of the

implications of using base or bank reserves to control a monetary

aggregate. That is, I examine the role of base as an instrument

but not as a target. Most studies of such a form of control

have focussed on the stability and predictability of the money multiplier.

This approach has serious drawbacks for those who do not believe in

the usefulness of the money multiplier notion, particularly in a world

with both institutional and economic lags. It is also the case that

the adherents of base control and the money multiplier approach 'nave

tended to emphasize the "supply of money"7 and have tended to downplay

or ignore the demand for money. But it is the interaction of demand

and   "supply" functions   that determines both the resulting level of money

and the level of interest rates. And at least in some cases it is

possible that rigid adherence to some forms    of base   control will lead

to explosive (i.e., undamped) oscillations in interest rates and perhaps

even in the monetary aggregate itself. Hence it is worth analyzing the
                                  —4—

movements of interest rates in cases where the authorities are using base

control to see whether this instability problem can arise. Furthermore,

by investigating in depth the implications of base control in a variety

of models one can gain insights into the strengths and weaknesses of

base control and the institutional settings in which it is more or

less likely to lead to desirable outcomes. Furthermore, the limitations

of base control in achieving the monetary targets over a short—run

horizon will also become clear.

              The paper is structured as follows. A series of models

of increasing complexity are introduced and the implications of base

control are examined in each case. I begin with a simple model without

institutional or economic lags and without uncertainty, with non—interest

bearing demand deposits as the only liability of the banking system, and without

currency. In this model banks adjust their portfolio by buying and

selling liquid assets since no liability side management is possible.

I then introduce the following modifications to the basic model but

for the sake of simplicity each modification is added to the simple

basic model and therefore in general I do not allow for the complexities

that might arise in making cwo or more modifications at the same time.

In the first change to the model I introduce currency holding by the

public as a part of money demand. In the next model I assume that the

banks issue time deposits but still use changes in liquid assets as the

mechanism for adjusting their portfolios. The following version of
                                 —5—

the model, probably the most important one in terms of substantive

conclusions, allows for the existence of lags in the system, both

economic as in the demand for money, and institutional, as in lagged

reserve accounting. The role of excess reserves and borrowed reserves

is explored in detail in the context of this model. Using these

theoretical models as a basis I carry out an analysis of the U.S. system

of base control and an assessment of what can be learned from its

operation thus far. This is followed by the construction of a theoretical

model of the Canadian institutional structure that emphasizes the differences

between the U.S. and the Canadian system. Finally, I offer some conclusions

that can be drawn from the analysis.

              There are a number of limitations to the analysis to

which attention should be drawn. First, it accepts as given the two—

stage procedure in which base is used to target on an intermediate

monetary aggregate and the latter in turn is related to the final

target variable. However, Friedman (1975) has argued that in general

there is no need for an intermediate monetary target and that the

monetary instrument (base or interest rate) should be directed towards

achieving the final target. Second, it is assumed that the authorities

are trying to hit actual money and hence are not adjusting their targets

to take into account the stochastic nature of money demand. This is

in line with the prescription of most advocates of base control although

it may be non—optimal in cases where there are stochastic movements
                                     —6—

in the demand for money equation. Third, I offer no empirical work

in this paper. The significance of some of the theoretical results

discussed below will depend on whether the relevant conditions are fulfilled

in practice or not, Fourth, the analysis is limited to the financial

sub—sector. I am thus implicitly assuming that over the period of time

analyzed in the paper (i.e., the short run) there is little or no

effect on the real sector or price sector of movements in financial

             9
variables.       This limitation of the analysis can be removed by

adding the other sectors to the model but, at least in the more complex

analysis with lags, the resulting model may not be analytically

tractable and hence one may have to have recourse to computer simulations.

Fifth, I use only one interest rate in the model, thereby obviating

the need to deal with the relationships between the one—day rate

that is determined principally by the banking system in their attenpt

to adjust their reserve position, the 30— to 90—day rates that are

more important in the demand for money equation, and the long—term rates

that enter into investment functions. The oscillations of the one—day

rate that are the focus of this paper would not be very important if

they did not result in similar movements in the longer—term money market

and bond market rates. However, recent theoretical work by Shiller (1979)

and Pesando (1980) on the volatility of longer—term rates and the U.S.

experience of the past year suggest that there can be a great deal of

volatility even in the longer—term rates engendered by sharp movements

in the very short—term rates. The effect of the movements of one—day
                                    —7--

rates on longer—term rates makes the argument of this paper more general

than might otherwise be thought. Sixth, the models are all deterministic

in nature. Introducing additive uncertainty to the initial model gives

results similar to those found by Pierce and Thomson (1972).


2. The Models

      2.1 Model 1: No lags, one bank liability, no currency

                There is the very simplest textbook case. Money is

defined as non—interest bearing demand deposits held with the banks and

the banks are assumed to have no liabilities other than demand deposits.

Reserve requirements are contemporaneous and all relationships are

deterministic with no stochastic component. There are also assumed to

be no lags in the demand for money equation.


(1) RR(t) = dDD(t)


(2) RT(t) = RR(t)


(3)    DD(t)   a — b i(t) + cYCt)


(4) MA(t) =    DD(t).

In equation (1), required reserves (aR) are a constant fraction of

contemporaneous demand deposits (DD). Equation (2) sets out the

equality of required reserves and total reserves (RT), i.e., there

are no excess reserves held by the banks. One can think of required

reserves as the demand for reserves and total reserves as the supply
                                  —8—

of reserves. 'Tote also that there are no borrowed reserves in this

system and therefore that the central bank is directly controlling

total reserves. In equation (3) the public's demand for demand deposits

is expressed as a function of the one interest rate in the system (i)

and of real income (Y).10 Finally, the monetary aggregate on which

the authorities are targeting (MA) is equal to demand deposits in

this system. Throughout the paper, all coefficients are positive.

               Solving (1), (2), and (4) one gets


(5) MA(t) =      (RT(t)).

This is a standard money multiplier result in which the target money

aggregate is tightly linked to the reserve variable under the control

of the central bank. An even more basic formulation would have an

equation linking the supply of reserves to the asset side of the central

bank's balance sheet and would thus relate changes in the money supply

to   open market purchases and sales.
                There is a second equation implicit in the system developed
above, that linking the interest rate to total reserves.

(6) i(t) =      (a + cY(t) -   RT(t)).

An increase in total reserves leads to an imediate decline in the
interest rate, the magnitude of the decline being a function cf both
the reserve requirement d, and the interest rate coefficient in the
demand for money, b. The smaller is either of these parameters,

the larger the effect on the interest rate of a given change in reserves.
                                   —9—

              Even in the context of this very simple model attention

should be drawn to several important points. First, although reserves

can be used to hit the target monetary aggregate, interest rates can

be used equally well as shown by replacing DID by MA in the demand for

money equation and then treating i as the instrument. Second, although

the focus of the base or reserve control approach is on the supply

of reserves, it is the case that the demand for money equation must

always be satisfied. The way the demand for money equation is satisfied

in the short run is via the interest rate movements shown in equation (6). It

must not be assumed that the authorities somehow force an increased amount

of money into a non—bank public that is unwilling to hold it or force an

unwilling public to give up money that it would like to retain. All    exchanges
are voluntary in our system and there is no "money rationing". The

public is induced to increase or decrease its holdings of money by

interest rate changes and, indeed, it is these interest rate changes

that are the fulcrum of the effect of changes in the monetary aggregate

on output, employment, the exchange rate and prices inmost macro—economic

models.

              A third element in this analysis is the implicit structure

of the banking system assumed in this model. This structure may play

an important role in determining whether or not a change in reserves

leads cowards or away from the new equilibrium, i.e., whether or not the

model is stable. In many   base   or reserve control models there is

implicitly or explicitly a banking system balance sheet in which the
                                 — 10 —



banks hold liquid assets and reserves as their assets and demand deposits

as their liabilities. Furthermore in response to an increase (decrease)

in reserves created by the central bank through open market operations

the banks buy (sell) liquid assets thereby pushing down (up) interest

rates and increasing (reducing) demand deposits. This dynamic story

of the reactions of the chartered banks to a reserve change is the usual

one discussed in the textbooks as part of the explanation of the money

multiplier. What is sometimes omitted in the textbooks is the fact

that it is the interest rate changes that induce the non—bank public

to exchange liquid assets for deposits and vice versa. Furthermore,

models in which the banks rely on liability management to adjust their

balance sheets can give different results. This subject will be

addressed in a future paper.

              One final element worth noting in this model is the absence

of a money supply equation. In this model and all the succeeding models,

the crucial equation is that in which the supply of reserves created by

the central bank is equated to the demand for reserves which is a function

of the magnitude of reservable deposits, the reserve requirement, and

in some cases of the desired holding of excess reserves. These supply

and demand functions are the basic building blocks of the analysis and

they can be related to the behaviour of the central bank and the

banking system, respectively. An alternative approach to analyzing

the model is to solve out for the monetary aggregate as a function of

reserves as in equation (5).   Instead of treating this result as one
                                     — 11 —


of    the reduced—form equations of the model (along with equation (6))

it is often treated as a money supply equation. Since the money supply

combines the behaviour of the banks and the central bank (and indeed

in some models the behaviour of the non—bank public and the government

as well) it is not a supply equation in the usual sense of the word.

This causes no problems as long as one realizes that the money supply

defined in this way is an artificial construct and does not simply

represent the behaviour of any single group in the model or the economy.

Nonetheless it seems to me to be much simpler to discuss the financial

side of the economy in terms of the basic transactors whose behaviour

is being modelled and I shall continue to do so throughout the analysis)2


      2.2 Model 2: No lags, one bank liability plus currency

                   Thus far it has been assumed that the target monetary

aggregate consisted only of demand deposits and that the liabilities of

the central bank consisted only of the reserves of the chartered banks.

In fact, currency is part of the narrow monetary aggregate and it is
                                         13
also a liability of the central bank.


(7)     RR(t) =    dDD(t)


(8)     B(t) =    RR(t)   + C(t)

(9)     DD(t) + C(t) = a — b i(t) + cY(t)


(10) MA(t) = DD(t) + C(t).
                                     — 12 —


 In   equation (8) the supply of base (B) is equated to the demand for

 base, which is the sum of required reserves and currency (C). The

 target monetary aggregate is the sum of demand deposits and currency

and the demand curve for these money balances is assumed to be the usual

 function of income and the interest rate.

                Carrying out the usual algebraic manipulations one gets

the following two equations


(11) MA(t) =      B(t)   —   —1)   C(t)


(12) i(t)        (a + cY(t) -      B(t) + ( -1)   C(t)).


To achieve the monetary aggregate target the central bank must be

able to respond to shifts between currency and demand deposits. For

example, if d were equal to 0.1, a one dollar random shift from demand

deposits to currency, with base unchanged, would lead to a $9 decline

in total money, and a corresponding increase in the interest rate. The

appropriate response of the authorities to a one dollar shift from

demand deposits to currency would be to increase base by $0.90. In

such a case, currency rises by $1, reserves fall by $0.10, demand

deposits fall by $1, and therefore the target monetary aggregate is

unchanged)4 In terms of the multiplier analysis, large random shifts between

currency and demand deposits imply a very volatile multiplier. In

contrast, if the interest rate is used as the instrument via the demand

for money equation, then shifts between currency and demand deposits

cause no operational difficulties.
                                        — 13


                    A common way of treating currency in this type of model

is to assume a stable relationship between currency and demand deposits

held by the non—bank public.


(13) C(t)/DD(t) =        e.

Then the money supply equation becomes


(14)            =      B(t).

Thus   the   simplicity of the base control relationship is re—established

if the ratio of currency to demand deposits is constant, i.e., if there

are no random shifts between the two components of money.


   2.3 Model 3: No lags, two bank liabilities, no currency

                    In this model I assume that banks issue interest—bearing

time deposits but that they do not use these time deposits to conduct

liability management. One simple way of introducing these "passive"

time deposits into the analysis is to postulate that the banks move the

time deposit rate in line with movements of market rates of interest

and accept the resulting volume of time deposits.


(15) RR(t)     = dDD(t)   + tTD(t)                      0   t   d


(16) RT(t) = RR(t)


(17)   DD(t) = a — b i(t) +     cY(t)
                                  — 14   —




(18a) MA(t) = DD(t)


(18b)   MA(t) = DD(t)   + TD(t)


(19) TD(t) =    f + g i(t) + hY(t).
Required reserves   are now a function of both demand deposits and time

deposits (TD) with the reserve ratio on time deposits smaller than or

equal to that on demand deposits. The target monetary aggregate

can be specified either in terms of narrow money i.e., demand deposits

in this model where currency does not exist (equation (18a)), or broad

money i.e., demand deposits plus time deposits (equation (18b)). The

level of time deposits demanded is directly related to the market rate

of interest since a rise in the latter brings about a corresponding

rise in the time deposit rate and, hence, a shift from demand deposits

to both market instruments and time deposits. Note that this argument

implies that b > g since some of the reduction of demand deposits in

response to a rise in interest rates corresponds to a movement into

market instruments.15 The demand for time deposits is also directly
                                  •          16
related to the level of nominal income.

               The reduced—form equations in this model are more

complicated than those in the earlier models because of the movements

between time deposits and demand deposits as interest rates increase.

The equation corresponding to the use of narrow monetary aggregate

as target is labelled (a) and that corresponding to the broad aggregate

is labelled (b).
                                                15 —


 (20)   i(t)                  (a +   f + (c +          Y (t) —   RT(t))
                      bd—tg

 (21a) MA(t)             RT(t) —     TD(t)

                  =      (1 + bd—tg RT(t)                 (bf + ag) —           (cg + bh) Y(t)
                                                 bd—tg                  bd—tg

(21b) MA(t) =            RT(t) +       TD(t)

                  =      (1 -         RT(t) +             (ag±bf) +
                                                 bdtg                   bdtg
                                                                                (bh + cg) Y(t)


 Since b >   g,       as discussed above, and d          t by our assumptions regarding

the institutional framework, bd >              tg.     Hence the denominators of all

the fractions are positive.

                      If the authorities' preferred aggregate is the narrow

monetary aggregate, an increase in income with reserves constant will

result in a decline in the monetary aggregate. This result occurs

because the increase in income leads to an increase in the demand for

time deposits both directly and through the induced increase in interest

rates. The increase in time deposits means that less demand deposits

can be supported by the given reserves, to use the money multiplier

terminology. On the other hand, if the broader aggregate is the

focus of policy an increase in income with reserves constant leads to

an increase in the monetary aggregate since the rise in time deposits

more than offsets the decline in demand deposits when the latter bear

a higher reserve requirement than the former.

                      It is clear that if the authorities wish to simplify

their task of linking reserves with the preferred monetary aggregate,
                                      — 16 —


they   should set t equal to zero if they pursue a narrow aggregate

policy and t equal to d if they pursue a broad aggregate policy. In

both cases this would have the effect of simplifying the reduced—form

equation for money equation to its most basic form, i.e., MA(t) =       RT(t).
Thus the intuitively obvious conclusion is reached, at least for this

simple model —— impose a uniform reserve requirement on all the components

of the monetary aggregate but do not impose a reserve requirement on

deposits that are not included in the aggregate.17 With a split reserve

requirement or with reserves on deposits not included in the aggregate

the authorities must act to offset shifts among components by adjusting
                            18
the   volume of reserves.
                                                        .
                                 In the language of multiplier analysis, the

authorities must adjust reserves to offset any change in the multiplier

brought about by shifts between time deposits and demand deposits.

               As pointed out above, with a split reserve requirement

an increase in income leads to a fall in the narrow aggregate and an

increase in the broader aggregate, if reserves are held constant. To

keep the monetary aggregate constant in the face of an increase in

income reserves would have to be increased in the case in which the

authorities are targeting on the narrow aggregate and reduced in the

case in which the authorities are targeting on the broader aggregate.

Using (19) one can see that this implies that with a rise in income

interest rates would increase more in the case of a broad aggregate target

than in the case of a narrow aggregate target.19 This point has been

an important element of the discussion about the choice of a narrow

aggregate by the Bank of Canada. See White (1979).
                                  - 17

   2.4 Model 4: Lags, one bank liability, no currency

              The discussion thus far has been limited to fairly simple

textbook types of models and has analyzed the implications of base

or reserve control in these settings. I now turn to more realistic

models of the economic environment in which lags in behaviour play a

crucial role. I begin with a version of the demand for money equation

in which the response of money demand to interest rate changes takes

place via a distributed lag. I then introduce the existence of borrowed

reserves and excess reserves into the model. This modification enables

us to deal with the possibility of control of non—borrowed reserves

rather than total reserves by the central bank. The institutional lag

in reserve requirements is then brought into the discussion. In the

light of these models, I will discuss the new U.S. approach to reserve

control in the next section of the paper.


      Model 4a: Economic lags, no borrowed or excess reserves

              In this model the demand for money equation includes

lagged interest rates as an explanatory variable in addition to current

interest rates. This is in line with estimated equations of money

demand in virtually all of which interest rates take some time to affect

the quantity of money demanded.


(22) RR(t)    dDD(t)

(23) RT(t) = RR(t)
                                          — 18 —


 (24)   DD(t) = a —            —                     cY(t)
                      b0i(t)       b1
                                        i(t—l) ÷


 (25) MA(t) = DD(t).


 There would be no difficulty in generalizing the money demand equation

 to incorporate a lagged income term or an error term.20 Since there

are no borrowed or excess reserves in this version of the model, the

reserves equation retains its simple form of an equality between the

supply of total reserves and the demand for required reserves. The

reduced—form equations for the monetary aggregate and the interest rate

are as follows:


(26) MA(t) =       RT(t)

(27) i(t) =        (a + cY(t)      -    RT(t))   -   b1
                                                          i(t-1).
               0                                      0


The monetary aggregate retains its usual simple form in this model. The

interest rate equation, however, now contains a lagged dependent variable

with a coefficient that is the ratio of the effect on the demand for

money of the lagged interest rate to the effect of the current interest

rate. Regardless of the relative magnitudes of these coefficients this

formulation implies a sawtooth movement of interest rates in response

to a change in income with reserves constant or to a change in reserves

with income constant. Furthermore, if, as is not unlikely in practice,

b1 is greater than b0, i.e., the lagged effects of inceresz rate changes
                                 — 19 —


dominate the current effects,2' then the coefficient on the lagged

 interest rate in equation (27) will be greater than one in absolute

value and the movement of interest rates will follow a path of explosive

oscillations. Thus, a change in income or reserves (or in the error

term for the demand for money if it were added to equation (24)) would lead

to ever increasing upward and downward movements of the interest rates.22

              The economics behind this result is fairly straightforward.

Suppose nominal income began to increase and the authorities held total reserves

constant. The increase in the demand for money and hence in the demand

for reserves in the face of an unchanged quantity of reserves supplied

by the central bank, would lead to a rise in interest rates. This increase

would have to be sufficient to offset the desired increase in money, i.e.,

it would be cY/b0, where the numerator represents the increase in the

quantity of money demanded as a result of the income increase and the

denominator represents the effect of a unit increase in interest rates

on money demanded in the current period. If this new interest rate

prevailed in the subsequent period, it would entail a further downward

movement in the demand for money of the order (b1 ) because of the
                                                  0
lagged effect of interest rates on money demanded. But such a downward

movement in money demand and hence in reserves demanded would be

inconsistent with the unchanged supply of reserves. Hence interest rates

have to fall in the second period. The lower interest rates of the second

period would lead to an increase in the quantity of money demanded in

the third period if left unchanged. Hence interest rates would have
                                — 20 —


to rise in the third period. Whether these oscillations are damped

eventually leading to a stable equilibrium, or undamped, leading to

explosive oscillations, depends on the ratio b1/b0, the relative size

of lagged effects and current effects of interest rates on the demand

for money, as shown above.

              One further point should be noted in the context of

this model. If b0 equalled zero, i.e., over the current period the

demand for money did not respond to movements of interest rates, the

interest rate is not determinate. A change in the quantity of money

demanded or quantity of reserves supplied cannot be equilibrated in

the current period by an offsetting interest rate change. For example,

suppose income were to increase and the demand for money increased as

a result. The demand for reserves would rise as transactors tried to

hold more money balances. The banks would try to sell liquid assets

to re—establish their equilibrium and this would drive up interest rates.

But the movement in interest rates cannot affect the quantity of money

demanded until the next period. Hence there is no interest rate at

which the system would be in equilibrium in the current period.



       Model 4b: Economic lags, borrowed reserves and excess reserves

              In the U.S. institutional structure borrowed reserves

play an important role in the transmission of the policy impulse from

the supply of reserves to interest rates and monetary aggregates. With

the introduction of borrowed reserves one must divide total reserves

into non—borrowed reserves (RNB) which are under the control of the central
                                           — 21 —


bank, and borrowed reserves (RB) which are created at the initiative
of the banks.23 Total reserves can also be defined as the sum of

required reserves and excess reserves (RE).


(28) RT(t) = RNB(t)         + RB(t)

(29) RT(t) =       RR(t) •+ RE(t).

The    rest   of the model remains as before with contemporaneous reserve

requirements and lagged responses of the demand for money to interest

rate changes; i.e., equations (22), (24), and (25) continue to hold.

To close the model, it is necessary to add a pair of equations describing

the demand for excess reserves and borrowed reserves by the banking

system.


(30)     RB(t) =   q(i(t)   —   rdis(t))               i(t) >     rdis(t)

                 = 0                                   i(t) < rdis(t)

(31) RE(t) = p                                         0   <   i(t)
As long as the market rate24 exceeds the discount rate (rdis) charged

by the central bank on borrowings by the banks, there is a relationship

between borrowed reserves and the difference between the two rates.25

The greater is this differential, the larger is the amount of borrowing

by the banks. If the market interest rate falls below the discount

rate I assume that all borrowing is repaid. Regardless of the level of

interest rates the banks are assumed to hold a relatively small and fixed
                                           — 22 —


 amount of excess reserves. I also assume that the banks would not be

willing to hold more excess reserves unless the market interest rate fell

very close to zero.26 At such very low interest rates, however, the

 demand for excess reserves becomes almost infinitely elastic, as was

 the case in the l930s.27

                   Solving this model for the case in which the market rate

is above the discount rate and the banks are borrowing reserves from

the central bank gives the following pair of equations.


(32) i(t) =
               q+db
                        rdis(t) + q+0 ( + ad + cdY(t) -           R(t))—              i(t-l)
        MA(t) =          (b0R.NB(t) + b1     RNBCt—l) — qb0 rdis(t) —
(33)
                  q+b                                                 qb1 rdis(t—l)

                  + cqY(t) + qa   —
                                      (h0+   b1) p) -         A(t-l).
In comparison with equation (27) in which there was no              discount window

one    can see that the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable is
now smaller than before and therefore            the system   is less   likely   to
be explosive. The coefficient on the lagged dependent variable can be

written as b1/(b3 +      ) as   compared to b1/b0 in the earlier case. The

damping in the oscillation arises from the fact that any increase in

money demanded can now be offset not only by rising interest rates but

also by increased borrowing at the discount window which permits the

monetary aggregate to increase in the short run. Nevertheless the sawtooth

movement in interest rates continues to hold and the monetary aggregate

now also follows the sane sawtooth movement.
                                       — 23 —


                  It   is worth emphasizing that holding non—borrowed reserves

constant    in this case does not imply that the monetary aggregate will

return to its target value after a shock to the system such as an

increase in income. This can be seen by solving for the equilibritm!

equations corresponding to equations (32) and


(34)    =                (q rdis + p + ad + cdY —      RB)
            q+d(0+lD1)

(35)      =                ((b0+b1) RNB —
                                            q(b0+b1)
                                                       rdis +   cqY + qa —
                                                                             (b0+b1)p)
              q+d(b0+b1)

An   increase   in income leads to an increase in interest rates and an

increase in the monetary aggregate even after the system settles down.

The reason is that the higher interest rate (relative to the discount

rate) results in an increase in borrowing from the central bank that

allows the monetary aggregate to expand. In this version of the model,

therefore, an increase in income leads to an increase in the interest

rate which is not sufficient to bring money back to its target.29 If

the authorities wish to keep money on target in the relatively short

run they will have to push up the interest rate from the level that is

consistent with a constant amount of non—borrowed reserves either by

reducing the level of non—borrowed reserves or by raising the discount

rate. Thus an element of discretion is re—introduced to the system in

that the central bank has to decide on the horizon over which the monetary

target should return to its target and the combination of discount rate

increase and decrease in non—borrowed reserves needed to achieve

this result.3°
                                          — 24 —


                   Rather than pursuing this general model further I wish
 to examine more closely the economics of the slightly simpler model

 in which b0 equals zero, i.e., interest rates affect money only with

a lag. In the case of the model with no discount window this assumption

led to the result that the interest rate was indeterminate. In the

case of a model with a discount rate the solution to the system is as follows:


(36) i(t) =      rdis(t)   + ad+p +      YCt) -                i(t-l)

                                                                         db
(37)      MA(t) = — RNB(t—l)   —
                                        rdis(t—l) + (a —     + cY(t) —        MA(t—l).
                                   b1

                   Suppose income were     to increase and hence cause an

increase      in money demanded. The increase in the quantity of        money
demanded results in an increase in required reserves and hence an

increased demand for reserves by the banks. The banks          would drive up
the      interest rate either by trying to     sell liquid assets or by trying
to increase their borrowing in the federal funds market. Interest

rates would continue to increase until the banks were prepared to increase

their borrowing from the central bank by the amount of the increase in

required reserves. In the next period this increase in interest rates

would lead to a reduction in the demand for money and hence a fall in

required reserves and thus a fall in interest rates. Unlike the earlier

models, the equilibration of the amount of reserves supplied by the

central     bank and that demanded by the banks is brought about in the first
instance not by an adjustment of money demanded (and hence required reserves)
as   a   result of interest rate movements but by an increase in borrowing
                                         — 25 —


at   the discount window. Indeed no adjustment of the current level of

demand deposits demanded is possible in this model given that b0 is equal

to zero, i.e., that there is no response of money demanded to interest

rates in the current period. The increase in the interest rate is initially

therefore determined by the magnitude of q since that represents the

response of borrowed reserves to changes in interest rates.31

                It is   important   to   realize   that in these models the

apparent   direct linkage between non—borrowed reserves and the monetary
aggregate no longer exists. For example, as can be seen from equation (37.);
a    change in non—borrowed reserves in the current period has no effect
on the aggregate until the following period and the monetary aggregate
will then oscillate until a new short—run equilibrium is reached. And
in this particular case it is very clear that the linkage from non—
borrowed reserves to     the   monetary aggregate operates via the rise in interest
rates   and borrowed reserves in the current period to the demand for

raoney in the following period. Whether it is useful to call such a

relationship a money supply curve is a moot point. What is clear is

that the relationship is a good deal more complex than in the earlier

models. It is also clear that it is not possible to hit the monetary

target period—by—period in this model         even if   one were willing to

accept the implied movements of interest rates because of the lag between

non—borrowed reserves and the monetary aggregate. It follows, therefore,
                                  — 26 —


 that   total reserves are also not controllable in this model.32 As

 discussed above, in the more general model with b0 not equal to zero,

 the authorities might be able to achieve their target each period but

 only by manipulating non—borrowed reserves and the discount rate

 appropriately and accepting possibly explosive oscillations in interest

 rates.


                In circumstances where the excess reserves provided by

 the central bank increase to amounts above the frictional level (p

in equation (31)) desired by the banks it may easily be the case that

the interest rates will settle at just above zero. This result

will occur, for example, when there is a lag in the demand for money.

Assume a decline in income which leads to a decline in money demanded.

With the fall in required reserves, and non—borrowed reserves

constant, banks will try to lend federal funds or buy liquid assets,

thereby driving down interest rates. With lower interest rates and

a constant discount rate the banks will repay their borrowings to

the central bank. If the fall in required reserves is sufficient to

force them into a position where they are holding excess reserves

larger than their desired holdings then the market interest rates will

continue to fall until they are willing to hold the excess reserves.

As indicated above, the banks will probably not be willing to hold

these excess reserves at interest rates much above zero.33 I am thus

arguing that there is a serious asymmetry in the base control mechanism

that arises from the difference between the demand for borrowed reserves
                                   — 27 —


and the demand for excess reserves with the former very sensitive

to market rates of interest and the latter very insensitive to market interest

rates. This asymmetry becomes significant when current rates of interest

have little effect on the current quantity of money demanded.

                 Formally, the model of positive excess reserves can be

treated by setting q equal to zero in equations (32) and (33) .   The

equations collapse (except for terms in p) to equations (26) and (27),

i.e., the discount window ceases to matter. If, in addition, b0 is

very small or indeed zero then interest rates will fall towards zero

very rapidly and the authorities will still not necessarily be able

to achieve the aggregate target over any short horizon.


       Model 4c: Institutional lag, borrowed reserves and excess reserves

                 In this version of the model I introduce lagged reserve

accounting of the sort currently being used in the United States and

Canada. I continue with the U.S. institutional environment of borrowing

at the discount window but drop the economic lags in the demand for

money. Since the results correspond fairly closely to those in the

case of an economic lag we can treat them in fairly cursory fashion.


(38)   RR(t) = dDD(t—l)


(39)   DD(t) = a — b i(t)   + cY(t)

(40)   MA(t) =   DD(t).
                                     — 28 —


Required reserves are now a function of demand deposits one period

earlier where the period is defined in terms of the length of the

accounting lag. In the case of the United States, for example, this

period is two weeks. The equations describing reserve behaviour, i.e.,

equations (28), (29), (30), and (31) ,     are   the same as in the previous

model.

               Solving in the usual fashion for the situation in which

equation (30) holds one gets:


(41) i(t) =   rdis(t)   +   (p   + ad ÷ cdY(t—1) - RNB(t)) -      i(t—l)

(42) MA(t) = a    -     - b rdis(t) + RNB(t) + cY(t) -         MA(t-1).

These results are formally similar to those in the case of a one          period

economic lag in   the demand for money and contemporaneous reserve require-
ments (equations (36) and (37) above) although with slightly different

lag structure. The economic interpretation is somewhat different, however.

Suppose there is an increase in income which leads to an increase in

money demanded. There is no effect on required reserves in the current

period and hence no change in the interest rate in the current period.

In the next period, however, required reserves increase. If the central

bank holds non—borrowed reserves constant, the banks will find themselves

short of reserves. The attempt by the banks to increase their reserves

will lead to an increase in the interest rate as banks attempt to

purchase federal funds, and to sell liquid assets to the public. As
                                  29


the short—term interest rate rises relative to the central bank discount

rate banks will turn to the central bank and borrow reserves and the

shortage of reserves will therefore disappear. As a result of the

increase in interest rates there will be a decline in demand deposits

held at the banks. This in turn will lead to a decline in required

reserves in the following period which will lead to a fall in interest

rates and a rise in demand deposits held at the banks. The by—now

familiar sawtooth will be the outcome of this system.34

              Turning to the situation in which there are positive

excess reserves in the system, there is no longer any reduced—form

relationship between interest rates or the monetary aggregate and non—

borrowed reserves. If the central bank increases non—borrowed reserves

in such a situation the extra reserves entail an increase in the excess

reserves of the banking system since required reserves are predetermined

and are not affected by movements in current demand deposits. With the

banks unwilling to add excess reserves to their portfolio at interest

rates much above zero, interest rates will clearly fall to very low levels

in such circumstances.35 This scenario becomes of practical significance

in a situation where nominal income falls or grows more slowly than

the targeted rate of growth of money. The fall in income leads to a

fall in current demand deposits which, in turn, leads to a decline in

the following period's required reserves. With non—borrowed reserves

constant, this implies an increase in excess reserves with the consequent

fall in interest rates to very low levels as described.36
                                    30 —


3.    The New Federal Reserve Procedures

                As part of its October 6, 1979 program the Federal

Reserve announced that it was "placing greater emphasis on day—to—day

operations on the supply of bank reserves and less emphasis on confining

short—term fluctuations in the federal funds rate".37 Although the details

of the new operating procedures were not spelled out by the Federal

Reserve in its October 6, 1979 press release, they have since been set

out in a staff paper entitled "The New Federal Reserve Technical Procedures

for Controlling Money".38 In this section of the paper I set out my

interpretation of these procedures in the light of the analysis of the

earlier sections. Although I rely heavily on the staff paper for the

Federal Reserve's own views on how the system is being implemented, the

evaluation I am offering is based in large part on the experience of

the first year of the operation of the reserves control system.

               The principal steps in the new methods of controlling

the monetary aggregates can be characterized as follows:


     (1) Set growth rates for those aggregates for which the Federal
          Reserve establishes targets, i.e., M1A, M1B and M2. In compliance
          with the Humphrey—Hawkins Act, target growth rates are set over
          a one—year horizon.

     (2) Given these targeted growth paths and expectations as to desired
          excess reserves, the growth of certificates of deposit and that
          of other reservable liabilities not in the targets, the growth
          of currency, and the split of deposits between member banks and
          non—member banks, the Federal Reserve calculates the implied path
          for the family of reserve measures such as total reserves,
          monetary base, non—borrowed reserves. The Federal Reserve is
          prepared to supply whatever reserves the banks are required to
          hold against certificates of deposit and other deposits that are
          not components of the narrower monetary aggregates, i.e., M1A,
          M18 and M2.
                                 — 31 —


              Two comments are in order here. First, the Federal Reserve

is engaged in a reserves control process rather than a base control

process for the reason outlined in Section 2.2. A random shift from

demand deposits to currency would lead to much larger movements of the

monetary aggregates under a system of base control than under a system

of reserves control. Second, in Section 2.3, I argued that in an optimal

system reserves would be imposed only against deposits included in the

monetary aggregates and that reserve requirements against these deposits

would be uniform. Given that there are reserves in the U.S. system

against deposits that are not in the monetary aggregates and that reserve

requirements against the deposits within the aggregate are far from

uniform the Federal Reserve must allow for growth in the former types of

deposits and for shifts within the latter types of deposits. It is

easiest to think of the Federal Reserve adjusting non—borrowed reserves

to deal with these "nuisancet' elements.39


  (3) The planned path of non—borrowed reserves is calculated from
       the path of total reserves by initially assuming a level of
       borrowing near that prevailing in a recent period.

  (4) Although total reserves are the principal overall objective
       of reserve setting, only non—borrowed reserves are directly
       under the control of the Federal Reserve chrough open—market operations.

  (5) Suppose, for example, M1A began to grow faster than targeted. Given the
       path for non—borrowed reserves, the increase in required
       reserves would lead the banks to attempt to raise funds in
       the federal funds market and hence bid up the federal funds
       rate arid to borrow more at the discount window. The higher
       interest rates would eventually feed back on M1A and slow down
                                   — 32 —


         itsgrowth rate. In the interim period while the higher
        interest rates are having their effect on M1A, required reserves
        and hence total reserves will remain above their initial
        targeted path. Thus during that period the Federal Reserve can
        control only the supply of non—borrowed reserves and not that
        of total reserves.

    (6) If the Federal Reserve wished to speed up the effect of its policy
         and bring total reserves down more quickly, it could lower the
         non—borrowed reserve path and/or raise the discount rate. Both
         these actions would have the effect of raising interest rates
         more than otherwise and hence would reduce the growth of M1A
         (and thus of required reserves and total reserves) more quickly
         than using the strategy of holding non—borrowed reserves to
         their initial path and leaving the discount rate unchanged.

                The analysis of model 4b throws some light on this aspect

of the analysis. As shown there, holding non—borrowed reserves to their

target path is likely not to have a sufficiently large effect on interest

rates to bring the monetary aggregate back to its target in a relatively

short period of time. Hence the Federal Reserve can speed the impact

of its actions on the monetary aggregate (and therefore on total reserves)

by increasing the discount rate or reducing the level of non—borrowed

reserves. The Federal Reserve must thus make a choice between a fairly

automatic policy in which it adheres to a target path for non—borrowed

reserves while allowing the monetary aggregates and total reserves to

deviate from their target paths for lengthy periods of time (a long

horizon policy) or a policy with substantial discretion over non—

borrowed reserves and discount rates which aims at bringing the monetary

aggregates   and total reserves back to their target path in a short

period of time (a short horizon policy) .   One element entering the

decision between long horizon and short horizon policy is the substantially
                                  — 33   —




greater   credibility the Federal Reserve would achieve by controlling

the aggregates and total reserves over a shorter time period. Offsetting

this, however, is the increase in interest rate volatility from choosing

a shorter horizon. Indeed, as indicated in the various models in

Section 2.4, if the Federal Reserve tries to hit its aggregate targets

over too short an horizon period, it might create an explosive oscillation

of interest rates. Furthermore, with the lag structures at work in the

economy it is possible that both interest rates and the monetary aggregates

will display ever—increasing cycles.40

                The principal conclusion of this part of the analysis is

that the choice of horizon is crucial. A relatively short horizon for

bringing monetary aggregates and total reserves back to their target path

would imply very sharp movements in interest rates and non—borrowed

reserves and possibly even explosive oscillations in these variables. With

a longer horizon, interest rates and non—borrowed reserves would be less

volatile but total reserves and monetary aggregates would remain above

target for a longer period of time following the increase in income.

               Another aspect of the control system that has become

apparent over the year is the asymmetry on the upside and on the downside.
As noted above (in Section 2.4) with non—borrowed reserves remaining on
their   target path, an increase in income would lead to a rise in interest

rates and, in the short run, the size of this increase would be dependent

on the response of borrowed reserves to the differential between the

interest rate and the discount rate. Conversely if income fell
                                      34 -

 substantially    and non—borrowed reserves remained on their growth path,

 then interest rates would fall, borrowed reserves would be repaid and

 the system would likely move into a position in which it was holding

excess reserves. With banks generally unwilling to hold more than

 frictional amounts of excess reserves even when interest rates are

relatively low, the interest rates have to fall to very low levels to

induce the banks to hold the excess reserves. Furthermore the fall in

interest rates would probably be very rapid. The asymmetry between the

two cases   arises because the demand for borrowed reserves depends on the
differential between the interest rate    and the discount rate whereas

the demand for excess reserves above a minimum frictional level is zero

for all interest rates above a very low level. This asymmetry implies

that the Federal Reserve would have to live with total reserves (and

non—borrowed reserves) below target paths for a longer period of time

than it would like unless it is prepared to see interest rates fall

to very low levels. Since such an outcome is unlikely to be palatable,

the Federal Reserve will not be able to follow an automatic non—borrowed

reserves path when the monetary aggregate falls substantially below its

target.


4. The Canadian Institutional Structure

                 Detailed descriptions of the way in which cash setting

by the Bank of Canada affects the excess reserves of the chartered banks

and thus influences short—term interest rates in Canada can be found in
                                  -. 35 —


Dingle,   Sparks and Walker (1972) and White and Poloz (1980). The model

underlying these descriptions can be characterized as a disequilibrium

model and hence does not fall into the same category as the equilibrium

models discussed in this paper. Nonetheless it is possible to capture

important elements of the Canadian structure by adding one equation to

the set of equations used in earlier models.

               The flavour of the type of analysis of the Canadian system

coming out of the Bank of Canada is suggested by the following quotation

from Clinton and Lynch (1979):

     "Suppose for example the Bank were to embark upon a more expansionary
      policy. Initially, the chartered banks would be confronted with
      an excess supply of cash reserves. In their efforts to eliminate
      the excess they would buy assets, causing interest rates to decline
      and the money supply to increase, just as in the familiar textbook
      credit multiplier. However, because of the lagged reserve requirement,
      expansion of the banking system- does not bring about a reduction
      in excess reserves. Thus, there is no definite limit on the
      expansion of the system that will follow from a given increase in
      excess reserves. As long as an excess supply remains in the system
      a disequilibrium persists and the banks continue to expand.
      Analytically the problem is that if the demand for excess reserves
      is not a function of the level of this month's deposits or interest
      rates then the demand for total reserves is a predetermined function
      of lagged deposits, and the supply of reserves is given by monetary
      policy. Equilibrium thus requires the mutual coincidence of two
      predetermined variables and the system is overdetermined. In
      practice the process is typically brought to a halt not by a self—
      equilibrating market mechanism but by the central bank itself
      withdrawing the excess, having achieved its desired effect on
      short—term interest rates or some other proximate target. The
      point to note is that at the end of the month the level of bank
      reserves will not necessarily indicate an expansionary policy."

               It is of interest to try to describe this type of behaviour

in the context of the types of financial models developed earlier in this

paper.
                                         — 36 —


(43)   (t) =      dDD(t—1)


(44)   RT(t) = RNB(t)


(45)   RT(t) =    RR(t) + RE(t)


(46)   DD(t) = a —         i(t) —        i(t—l) —        i(t—2) +   cY(t)
                      b0            b1              b2

(47)   MA(t) =    DD(t)


(48)   RE(t) = p                                                    0 <   i(t)
Required reserves are a function of lagged demand deposits under the

system of lagged reserve requirements in use in Canada. I ignore for

the sake of simplicity the fact that there are reserves against time
            41
deposits.        Total reserves are equal to non—borrowed reserves and also

to the sum of excess reserves and required reserves. Although there

is occasional borrowing by the chartered banks from the Bank of Canada,

this usually occurs at the end of an averaging period and is often the

result of an unexpected clearing swing against a bank on the last day

of the averaging period. Without going into detail on this point, I

believe that it is fair to characterize the Canadian system as an
                                                     42
excess reserves system despite occasional borrowings.                     Demand deposits

are assumed to respond to interest rate movements with a distributed

lag. The monetary aggregate is defined in terms              of   demand deposits. Of

course, in Canada, the narrow aggregate which the authorities use as

an intermediate target is Ml, the sum of currency and demand deposits,
                                           — 37 —


but once again for the sake of simplicity, I ignore currency in the
discussion that follows. Finally, the excess reserves desired on

average by the banking system are equal to a constant, p.43 In practice,

in Canada, the average amount of excess reserves is normally on the

order of less than 0.05 of 1 per cent of statutory deposits or about

$60 million.

                As can easily be seen by attempting to solve the

model, there is no determinate equilibrium for interest rates or the

monetary aggregate if one were to treat RNB as the driving variable of

the model. To characterize what actually happens in the Canadian system,

albeit crudely, one has to add a disequilibrium equation which links

the change in interest rates to the difference between the actual amount

of excess reserves in the system and the desired holdings of the

chartered banks. Thus equation (48') is replaced by the following equation.


(49) i Ct) —   i(t—l)   =   -s(RE(t)   —   p)

If excess reserves exceed (fall short of) those desired by the banks

(i.e. p) interest rates fall (rise). The coefficient s reflects the

magnitude of the change in interest rates in each period to the excess

or shortfall in excess reserves. Note that if excess reserves are held

above the desired level indefinitely interest rates would eventually

fall to levels close to zero as in the earlier equilibrium models. It

is the fact that it takes time for such a fall to occur that is the crux

of the Canadian system since the surplus of excess reserves will be
                                    38 —


removed by the Bank of Canada when interest rates reach the desired

levels, i.e., well before they reach zero.

                One can now sketch out the mechanism used by the

Canadian authorities to achieve monetary aggregate targets.44 Suppose

the aggregate is initially on target45 but that nominal income subsequently

begins to grow at a faster rate than that consistent with the targets.

The level of money demanded will rise above the target as a result of

the income increase. The authorities then decide to raise interest rates
                                                            46
to the level required to bring money back to target.             Because of the lags

in the money demand equation and the danger of instrument instability

or excessive volatility of interest rates, the increase in interest

rate is designed to bring money back to target not immediately but in

a reasonable period of time where the latter is determined from the

properties of the money demand equation. To achieve this increase

in interest rates, the authorities temporarily reduce the amount of

reserves   to the system, reducing the amount of   excess reserves below

the desired level, and thus forcing the banks to     sell   liquid   assets
and bid aggressively for large blocks of time deposits. Both these
actions result in an increase in short—term interest rates. When

the desired level of interest rates is reached, the reserves previously

removed are returned to the system, the banks no longer are short of

funds, and interest rates remain at their new level. This in turn

eventually brings money back to its target value.
                                  — 39 —



               The movement of total reserves over the period under

 discussion is largely the result of the movements of other variables

 and is therefore of little interest to the policymakers. There are

 four elements affecting the level of reserves in the example. First,

 as a result of the increase in money demand required reserves rise in the

 following period and hence total reserves increase. Second, the reduction

 in excess reserves is mirrored by a decline in total reserves but the

 amounts involved are very small (i.e., s is large). Third, until the

 higher interest rates influence the quantity of money demanded total

 reserves will remain high. Fourth, when money demand falls back to

 the target required reserves will fall and so will total reserves.

               To make these points in a slightly more concrete fashion

we can use the system of equations (43) to (47) and (49).      Suppose nominal
income rises it period t by one unit. The monetary aggregate rises

in period t by c units. Suppose the policymakers decide in period (t+l)

that the cause of the increase in money demand was a rise in income

and it was not simply random noise.47
                                        If b2 were larger than the sum

of b0 and b1 it would not be possible to re—achieve the target money

balances in less than three periods without
                                                introducing explosive

oscillations in interest rate. Hence the authorities would act to increase

the interest rate in period (t+l) by c/(b0 + b1 + b2) and hold it there,

thereby aiming at bringing money back to target in period (t+4)   .   To
achieve the higher interest rate in period (t+l) non—borrowed reserves

and hence excess reserves would be reduced by          C
                                                  (          during period
                                                s b0+b1+b2
                                       — 40     —




 (t+l).    Once the interest rate rose to its new level these reserves               would
 be   put back into the system.

                 Using these elements one can calculate the movement in

 total reserves brought about by the change in income as follows. tn

 period t,   there   is no change in total reserves since the increase in

 demand deposits affects required reserves only with a lag. The change

 in total reserves in period (t+l) is composed of an increase of dc units

 in required reserves (one unit    increase         in income results in c units

 increase in demand deposits which in turn causes an              increase of dc   units

in required reserves). Offsetting this in part is the decline in excess
reserves set into motion by the authorities of
                                                            Ol2
                                                         units which is
needed to raise interest rates. Thus the net increase in total reserves
in period (t+l) is cd — 1          .   In period (t+2) these excess
reserves are put back into the system but required reserves fall because
of the effect of the increase in interest rates on money demanded in
period    (t+l). Hence, compared to    the initial position in period t,
                                            b
total    reserves are higher by cd —   cd
                                            b+b         .   In   period (t+3)

required
                                             012
            reserves are pushed down further by the effect of the continuing

high    interest rates on demand deposits in period (t+2) .            Thus compared

to the initial position total reserves are higher by cd — cd b0                 b1
                                                                          b
                                                                              012
                                                                                +b

Finally, in period (t+4) total reserves are back to their initial

equilibrium since money returned to its initial value in period (t+3).

As can be seen by this outline the movement of total reserves is very
                                           — 41 —



much a resultant of other behavioural actions and hence is not a useful

guide to central bank actions.

                  Clearly the above characterization is very crude. The

relationship between excess reserves and interest rates is much more

complex than indicated, as can be seen in the two articles cited at the

beginning of this section. Nonetheless two principal conclusions can

be drawn from the analysis. First, there is a recursive element in the

Canadian policy structure which runs from (1) movements of the monetary

aggregate, to (2) the desired setting of interest rates intended to

re—establish the target levels of the monetary aggregate at some future

date, to     (.3) the temporary setting of excess cash in order to achieve

the desired level of interest rate. Second, the movement of total

reserves is a combination of the movements in required reserves resulting

from the movement in deposits the previous period and of the temporary

movements of excess reserves needed to achieve changes in interest rates.

                                             48
in sheer size the former overwhelm the latter   and hence total reserves

are not a variable which can be used to interpret central bank actions.


5. Conclusions

                   In this paper I have examined some of the implications

of the rigid version of base control. It seems clear in the case of

those models that incorporate either institutional or economic lags

that base control may entail very sharp and possibly explosive

oscillations of very short—term interest rates. These in turn are
                                 — 42 —


likely   to lead to sharp oscillations in longer—term money market and

bond market rates. There may be forms of base control which are

sufficiently flexible to avoid the problems discussed in this paper.

I believe that it is incumbent on the proponents of base control to

specify with some precision the kind of less rigid rules for base control

that would give sensible results. Furthermore they must consider whether

changes in institutional structure would be needed to make their system

workable and whether the new rules would be likely to lead to the

requisite changes in behaviour by market participants. Finally, they

must show that this type of system would perform better than the system

currently in place. It is only in the context of a well—defined proposal

for base control embedded in a moderately realistic model of the

financial system (i.e., one with lags and stochastic error variables)

that the debate can proceed.
                                NOTES


1.    A recent theoretical analysis of these questions of strategy can
      be found in Freedman (1980).
 2.   In one sense this formulation of the problem is inaccurate since
      the authorities operate on reserves (or excess reserves in Canada)
      to influence interest rates even when the latter are used to affect
      the monetary aggregate. Nonetheless, in a more basic sense the
      distinction remains since in a base control system the authorities
      aim at money directly via the movement of base without using interest
      rates as a proximate instrument. This does not mean, however, that
      interest rates play no role in bringing about the movement of money
      in response to a change in base, as will be seen below.
3.    A detailed discussion of the new procedures can be found in Board
      of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1980) and Axilrod and
      Lindsey (1980). The former has been excerpted and discussed in
      Lang (1980).
4.    United Kingdom (1980).
5.    Coimnents by Karl Brunner at Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference,
      October 1980. But see B1ttler et al (1979) in which base is treated
      as the instrument for achieving the desired money target.
6.    See, for example, Clinton and Lynch (1979) and the references cited
      therein. More recent studies include Johannes and Rasche (1979) and
      B'tittler et al (1979).
7.    The question of the usefulness of the concept of the supply of money
     will be addressed below.
8.    The magnitude of these random movements in the very short run is a
      significant element in the controversy whether to use base or interest
      rate control to achieve monetary aggregate targets. If the demand
      for money were volatile in the very short run but stable over an
     intermediate run, the Poole analysis would imply use of interest rates
     in the very short run to control the monetary aggregate in the
     intermediate run.
9.   In the Canadian case this assumption is particularly suspect since
     there is a very quick linkage from interest rates to exchange rates
     and then to prices.
10. The price level is thus implicitly assumed to be constant throughout
     the analysis.
11. This statement is true only for the class of models in which money
     demand is assumed always to be in (short—run) equilibrium. The class
     of disequilibrium models permit a distinction between the supply of
     money and demand for money. However, as suggested below, the concept
     of the supply of money is not necessarily a useful one.
 12. This point becomes more substantive when one reaches the case of
       lagged reserve accounting where the notion of a money supply based
      on the reserves of the banking system becomes much more difficult to
       conceptualize whereas the notions of the demand for and supply of
      reserves continue to hold without modification. This point will be
      developed in section 2.4(b) below when lagged reserve accounting is
      introduced.
 13. I ignore the fact that in some jurisdictions the government is the
      issuer of at least part of the currency (e.g., coin).
 14. If the central bank finds it difficult in the short run to track
      shifts between currency and deposits, a case can be made for focussing
      on a reserve path rather than a base path. A shift of $1 from demand
      deposits to currency in the former case leads to a $1 increase in
      money whereas in the latter it leads to a $9 decline in money. See
      Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1980) for such a
      justification of a reserve target rather than a base target.
15. This formulation presupposes zero or at least fixed interest rates
      on demand deposits and the assumption of gross substitutability.
16. In this formulation income is proxying for both income and wealth,
      which would be introduced separately in a correctly specified equation.
      One could also model the ratio of time deposits to demand deposits
     but the results of this formulation of the problem are less revealing
      for our purposes.
17. This simple conclusion might have to be modified for a model in which
      the banks conduct liability side management rather than liquid asset
     management. Note also that in certain cases reserve requirements are
     imposed for equity or efficiency reasons that are unrelated to the
     question of monetary control.
18. The problems created by imposing reserves on deposits that are not
     part of the target monetary aggregate or by non—uniform reserve
     requirements are much easier to handle in a system with lagged reserve
     requirements than in a system with contemporaneous reserve requirements.
19. This result is simply a reflection of the lower elasticity of the
     broader aggregate with respect to market interest rates when the rate
     on time deposits moves in line with market rates.
20. The careful reader will note that if the lag structure of the demand
     for money with respect to income were identical to that with respect
     to interest rates the oscillation of interest rates in response to an
     increase in income would disappear in some of the models of this
     section. If the mean lag on income were shorter than that on interest
     rates, a result found in some demand for money equations, the oscillation
     results would continue to hold however. Perhaps more important, an
     increase in the price level in those models of money demand in which
     prices affect money with no lag, or a movement in the error term in
     the demand for money equation will give rise to the types of oscillations
     described. Hence the result is more general than indicated in the text.
21. In making this assertion I have implicitly defined the time period
     in which the analysis is cast as the period over which proponents
     of base control wish to achieve control over the money supply. This
     period is sufficiently short that the statement in the text holds.
22. This argument and the corresponding ones in the rest of this section
     of the paper are closely related to the notion of instrument instability
     in Holbrook (1972). The fact that the authorities are using reserves
     rather than interest rates to control money does not cause the problem
     of potentially explosive oscillations of the interest rate to disappear.
     It simply reappears in a slightly different guise. Discussion of
     the possibility that interest rate movements could be explosive can
     also be found in Pierce and Thomson (1972), Ciccolo (1974) and
     Lombra and Struble (1979).
23. The central bank has some influence over the amount of borrowing through
     its control over the discount rate and through its administration of
     the discount window.
24. In a more complex model one would use the federal funds rate in the
     borrowed reserves equation and, say, a 90—day rate in the demand for
     money equation. This would require the addition of another equation
     linking the 90—day rate to the federal funds rate.
25. The coefficient q is at least partly related to the way in which the
     discount window is administered. Thus the "reluctance" of banks
     to borrow from the central bank can be influenced by the behaviour of
     the central bank. One could also add a constant to equation (30)
     to represent a certain small amount of borrowing that takes place even
     when the interest rate falls below the discount rate but this would
     not change the analysis.
26. A slightly less stringent set of assumptions that would lead to
     virtually the same results would involve replacing the right hand side
     of equation (31) by p — ni(t) where n is a small number.
27. Although the behavioural equation from the point of view of the
     banks treats borrowed reserves as a function of the level of the interest
     rate (relative to the discount rate), from the point of view of the
     system as a whole it is preferable to think of borrowed reserves
     as the given factor and the interest rates as endogenously determined.
     With the central bank setting non—borrowed reserves, required reserves
     a function of income and mainly lagged interest rates, and a constant
     level of excess reserves, borrowed reserves are almost a residual of
    the system. Thus in the analysis that follows I will consider separately
    the case in which banks have positive borrowed reserves and that in which
    the movements of non—borrowed reserves and required reserves result
    in the banks having no borrowed reserves on their balance sheet, i.e.,
    an excess reserves case.
 28. Recall that I am assuming that there is no effect on income of changes
       in interest rates in the period under study. Hence the notion of
      equilibrium must be interpreted as a temporary position before the
      influence of financial variables on the real economy begins to take
      effect.
 29. Eventually, of course, the higher interest rates will lead to a
      slowdown in income growth which will bring the monetary aggregate back
      to its target.
30. In the simple model which we are using, if the authorities were to
      float the discount rate on market rates, then (32) and (33) basically
      collapse to equations (26) and (27) and the monetary aggregate is
      always on target. That is, the discount window becomes irrelevant
      if the margin between the market rate and discount rate never moves.
      Recall, however, that the oscillation of interest rates may well be
      explosive in equation (27).
31.   In this model, floating the interest rate on the discount rate leads
      to an indeterminacy of the interest rate, as can be seen from equation
      (36). The reason is that with a floating discount rate there is no
      way to equilibrate a shortage of reserves caused by an increase in
      money demanded since neither the public nor the banks respond to a
      movement in current rates.
32. If one thinks of excess reserves as constant at some frictional level,
      total reserves will follow required reserves which, in turn, are a
      function of the monetary aggregate. If the monetary aggregate is not
      controllable, neither are total reserves.
33. Floating the discount rate will make no difference to the outcome
      since interest rates must fall sufficiently to induce the banks to
      hold the excess reserves and the discount rate is not an argument
      in the demand function for excess reserves.
34. In principle the central bank could prevent the sawtooth in money
      and interest rates from arising by offsetting the increas.e in income
      by the appropriate decline in non—borrowed reserves. This, however,
      requires perfect information regarding the movement of income.
35. Even if excess reserves moved slightly in response to changes in
      interest rates the result would be only slightly modified.
36. One can easily combine the one—period lag in the demand for money
     and lagged reserve accounting. The resulting interest rate pattern
      is one in which interest rates oscillate every second period. More
      complicated models with n period lags can be constructed by the
      interested reader. The resulting nth order difference equations may
     be difficult to solve but are very likely to give cyclical movements
     which may well be undamped.
37. Federal Reserve Bulletin, October 1979, page 830.
38. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1980). This paper
     has been discussed in Lang (1980).
39. Note that it is much easier to deal with these problems in a system
     with lagged reserve accounting than in one with contemporaneous
      reserve accounting.
40. Adding an expenditure sector and a price sector to the model may, under
      certain circumstances, strengthen the conclusion in the text regarding
      an unstable cyclical response. Suppose, for example, that the
      authorities are following a short horizon policy which has caused
      interest rates to increase sharply in response to an increase in the
     monetary aggregate which resulted from an increase in the rate of growth
      of nominal income. It may be the case that at the same time as the lagged
     effects of the high interest rates drive the monetary aggregate below
     its target they also slow down the growth of real income and perhaps
     prices and, hence, intensify the downward movements of the monetary
     aggregate. Thus the possibility of explosive oscillations in the
     monetary aggregate and interest rates may be increased by introducing
     the interrelationship of the financial sector and the real and price
     sectors into the model.
41. In any event the Bank of Canada is willing to supply whatever reserves
     are required to support these time deposits since they are not part
     of the target monetary aggregate.
42. The purchase and resale arrangements (PRA) between the money market
     dealers and the Bank of Canada also do not vitiate this judgement.
43. It would make little difference to the analysis if desired excess
     reserves were weakly related to the level of interest rates.
44. See White (1976) for an early account of this mechanism.
45. For purposes of simplicity I ignore the existence of the band in
     the analysis that follows.
46. There may be a lag at this point because of the need to decide whether
     the increase in money was random in which case there should be no
     interest rate change or was a result of an increase in income.
47. This distinction assumes a random error v also is part of the demand
     for money equation.
48. This is particularly the case since required reserves also move in
     response to movements in time deposits and Government of Canada deposits.
                               REFERENCES


Axilrod, S.H. and D.E. Lindsey (1980) "Federal Reserve System Implementation
   of Monetary Policy: Analytical Foundations of the New Approach", paper
   presented at the Denver meeting of the American Economic Association,
   September 6.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1980) "Appendix B:
   Description of the New Procedures for Controlling Money", appended to
   "Monetary Policy Report to Congress Pursuant to the Full Employment
   and Balanced Growth Act of 1978", February 9.

Büttler, H.J., J.F. Gorgerat, H. Schiltknecht and K. Schiltknecht (1979)
   "A Multiplier Model for Controlling the Money Stock", Journal of
   Monetary Economics 5, 327—341.

Ciccolo, J.H. (1974) "Is Short—Run Monetary Control Feasible?", in Federal
   Reserve Bank of New York, Monetary Aggregates and Monetary Policy
   (New York), 82—91.

Clinton, K. and K. Lynch (1979) "Monetary Base and Money Stock in Canada",
   Bank of Canada Technical Report 16 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada).

Courchene, T.J. (1979) "On Defining and Controlling Money", Canadian
   Journal of Economics 12, 604—615.

Dingle, J.F., G.R. Sparks and M.A. Walker (1972) "Monetary Policy and
   the Adjustment of Chartered Bank Assets", Canadian Journal of
   Economics 5, 494—514.

Freedman, C. (1980) "Monetary Aggregates as Targets: Some Theoretical
   Aspects", paper delivered at the University of Calagary, April 10.

Friedman,   B.M. (1975) "Targets, Instruments, and Indicators of   Monetary
   Policy",   Journal of Monetary Economics 1, 443—473.

Holbrook, R.S. (1972) "Optimal Economic Policy and the Problem of Instrument
   Instability", American Economic Review 62, 57—65.

Johannes, J.M. and R.H. Rasche (1979) "Predicting the Money Multiplier",
   Journal of Monetary Economics 5, 301—325.

Lang, R.W. (1980) "The FOMC in 1979: Introducing Reserve Targeting",
   Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 62, No. 3, 2—25.
                                —2—

Lotnbra, R. and F. Struble (1979) "Monetary Aggregate Targets and the
    Volatility of Interest Rates: A Taxonomic Discussion", Journal of
    Money, Credit and Banking 11, 284—300.

Pesando, J.E. (1980) "On Expectations, Term Premiums, and the Volatility
    of Holding Period Yields on Long—Term Bonds", National Bureau of
    Economic Research Working Paper (forthcoming).

Pierce, J.L. and T.D. Thomson (1972) "Some Issues in Controlling the
    Stock of Money", in Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Controlling
    Monetary Aggregates, II the Implementation (Boston), 115—136.

Poole, W. (1970) "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in
    A Simple Stochastic Macro Model", Quarterly Journal of Economics 84,
    197—216.

Shiller, R.J. (1979) "The Volatility of Long—Term Interest Rates and
    Expectations Models of the Term Structure", Journal of Political
    Economy 87, 1190—1219.

United Kingdom (1980) The Green Paper on Monetary Control, Cmnd. 7858

White, W.R. (1976) "The Demand for Money in Canada and the Control of
    Monetary Aggregates: Evidence from the Monthly Data", Bank of Canada
    Staff Research Study 12 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada).

White, W.R. (1979) "Alternative Monetary Targets and Control Instruments
    in Canada: Criteria for Choice", Canadian Journal of Economics 12,
    590—604.

White, W.R. and S.S. Poloz (1980) "Monetary Policy and Chartered Bank
    Demand Functions for Excess Cash Reserves", Canadian Journal of
    Economics 13, 189—205.
