                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CONSUMPTION PREFERENCES, ASSET DEMANDS,
                 AND DISTRIBUTION EFFECTS IN
                INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL MARKETS


                         Paul   Krugman

                     Working Paper No. 651




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          March 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   about exchange rates has shifted
     In recent   years   the conventional wisdom
                                                                        supplies to a
                                  current and expected future money
from an exclusive emphasis on
                                        role to the current account.      In spite of
new view which assigns an important
                                     however, there has been little agreement on
the popularity of this new view,
                                      the current account affects the exchange rate.
the actual channel through which
                                                   One position, exemplified by Mussa
There seem to be three distinct positions.
                                             by the work of Freedman
(1980) and given some empirical support

             that the current account matters only because it      is   an indicator
(1979), is
                                                                  A second
of   long—run shifts in the purchasing power parity relationship.
position, developed theoretically by Dornbusch and Fischer (1980) and given
some empirical support by recent work by Frankel (1980), is that the current
account    matters because wealth affects the demand for money. Finally there

is the  portfolio balance approach developed by Branson (1977) and Kouri (l976a).
 In this view, the redistribution of world wealth which current account
 imbalances produce alters the demand for bonds denominated in different cur-
 rencies, producing      shifts in interest differentials which in turn alter

 relative money demands.

      This paper is an attempt to examine some of the microeconomic foundations

 of this last --1 ew of the link between currerr accounts and exchange rata.-
 Several   authors, especially Kouri and de Macedo (1978), but also more recently
 Dornbusch (1980), have sought to justify the portfolio aiproach in terms of
 finance theory, deriving asset demands from a mean—variance framework and
 arguing that differences in the portfolios of different countries explain
                                                                        What
 why changes in the world distribution of wealth affect exchange rates.
                                                                                 9


I   will do in this paper is to argue that, even under seemingly favorable

assumptions, these distribution effects nay run the wrong way; that if they

run   the right way, they will be very weak; and that the incentives for inter-
national, portfolio diversification are in any case small, and can be      swamped
by quite modest transaction costs or other costs to diversification.
        This   paper is in four sections. Section 1 briefly reviews the argument

about how an effect of current accounts on exchange rates can be ,jüstified

in a finance theory framework, then shows by a numerical example how the ef-

fect can run in the wrong direction. Section 2 sets out a formal model in

which the condition for distribution effects running the right way can be

explicitly derived. Section 3 then develops a continuous—time model in

which   an explicit   algebraic treatment of the distribution effect on the for-

ward premium     can be conducted, an& uses some semi—realistic numbers to show
the effect's unimportance. Finally, Section 4 considers     the gains to

diversification,     and presents an argument that transaction costs may be as
important or more important than mean—variance considerations in determining
international portfolios.
1. Wealth Distribution and the      Forward Premium.

      As   Kouri and de Macedo(l978) have pointed out, the essence of the port-
folio balance explanation of the current account's role in exchange rates lies
in what they Lall the "wealth transfer effc.". Suppose that Americans nr 1d
a higher proportion of their wealth in dollar denominated assets than Germans
do. Then a redistribution of wealth from America to Germany, occurring over
time through current account imbalances, will reduce the demand for dollar
denominated assets and increase the demand for mark denominated assets, re-
quiring either a rise in the U.S.—German interest differential or a deprecia—
tion of the dollar. The rote of the current account in exchange rate determination -
                                                                            3.


arises from the assumed tendency of residents of each country to hold a larger

proportion of their wealth in domestic—currency—denominated assets than

foreigners    do. (This is a point which is somewhat obscured in "small country"
models, such as those of Branson (1977), Kouri (l976a),and Dornbusch and Fischer
(1980) ,   in which it is assumed that the home country holds foreign assets but
foreigners do not hold domestic assets. This of course implies that home
country residents do hold a larger share of their wealth •in domestic—currency
denominated assets; and it is this, rather than the small—country aspect of
the story, which really does the work of moving the exchange rate).
       Where finance theory comes into this story is in explaining ! residents

of each country should have a "local habitat" in domestic bonds. Essentially.
it is argued that Americans hold American assets because they buy American
goods. That is, because the consumption basket of each country is weighted
toward domestically produced    goods whose prices are set in domestic currency,

risk   averse investors will tend to choose a portfolio with a disproportionate
share of assets denominated in domestic currency.
       We can clarify the point by considering a world of two countries, America
and Britain, where the only assets are nominal bonds denominated in dollars
and pounds. Suppose that prices of American and British goods are predictable
inrms of dollars and pounds respectively, so that the only uncertainty is
about exchange rata changes. Then an individual who consumes only American
goods will be able to avoid all risk by holding only dollar bonds, and will
hold pound bonds only if they offer a higher expected real return. Similarly,
an individual who consumes only British goods will hold only pound bonds un-
less offered a higher expected real return on dollar bonds. If we can take
it as given that Americans will spend a higher proportion of their income on
American goods than Britains will, this seems to give a simple justification
                                                                                          4.

 for the asstmlption that donestic residents have a local habitat in domestic

 currency    bonds. The point can     be further emphasized if one goes to a

 mean—varianceframework, as Kouri and de Macedo (1978), de Macedo (1980), and
 Dornbusch (1980) do. In such a framework the optimal portfolio consists of a
 "safe" asset plus a speculative portfolio which depends on expected returns ——
 and the safe asset consists of dollar bonds for
                                                 a dollar consumer, pound bonds
 for a pound consumer.
                                                                                      -




       Unfortunately, the case for a wealth transfer effect of the right sign
 is not as clear—cut as this argument makes it seem. The reason is that ex-
pected real returns depend on the constimption basket ——           and   they do so in such
 a way as to encourage holding of bonds denominated in foreign currency.
     Consider the example in Table I. For simplicity we consider a situation
in   which interest rates are zero on both types of bonds.           At time t=0, one

dollar is worth SOp; at time t1, a dollar will with equal probability he worth
1   pound and   3Op. Thus   the             of dollars per pound is 2 1/6,
                                  expected number

while the expected number of pounds per dollar is .65.


                                      Table I
      t=0:      S=2           or 1/S=.5
      t=O:      S = 3 1/3     or      1/S =   .3   with   probability 1/2
                S   = 1
                                                   with probability 1/2
             E[SJ = 2 1/6          E[l/S] = .65


      What would an investor do in this situation? It depends on two things:

his consumption tastes, and his degree of risk aversion. One extreme case

would be that of completely risk—averse investors.
                                                               These investors will
hold dollar bonds if they consume American
                                                    goods, pound bonds if they con-

sume-British goods. If investors are risk neutral, however, this result
                                                                                         5.


be reversed. Pound bonds have a positive expected return in terms               of   dollars,

while dollar bonds have a positive expected return in terms of pounds. Thus

in this case we will have cross—holding,the reverse of the local habitat story.

       This paradoxical possibility results from Jensents inequality. There is

a small literature on the role of Jensen's inequality in international finance

(see Siegel (1972), Roper (1975), and McCulloch (1975).

the   upshot of which was that the discrepancy caused by this effect was too
small to have any    practical    importance. One might expect that this would im-
ply that   even slight risk aversion would be enough to establish the preferred

habitat result. however, this is not the case. Consider a Bernoulli in-

vestor, i.e. , one whose utility is linear in the log of expected wealth.

Such an investor would not ordinarily be considered to have an unreasonably

low degree of risk aversion.        Yet the Bernoulli case is not enough to estab-
lish a preferred habitat result. Let W be wealth in dollars, and S the
dollar—pound exchange rate. Then a Bernoulli investor who consumes American
goods will maximize E[Zn WI , while an investor who consumes British goods will
maximize E[n W/S]     =   —E[Ln   SI +   E   [n Wi.   Since EIZn 5] is unaffected by the
choice of portfolio, the two investors will hold           the same portfolio.         (In the

example in Table I they will hold 43 percent            dollars, 57   percent   poutids).
       This   suggests investors will have a local habitat in bonds only if they

are    sufficiently risk averse, and that the degree of risk aversion required
is not trivial. We will see below that wkiat is in fact required ——               as   che
Bernoulli example may have suggested —— is            relative risk aversion greater than
one.     Furthermore, the example suggests that the role of risk aversion in

international portfolio decisions is comparable in magnitude to that of Jen-

sen's inequality —— an effect which has generally been dismissed as trivial.

If this is the case, presumably the importance of risk aversion is also minor.

Our    calculations later will support this view.
                                                                                        0.

 2.    A Formal Model.

        The basic idea of the finance theory view of distribution effects on

exchange      rates is that investors have a "local habitat" biased toward assets
denominated in domestic currency because they spend a relatively higher pro-
portion of      their income on domestic goods. This presumes, of course, that

the purchasing power of domestic currency aver domestic goods is more pre-

dictable than the purchasing power of foreign currency over domestic goods;

i.e., that inflation rates are more predictable than exchange rate changes.

This is a reasonable presumption: inflation rates are both much less variable

than exchange rate changes and              much more serially   correlated (see Mussa (1980)).

In this section I will carry out a formal analysis which takes this presumption

to its logical extreme: price levels will be assumed to be wholly predictable,

so that the only source of uncertainty is the exchange rate.

        We make the following assumptions:

(i)       Investors take their initial wealth, invest it for one period, then

          use   all   of their wealth to buy consumption goods.

(ii)     There     are two countries, America and Britain, each producing a         single
          consumption       good.

(iii)    There     are two assets,      bonds denominated in dollars and bonds denominated
         in   pounds.

(iv)     All    mv    stors have the same degree o risk aversion, but they diffl.

         in   their tastes over goods. American investors have a relative preference
for American goods.
       We will assume that utility can be written in the form
              U=
                       [C           C5i''                                                (1)
                                                                                   7.



where CA 0B are consumption of American       and British goods respectively.
Thi.   is a constant relative risk aversion utility function, with 1 —     y   =    It
the coefficient of relative risk aversion. R will be assumed the same for

all   individuals.   However, $,   which measures the relative demand for British
goods, will be greater for Britons than Americans.

       At the beginning of the period, investors will allocate their wealth

between   dollar bonds and pound bonds. They will be bound by the budget con-
straint

            1A +EIBW                                                               (2)


where I and 'B are holdings of dollar and pound bonds respectively, E is
the beginning—of—period exchange rate, and W is beginning of period dollar
wealth.
       At the end of the period, wealth measured in dollars will depend on
the initital allocation of investment, interest rates, and      the   uncertain
end of period exchange rate. We can regard the exchange rate as taking on

any of a number values E., with the probability of each valte being "c              In
each such state wealth measured in dollars will be



                                                                                   (3)
           i TA (l+iA) +EiIB (l+iB)


where       iB are the interest yields on dollar and pound bonds respectively.

       Investors will maximize utility, subject to the budget constraint




            PACA+EiPBCB=Wi

where   A' B are the end—of—period prices of American and British goods
respectively, to be known with certainty. It is convenient to write the
                                                                                                8.

 result of this maximization as an indirect utilty function,


                     1                        —              —IY
                                                  '
             Ui=7WiY[Pa                  B1                                                   (5)
 or by choice of units;


                             /
                    1
             U. =                E.                                                           (5')


       Now consider the investor's decision problem. Each investor will want

to maximize expected utility,


             EUEp.U.                                                                          (6)


There is one decision variable, investment in pound bonds 'B' since
                                                                     EU1
'A = W — E              Thus the first order condition
                                                                           B          where


after some manipulation we can            sluw        that

                                   y-l    —fty
                 = K
                                 Wi                   (p1 1)                                  (7)


where K consists of terms which do not vary with the end of period

exchange rate, and we define

                    E.      1+1B
             1                                                                                (8)
                    E
                            l+1A
      We are now prepared to ask           the        basic question: will British residents

hold a larger proportion of their wealth in pound bonds than Ameriaan

residents?    This reduces to the question of the sign of                      EUID
If   this is positive, an increased taste for British goods will lead to

increased investment in pound denominated bonds; conversely, if it is negative,

a stronger taste for British goods will lead to reduced investment in pound

denominated assets.
                                                                                  9.




       Differentiating (7)


                EU                     yl
                       —Y   Kp.   W.        p (p1 —1) Zn p.                           (9)
             BIB


Inspecting    (9) term by   tern, we see that all terms       will be negative if y
is positive, positive if y is negative. Recalling that the coefficient of
relative risk aversion R is equal to 1 — y, this gives us the basic
result: An increased demand fora country's goods leads toan increased
demand for assets denominated in its currency if and only if relative

risk aversion is greater than one. If relative risk aversion is less than one,

the   effect runs the "wrong" way.

3.    Distribution Effects: A Continuous Time Model

      If   risk aversion is great enough, the wealth transferF effect will run
in the "right" direction. What we would like, however, is a measure of its
importance. It will be useful to develop a model in which we can solve
explicitly    for the effects of a redistribution of world wealth on the

equilibrium interest differential.

      Recently Kouri (1976b)           de Macedo Q980 )   and Stulz (1980) have applied

the analysis of continuous time portfolio models to international finance.

The basic result we need .&om this analysis is the following: suppose an in—,

vestor has a constant relative risk avezsion utility function of the form

            U=f 1Cdt                                                              (10)
               0


where C is real consumption. Suppose further that real returns on the
assets available follow Brownian motion. Then at each point in time the
                                                                                                      10 -

investor   will choose a portfolio which maximizes


               V = E (dW/W)                    vat (dW/W)                                            (11)

where t   is    real wealth, dW/W is its instantaneous rate of change, and
R = 1—y is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.

      Applying this to the international problem, we simply note that real

wealth W may be defined as

                =
                                                                                                     (12)

where W is dollar wealth, E the exchange rate,                                  and P the own   currency
prices of American and British goods, and                                 the share of British goods in

consumption.

      As in the last section, we assume                          that   there is no uncertainty about

prices. Each        price   level will be assumed to grow at a constant rate:



           dPA=ITA Pdt                                                                               (13)



           dPB=lrBPBdt

      The exchange rate will, however, follow Brownian motion:

           dE = 6E, dt + Esdz
                                                                                                     (14)
where dz is the random element.
      Let us also assume that dollar and pound bonds heat fixed nominal rates
'A and iB respectively. Also, let A                         be   the share of wealth put into    pound
bonds. Then by 1t6's Lemma, we can write the instanstaneoug change                              in
Was

          dW/w= (1—A)
                                1A ÷ AIB

                    — (1—B)      IT
                                           B                                                      (15)

                                      dE       1        9
                    + (A    -
                                B) —j +            (B       +     -   2A)
                                                                                                     11.


       The "Jensen's inequality" or "Siegel paradox" effec.t can be seen in
the last term. As       long   as 5>0, that is, as long as there are some British
goods in one's consumption basket                  the real return on a portfolio depends
not   only on the rate of change of the exchange rate but on its variance.

       Substituting from (14) and taking expectations, we find


              E [dW/w] = (1 — A)
                                    'A        Aib
                          - (1-5) A - B
                                                                                                    (16)
                                          1            2
                         + (A—5)
                                     +- (                  .+   5   —25A) S

for   the expected return on the portfolio; and

              var (dW/W) = (A—$)2     2                                                             (17)
for   its variance.

      We can now solve for the optimum share of pound—denominated assets.

The first—order condition is
                                     CA
                                          =    i   B
                                                       + —iA —                 — R (A—$)   = 0      (18)


or     A =              S — 'A + (R—l) 5S2]
             —1- [i +
       It    is immediately apparent that a higher share of British goods in
consumption      implies a higher share of                 pound denominated assets in      one's

portfolio if and only if R > 1.           Further, since 3A1B5 = R — 1/R, this effect

will be small unless risk aversion is considerably more than one and will in

any   case be less than proportionate.
       Given the expression of portfolio choic2 (18), we can now proceed to
an analysis of the size of distribution effects on the forward premium (i.e.,

the interest differential). Let

                  supplies of dollar—and pound—denominated bonds
       DA DB

      W&e WB =
                  dollar wealth    of Americans and                  Britons
                                                                                           12.

                   share of British goods in the consuniption of Americans and
    5A' 8B =
                   Britons

        AA) An =
                   share of pound assets in the portfolios of Americans and Britons

    We assume that SB >                          the question is whether this difference in con-
                                           5A'
sumption patterns gives rise to a significant distribution effect in the

asset market.

        By (18), we have

              A =
               A RS2
                                 [iB IA + 6
                                       —
                                                      +5A        (R—1) s2]                  (19)

                   =             [IB -     'A    + 6 +
                                                             B
                                                                 (P-i) s2]
                       RS2

        The market clearing condition is

                                            E                                               (20)
               AAWA+ A WB =                      DB

        We   can divide both sides of (20) by total world wealth,

WA + W =           + EDB. and rearrange to get an expression for the forward

premium as a function of the share of pound assets in world assets supplies

and the British share in world wealth:


                             =                           2         2 EDB
               1B —                6       5A (R—l) S +RS                                   (21)
                       'A
                                                                        + EDn


                                                                  WB
                                       + (R-1) 2                           5A -
                                                             WA

        What (21) says is that: (i) an increase in the relative supply of

pounds will lower the forward premium on pounds; (ii) an.increase in the

British share of world wealth will raise the forward premium on pounds if

relative risk aversion is greater than one and Britons have a relatively

stronger taste for British goods.

    -
        For   plausible parameter values, however, this last effect is very weak.
Consider      the effect of redistributing one percent of world wealth from
                                                                                    13.
America to Britain ——          a   very large quantity compared with the wealth redis-
tribution actually involved in recent current account imbalances.              Suppose
we also mike the most extrame assumption about consumption baskets, namely

that      =   0,   SB =   1.   Then the change in the forward premium is .01 RS2.

A widely accepted "reasonable" value for R is 2•



                       Table       2: Variability of Exchange Rates
       Mean squared annual change in log of exchange rate, June 1973—June 1980

                            Dollar/mark                .0114

                            Dollar/yen                 .0 186


                            Dollar/pound               .0191




       Table 2     gives some representative numbers on exchange rate variability.
Using these numbers, we find that redistributing one percent of world wealth
would lead to a change in the forward premium of less than .02 percentage

points.

       Given sufficiently strong risk aversion, then, it is possible to explain

both imperfect substitutability of bonds and distribution effects on interest

rates. But given realistic numbers, these effects will be very small. If

distribution effects in international financial markets           do play an economically
significant    role, they must arise from sources other than risk aversion.

4. Will Investors Diversify Internationally?

       In the last section we saw that for reasonable estimates of relative risk

aversion and       actual   exchange volatility the economic importance of international

portfolio diversification seems doubtful.           A natural question is whether investors

themselves will bother to diversify. Realistically, there will be some costs

to international diversification of one's portfolio. Will the advantages be
                                                                              14.


large enough to outweigh these?

       To ask this question we1 need to formulate the costs of diversification.

It seems mOst natural to suppose that there is a fixed cost to diversification.

However, in the continuous time formulation this will not be tractable. We

can easily handle the cost, however, if we model it as a fixed cost jj unit

time; this can be viewed as an approximation to a situation where there is a

simple fixed cost. The cost per unit time will simply be the fixed cost

divided by the maturity of the security.

       Our revised model of portfolio choice can be written as follows. Let f

be a fixed cost per unit time which an investor must incur if he chooses to

hold       foreign    currency bonds. Thus the change in an internationally
diversified investor's wealth will be
            dWIW    = —f/W

                     + (1—A) 'A +
                                          A1B
                      —
                           (1—5) ir
                                  A
                                    —     SITE
                                                                              (22)
                      + (A—$) dEIE

                      ÷          +   s   — 25A)   (dEIE)2
                          4

       An investor who holds only domestic currency bonds, however, need not

incur the fixed cost. Thus an American holding only dollar bonds will have


            dW/W           — (1—5)         —
                      LA

                      — dE/E                                                  çza)


                      +4      (52 + 53 (dE/E)2

       Under what conditions will investing only in domestic currency be

preferred? Let

            V   =   utility with optimal diversification
                =   utility without diversification
                                                                                                          15.

        Then we can show that

              V — V =               —±/W
               D   N
                                                                                    2
                                    +         [1B+ó —              (R—l)       SJ
                                         12
                                        2R5
                               -




        If f/W is large enough compared with second term, investors will not

diversify.

        Consider the following example. Suppose

              E   [dE/El +          B 'A = E [d(1IE)I(lIE)]+             A —   'B' i.e.,      from the

point    of view of nominal returns in the other currency neither currency
appears more attractive. This can be                   shown to imply

                  =        —        + 52/2     This is as close as we can get to a situation
                      'A       iB
                                                              =
of pure diversification, since setting                            içi3     would actually mean pro-
viding a differential in real returns.
        In this case, the interest rates drop out and the critical level of
fixed costs depends only on R, ,                 and   S2 .       Suppose R = 2,        S2 = .02, and
8 = .2.    Then VD _VN will be .00245 — f/w.
      1ihat   this means is that a cost equal to .245 percent of wealth at an
annual rate will deter diversification. For short maturities                                this can be

a   quite small number. For three—month securities, for instance, an investor
with $10,000 will be deterred by costs of $6.13; an investor with $100,000
by costs of $61.25.
      These calculations suggest that for many investors the costs of inter-
national diversification will be enou to block such diversification.
      In practice, international portfolio diversification is not something
that ordinary individuals do.                          Instead, it is more typically something
that we associate with firms and individuals whose utility depends on the cx—
change rate in a "leveraged" way —— e.g., importers who must commit themselves
to pay for foreign goods in future. This analysis suggests why. And it fur—
                                                                       16.


thur suggests that a realistic analysis of international financial markets

must take into account the fact that international investment is not costless.
                                                                               17.
                                     References


Branson, W. (1977): "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange Rate

     Determination," Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen, 1.


Dornbusch,   R. and S.   Fischer (1980): "Exchange Rates and the Current

     Account,"   AER (Dec.)

Frankel, 3. (1980): "The Mystery fo the Multiplying Marks: A Modification
     of the Monetary Model," NEER Working Paper #

Freedman, C. (1979): "The Canadian Dollar, 1971—76: An Exploratory
     Investigation of Short—Run Movements," NBER Working Paper #380.

Kouri,   P. (1976a) : "The Determinants of the Forward Premium," rnimeo,
     Institute   for International Economic Studies, Stockholm.


_______ (1976b): "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in the
     Short Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian

     Journal   of Economics, 2.

_______ and J. de Macedo (1978) :      "Exchange Rates and the International
     Adjustment Process," Brookings Papers on Economic ActiVity: 1.

de Macedo, J. (1980): "Portfolio Diversification Across Currencies,"
     mimeo, Princeton.

McCulloch, J.H. (1975) :      "Operational Aspects of the Siegel Paradox," QJE

     (Feb.).


Mussa, M. (1979): "Enpirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Bateth

     and   Theories of the Foreign Exchange Market," mimeo, Univ. of chicago.

______ (1980):    "The Role of the Current Account in Exchange Rate Dynamics,"
     inimeo, University of Chicago.
                                                                         18.


Roper, D. (1975): "The Role of Expected Value Analysis for Speculative
     Decisions in the Forward Currency Market"       (Feb).

Siegel, J. (1972): T'Risk, Interest, and Forward Exchange," QJE, May.
