                     I'IBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 INDEXATION OF THE MINIMUM WAGE
                   WITH RATIONAL F(PECTATIONS


                      Herschel I. Grossman

                      Working Paper No. 653




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            April 1981




The content of this paper is based on research undertaken for the
Minimum Wage Study Commission under U.S. Department of Labor Contract
No. J—9—M—O-.0069 awarded to the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
material derives in part from tax—supported research and may be
freely reprinted with the customary crediting of source. This work
is part of the NBER's research programs in Labor Studies and in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper 11653
                                                                April 1981



                                    AJ3 STRACT




           Indexation of the Minimum Wage with Rational Expectations



     This paper considers the possible employment effects of reforming

minimum—wage policy to incorporate indexation of the nominal minimum wage.

The analysis assumes that both the demand for the labor services of minimum—

wage workers and the setting of the nominal minimum wage rate under existing

policy depend in part on rational expectations of future average wage rates.

The analysis implies that, if the indexation ratio of the nominal minimum

wage to the recent—past average wage rate were large relative both to the

level and trend of the expected rate of average wage inflation and to the

existing relative minimum—wage target, indexation would decrease the average

level over time of minimum—wage employment. The analysis also implies that,

if the year—to—year variation in expected wage inflation were large relative

to the year—to—year variation in unexpected wage inflation, indexation

would increase the year—to—year variation in minimum—wage employment.



                                             Herschel Grossman
                                             Department of Economics
                                             Brown University
                                             Providence, Rhode Island 02912

                                                 (401) 863—2606
     This paper considers the possible employment effects of
reforming minimum-wage policy to incorporate indexation of the
nominal minimum wage. A feasible indexation scheme would
involve periodic adjustment in the minimum wage in accord with
a wage or price index. The specification of an indexation
scheme would require designation of the periodicity of
adjustment, of the relevant index, and of the factor of
indexation that determines the quantitative relation between the
minimum wage and the designated index. As a relevant example,
the Congress has recently considered an indexation scheme that
would specify annual adjustments of the federal minimum wage
to make it a fixed fraction of the average wage rate of the
preceding year. The purpose of the analysis in this paper is
to identify theoretically the factors that would determine
how, if at all, the effects of a minimum-wage policy involving
such an indexation scheme would differ from the effects of
the existing minimum—wage policy.
     The analysis develops a theoretical model that incorporates
the following distinctive and important elements:
(1) Employer demands for labor services in the subset of
labor markets in which the minimum wage is an effective con-
straint depend on the expected relative minimum wage rate
in the near and distant future, as well as on the current relative
minimum wage rate and other variables.
(2) Employers base their demand behavior on "rational" expecta-
tions about future average wages and future minimum—wage policy,
and, hence, about future relative minimum wages.
(3) Existing minimum-wage policy involves presetting of the
nominal minimum wage, but the policy objective is to make
the average level of future relative minimum wages equal a
constant target.
(4) Policymakers base their behavior on "rational? expecta-
tions about future average wages.
These assumptions mean that both policymakers and employers
behave as if they know the true mathematical expectations of
                             —2--

relevant future variables implied by current and past data and by
the economy's stochastic structure.
     In a recent econometric study, "The Federal Minimum Wage,
Employment, and Inflation," John Boschen and I find that the
data do not reject the hypothesis that average wage rates
and aggregate employment are independent of the form of
minimum-wage policy. This result is policy invariant, in the
sense of Lucas. The main implication of this hypothesis
for the present analysis is that the only important effect of
minimum—wage policy is on the amount of employment in the
subset of markets in which the minimum wage is an effective
constraint. Consequently, in considering the possible effects
of indexing the minimum wage, the present analysis focuses
on the amount of employment in the subset of constrained
markets relative to aggregate employment, taking actual and
expected changes in average wages as well as in aggregate
employment to be determined by other factors. The presumption
that the subset of constrained markets is not empty is based
on the observation that the wage distribution has continually
exhibited a cluster at the level of the current federal
minimum wage.
     Actual employment in the subset of markets in which
the minimum wage is an effective constraint is equal to demand
and is less than supply. The determination of labor demand
and, hence, of employment in this subset of constrained markets
involves the determination of behavior in the representative
market in this subset and, also, the determination of the
size of this subset. The analysis assumes that the ratio of
employment in the representative constrained market to
aggregate employment depends on the current ratio of the
average wage rate to the minimum wage, on the expected ratio
of the average wage rate to the minimum wage in the near and
distant future, and on other variables.   The importance of
expected future relative wages
results from a variety of adjustment and training costs.
The other variables, which can include technological factors,
                             —3—
taken to be exogenous, and past ratios of employment in that
market to aggregate employment, are not essential to the analysis.
The number of constrained markets depends on the current ratio
of the minimum wage to the average wage and on other variables,
such as the current ratio of employment covered by the
minimum wage to aggregate employment, which we also take to be
exogenous.
     Incorporating these assumptions into a log-linear demand
function for the subset of constrained markets yields the
basic employment equation.

        Nt =   n(w—c1) + nEt(W+i—2t+1) + nEt(W+2-c2t+2) + z,
where the variables are defined as follows:
N   is the log of the ratio of employment in the subset
     of constrained markets to aggregate employment.
W   is the log of the average wage rate.
    is the log of the minimum wage rate.
Z   is a vector of other exogenous and predetermined variables.
The subscripts t, t+l, and t+2 indicate, respectively, the
     current year, the near future, and the distant future.
Et is an operator that designates a currently formed rational
     expectation.
The analysis assumes that the elasticity coefficients, n, n,
and n, are all positive. The only difficulty with this
assumption involves n, because an increase in the current ratio
of the average wage rate to the minimum wage rate increases
demand in the representative constrained market but decreases
the number of constrained markets.

     With regard to existing minimum-wage policy, the history
of federal minimum-wage legislation suggests the following
observations:
                                 —4—
(a) The law has specified future time paths for the nominal
minimum wage.  (b) The law has been amended at intervals ranging
from four to seven years.  (c) These amendments have raised
the relative minimum wage to between 46.2% and 55.6% of the
average manufacturing wage rate.    Cd) Between amendments,
the relative minimum wage has declined to between 39.3% and
47.3% of the average manufacturing wage rate.

     It is not clear why the law has specified the minimum wage
in nominal terms rather than as a percentage of the recent
average wage, but the above observations suggest, nevertheless,
that a long-run policy objective has been to avoid large
variation in the relative minimum wage. In light of these
observations, the following representation of existing
minimum-wage policy           would seem to be appropriate:
First, the current and near—future minimum wage,    and
are currently predetermined. Second, in the longer run,
amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act preset the nominal
rninimuin   wage to equate on average the expected relative
minimum wage to a target level, which we can treat as a
constant. The expectations on which this policy is based are
Hrational,II but the carrying out of policy is subject to a
random error.

     Specifically, this representation of existing minimum-
wage policy assumes that

(2)
            t+2 Et+l Wt+2 + y +
where  y is the long-run policy target for the log of ratio
of the minimum wage to the average wage rate and w is a
random variable with zero mean.
The policy target, y, does not represent the level at
which the relative minimum wage is set when the Fair Labor
Standards Act is amended. Rather, it is the mean over
time of the level of the nominal minimum wage relative to
expectations of the average wage. It also turns out to be,
                                              —5—
as we see in equation (3) below, the expected long-run value of
the minimum wage relative to the average wage. The random
error, w, results from stochastic factors that affect either
the timing of amendments to the law or the level at which
the minimum wage is set when the law is amended.

          Taking expectations of equation (2) yields

(3)         Et(wt+2-t÷2) =           -
Backdating equation (2) yields
(4)                  EtWt+i +        y   +
                                             wt÷l   and

(5)
             t=Et_1Wt+y+wt.
The essential assumption involved in the use of the same
expectations operator, E, in equations (1—5) is that
employers and policymakers have the same (rational) expecta-
tions about average wages.

     Substituting equations (2—5) into equation (1) yields
the following solution for relative employment in the subset
of constrained markets in terms of minimum-wage policy vari-
ables, unexpected wage inflation, and other variables:

(6)         Nt =   -(n   +   n   +   n)y      -      +
                                                          n(wt   —
                                                                     EtiWt)   +z
                    —            measures current wage inflation and
where w
Etiwt Et iWt -                   measures last year's expectation of
this year's wage inflation. For present purposes, the important
implications of equation (6) are that relative employment in
the subset of constrained markets is negatively related to
the target level for the relative minimum wage, given by y,
and to the amount, given by u, by which the setting of
the current relative minimum wage exceeds this target level,
and is positively related to the amOunt, given by
      -
          Etiwt,   by which current wage inflation exceeds last
                                             —6—
 year's expectation. This difference measures the amount by
 which unexpected inflation erodes the relative minimum wage.
      The indexation scheme considered in this paper would
 differ in two important
                         ways from existing minimum-wage policy:
 First, with indexation, adjustment of the minimum wage would
 be an automatic response to
                             changes in average wages rather
 than depending on a revision of expectations about average wages
 on the part of policymakers. Second, with indexation, the
 setting of the minimum wage would be a backward looking
 reaction to last year's average wages rather than a forward
 looking anticipation of next year's average wages.
       We can specify this indexation scheme as

             =            x,
                 W1   +

where x is the factor of indexation.
                                                           Updating equation (7)
 and taking expectations yields

 (8)     Ett÷i = W + x                 and

 (9)     EtQt+2 =   EtWt+i         +   x.

     Substituting equations (7-9) into equation (1) yields the
following solution for relative employment in the subset of
constrained markets in terms of the revised
                                            minimum—wage policy
variables, expected wage inflation for the near and distant
future, and other variables:

(10)     Nt = —(n     + n      +   n) Cx     -
                                                 Etwt÷2)    +
                                                                 n(wt   -
                                                                            Etwt+2)
                      + n
                          (Etwt+1_Etwt+2) +                z.,
where Etwt÷2 =                 -
                  EtWt+2           EtWt÷1        measures currently expected
long—run wage inflation and  Etwt÷1 = EtWt+1 - W. measures
currently expected near—future wage inflation. For present
purposes, the important implications of equatiOn (10) are that
                                —7--
relative employment in the subset of constrained markets is
negatively related to the factor of indexation minus currently
expected long—run wage inflation, a difference given by
x -
    Etwt+2, and is positively related to the amount, given by
w. -   Etwt+2,   by which current wage inflation exceeds expected
long-run wage inflation and to the amount, given by Etwt+i -
                                                                Etwt÷2
by which expected near—future wage inflation exceeds expected
long-run wage inflation. Expected long-run wage inflation plays
a critical role in this case because it determines the extent
of the expected future erosion of the relative minimum wage that
results from the backward-looking nature of the indexation scheme.
     Comparison of equations (6) and (10) indicates that with an
indexed minimum wage the selection of the factor of indexation, x,
relative to the expected long—run rate of wage inflation, Etwt÷2,
would have the same effect on relative employment in the subset
of constrained markets that the selection of the relative minimum—
wage target, y, has under present policy. However, the nature
of the factors that either erode or reinforce the effects of
these key policy variables differs drastically in the two cases.
Under present policy, which we characterize as forward looking,
these other relevant factors include the unexpected part of the
current rate of wage inflation and randomness in the carrying
out of policy. In any particular year, these factors can have
a significant effect, but, given that expectations and policy
execution are accurate on average, the average effect of these
factors over time is zero. In the long run, the effect of
present minimum—wage policy depends on the level of y.
     With an indexed minimum wage, which by its nature would
be backward looking, the other relevant factors would include
deviations of the current and expected near-future rates of
wage inflation from the expected long—run rate of wage infla-
tion. In any particular year, these deviations could have a
significant effect. Moreover, if, for example, the expected
rate of wage inflation were trending upward, these deviations
                              —8--

 would be chronically negative, and their effect would be to
 depress employment further in the subset of constrained
 markets. If, however, the expected rate of wage inflation had
 no trend, the average effect of these deviations over time
 would be zero. In this case, the long—run effect of an indexed
 minimum wage would depend only on the level of the factor of
 indexation relative to expected long-run wage inflation.

     Suppose that minimum—wage policy were changed to incorporate
this indexation scheme with the factor of indexation, x, set
equal to the sum of the present relative
                                         minimum—wage target, y,
and the expected long-run raLe of wage inflation, Etwt÷2.
The preceding discussion implies that, if the expected rate of
wage inflation has no trend, the average effect over time of
this indexed minimum-wage policy on relative employment in
the subset of constrained markets would be the same as the
average effect over time of present policy. These effects,
however, would not necessarily be the same in each and every
year because of the influence of the other relevant factors——
unexpected wage inflation and policy randomness in the
present case and variations in expected wage inflation in the
indexation case. Moreover, if, for example, the expected
rate of wage inflation were trending upward, x would have to
be less than the sum of y and Ew÷2 to make the average
effect over time of an indexed minimum wage the same as the
average effect over time of present policy.
     An important general implication of this analysis is that
we cannot draw any a priori conclusions about how, if at all,
the effects of an indexed minimum wage would differ from the
effects of existing minimum-wage policy. How, if at all, the
average level over time of employment in the subset of con-
strained markets would change with the adoption of indexation
would depend on the size of the chosen factor of indexation
relative to the present relative minimum-wage target and the
expected pattern of the rate of average wage inflation.
                             —9—
Specifically, this average level of employment would decline if
the indexatjon ratio of the federal minimum wage to recent—past
average wage rates were large relative to the level and trend
of the expected rate of average wage inflation and the present
relative minimum—wage target.   How, if at all, the amount
of year-to—year variation in employment in the subset of
constrained markets would change with the adoption of indexation
would depend on the amount of year—to—year variation in
expected wage inflation relative to the amount of year—to—year
variation in unexpected wage inflation and in policy
execution.   Specifically, this year-to-year variation in
emT;loyment would increase if the year-to—year variation in
expected wage inflation were large relative to the year—to—year
variation in unexpected wage inflation.

                           Reference
J.F. Boschen and H.I. Grossman, "The Federal Minimum Wage,
     Employment, and Inflation," NEER Working Paper,
     March, 1981.
