EBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING BEHAVIOR AND THE EXPERIMENTAL
HOUSING ALLOWANCE PROGRAM: WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED?

Harvey S. Rosen
Working Paper No. 657

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RSSEABCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

April

1981

paper was presented at the NTBER Conference on Social
Experimentation held at Hilton Head, South Carolina, March
This

5—7,
Any
opinions
expressed
are
those
of
the
author
and
not
those
1981.
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #657
April 1981

Housing Behavior and the Experimental Housing Allowance Program:
What Have We Learned?

ABSTRACT

The purpose of this paper is to evaluate the Experimental Housing

Allowance Program (EHAP). My focus is on what the experimental data have
taught us that could not have been learned from more traditional sources

of information. I review the major problems that confronted investigators
using non—experimental data, and for each problem discuss whether or not
it was mitigated by the availability of EHAP

data.

I conclude that if

the goal was to obtain improved estimates of the behavioral response to
housing allowances, a social experiment was not necessary.

Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, New Jersey 08544
(609) 452—4022

I.

Introduction

In

the United

States

and nanv other

countries, attempts have

been

made to augment the rea] incomes of the poor by increasing their

con-

sumption of housing. Such schemes have taken a number of

for

forms;

examole, provision of public housing, construction subsidies, etc. It
has been suggested that a better method would be to give poor people
financial allowances which could be used to upgrade their housing stand-

ards. The success of such a program would depend upon the answers to

several questions. Two of the most important are: Would low income
families respond to financial incentives to increase their housing con-

sumption? To the extent they do, would housing prices simply be driven

up, resulting in windfall gains for landlords?
To obtain answers to these important questions, in 1970 the Department of Housing and Urban Development authorized a social excerimont,

The Experimental Housing Allowance Program (EHAP). The first part of
EHAP, the "demand experiment" was designed to predict households' re-

sponses to housing allowances. In this experiment members of a random
sample of low income households were granted housing allowances and.
their

behavior compared to a control group without allowances. The

second

part, the "supply experiment" was designed to examine markot ef-

fects of ucusing allowances. All low income families in two communities
were eligible to receive allowances, and. the response of the overall

level of prices in each community was carefully monitored. (The procisc provisions of the programs are discussed in greater detail below.)

—n—

E&P
to

tas

not instituted in an intellectual vacuum. For years prior

the cx; uri:.tent,

housing rr.Ls :cciv..d c(tzicitrable attcatiorz frct't

economists. The 9urpose of this paper is to discuss what ncw insights
EllA? has provided concerig proktble responses to various typc-s of
housing

data

allowances.

Sttcificafly, I intend to focus on what experinental

have taught us about these responses that could not have been learned

from more traditional sources. This is admittedly a narrow

, bccause

E}IAP produced a number of "... serendipitous findings that had nothing to

do with the research objectives used to justify them"
For

(Aaron,

1979, p.43).

example, much of value appears to have been learned concerning effic-

ient techniques for administering welfare programs. Nevertheless, the

prediction

of behavioral responses lies at the heat of EHAP, and it is

fundamentally on the basis of new knowledge about them that the experiment must be judged.

The existence of numerous studies which
to

have used conventional data

answer questions similar to those studied in EHAP

suggests

a natural

way to organize this paper. I will review
the major problems that confronted previous investigators, and for each problem discuss whether or
not it has been mitigated by the

should emphasize
vestigators

were

that it is

availability of experimental data. I

not icy intention to suggest that

the

EHAP in-

unaware of the fact that for some problems, experimental

observations

offer no particular advantage. Rather, their work has shown
keen s.ansitivity to thQ liaitations of their data.
The dtanand excriInnt

III.

Is discusted in Section II, su'ply in Section

Section IV contains the conclusions.

- rvy

-

S

II. The Demand_Experiment

The

main purpose of the dcmanJ cxpernents was to

obtain

odicLi•:ns

of households' resnonses to various types of housing allowances. I begin
this section by describinc the exS:eriment' s structure. This is followed
by a

discussion of problems that users of conventional data hove faced

in analyzing housing behavior, and the extent to which experimental data
alleviate these problems.

A.

2

DescriptIon of the Demand Experiment

In the demand experiment, a set of randomly selected low income
households received allowances, while mcmbers of a control group did not.

There were two basic types of allowances. Under the first, the payment
received was the difference between the cost of 'adequate"housing estab—

lished for the program (C) and some fraction b of household income3
(Y)

M =

(1)

C —

bY

where M is the size of the payment.

(

C

was determined by a panel of

housing experts, which considered both household size and the site in

making its decision.) Equation (1) is referred to as the "housing gap
formula." Under the second scheme, known as the "percent of rent

formula," the payment was some fraction ()

paid

by the family:
M =

CiR

of the gross rent )

Essentia].lv, the demand experiment consisted of confronting dif—

ferent fonilies with varici;

paring their

]us of

b

,

housing decisions to those of the

,

C

, and then com-

control oroup.

In

addition, some of te nousing gap nousenolas were tolo that their apartments

had to satisfy certain minimui standards before they

would be

eligible for payment. For example, plumbing and kitchen facilities
had to meet certain specifications; roofs, ceilings and walls had to
be in good repair, etc.

(Friedman and Weinberg 1978, p. A-3l

In practica,value3 for b of 0.15, 0.25, and 0.35 were employed;
the parameter o. took on values that started at 0.2 and were incremented by 0.1 until they reached 0.6.

C varied between 20% below and 20%

above the levels set by the experts. The experiment was conducted for
three years beginning in 1973 at two sites, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
4

and Phoenix, Arizona. At each site about one thousand low income

families participated in the experiment, somewhat under half of which

were included in the control group. Only renters were eligible.

B.

Problems in Predicting the Demand Pesponse to Housing Allowances
Presumably, by appropriately comparing the responses of the control

and treatment groups, one can infer the impact of the various types of

allowances upon h'using behavIor. However, suppose for the moment that
experimental
predict

data were not available, and an

investigator were asked to

the. effect thot allowances would hove

upon }ousing behnv4or.

—3

fast likely the investigator would begin by noting that the
houcig gap
formula is ese'ntiaily an ncrease in ricome, and the ercent ci rent
formula Inpresents a chance in the price of housing services from some

price P to (l—n)P .

Therefore

given income and price elasticities of
housing demand, one can uredict an individual's response to the housing
allowances.0

These considerations suggest the following strategy: employ

multiple regression techniques (or some variant thereof) to estimate the

demand for housing

services,

employing either cross-sectional or time

series data. This yields a set of the relevant elasticities. Then, as—
suisincj that people would react to the price and income

differences gener-

ated by a housing allowance program in the same way as those generated

"naturally," use the elasticities to estimate the program's
impact on housing demand.

I now discuss some problems that face the investigator who wants
to implement this strategy, and whether or not the problems are eliminat-

ed when experimental data are available.

1.

Specification of a Model

Users of conventional data typically begin by specifying a model

that relates the quantity of housing services demanded for the 1th ob-

servation (Q)

, to

some function f(S) of price

and a 'ector of demographic variables Z
tions

(3

suggest might be re evant:
1

=

f(P.,Y.,Z.)
1
1
1

that

(P.) ,

income

(Y.)

theoretical considera-

—6-

In Some cases
as

f ()

is

slecified in an ad hoc but

convenient form such

log-linear (e.g., Polinaky and Eliwood 11979] , Rosen
f1979bJ ,

other times it is derive2 from maximization of

tion

while

an explicit utility func-

(Abbott and Ashenfelter [1976])

Equation (3) is deterministic, so the next step is to assume that
even observations with identical right hand side variables may have different

because of random errors. Usually, an error term is ap-

pended additively.

(For an exception see King [1980).)

set of observations on Q.

'

'

and

Now, given a

Z. and the stochastic speci-

fication, the model's parameters can be estimated using a variety of
econometric techniques. The parameter estirriates can then be used to

compute behavioral elasticities;6 indeed, in the case of log linear
demand curves, the parameter values themselves are the elasticit15
There are several major drawbacks with this standard procedure.
First, economic theory puts very few constraints on the form of

f(•)

so the investigator must make an essentially ad hoc choice with respect
to the specification of either the demand or utility function. Second,

it must be assumed that f() is identical across individuals.7 (When
time series data are used, the analogous assumption is that f() does

not change over time.) Finally, and perhaps most crucially, it

must be

assumed that the fit(ed relationship will continue to
apply when a right
hand side variable for a given observation changes, For example, if the
investigator finds that
increasing a

housing
learned

particular

is less than one, it does not imply that

percent will increase its
consumption by a smaller percentage. All that one has really
is that in the data, poorer families
devoUe a larger frt on
family' s

income

ten

of

their income to housing than richer families, ceteris oaribus. Only by
assumt that poor families would act lika the richer ones if their in-comes were increased, and vice versa,

ficance

can one give any behavioral signi--

to elasticity estimates from regressions.

In contrast, the situation facing the investigator with experimental

appears

data

simple. There is no need to specify f()

,

or

to make pos-

sibly invalid behavioral assumptions. As Hausman and Wise [1981]

note,

provided that the experiment is designed properly, all that is necessary
is to compare the behavior of individuals in different treatment groups

with each other, and with the control group. Indeed, EHAP investigators
Friedman and Weinberg [1978] do exactly this. In a series of tables
they exhibit information on housing expenditures for both the experimental and control groups at the time of enrollment and at two years
after enrollment.

cSee, for example, pages 8, 13, 14, A—54, A—55.)

Interestingly, however, only a small portion of Friedman and Weinberg's

lengthy (and excellent)9 report on the demand experiment is devoted to
discussion of such results. Most of the document concerns the specification of models like (3), and their estimation with data from the experiment. But as Hanush-ek and Quiyley 11979h] observe,such 'reoression
estimates ... do not arise from experimental payments of
income, but

rather from the 'natural' experiment

arising because 'otherwise identi-

cal' households of (e.g.] varying income are observed to have made dif-

choices"

(p. 20). ln short, the experimental nature of the data
is ignored, so that all the model spccificatjon problems associated with
ferent

converitiona] data must be confronted.

-8—

Why is this the case? The main rcason, I think, is the possibility

that sco of the key pararote-s

the t onvern

hou-ing 1:--:avior dcoJ opon

variables that can change over time. For example,
that

tiere

is

cooc evidence

the price elasticity o denanl for housing is a function of income

(Rosen 11979aJ). Thus, to the extent the economic environment changes,
the value of simple comparisons between control and experimental groups

will be diminished.10 In contrast, a properly estimated structural model
would allow an investigator to deal with such a situation.
Additional reasons are provided by Stafford's (1981] discussion of
the general circumstances under which experiment-i results are likely to
be more useful than those from structural models.

First, there must he

reasonable certainty that the programs examined in the expericnt are
the ones which will eventually be considered by policy makers. This is
because by its nature, an experiment can generate information only about
the specific treatments being examined (or interpolations between

Second,

them).

there must be some agreement on the relevant time horizon.

Other-

wise the experiment may not be long enough for one to observe all its effects upon the population.

The application of Stafford's criteria suggests that in the case of

housing allowances, a structural approach is required. A multitude of
housing programs have been considored in the past (see Aaron [1972])

there is no reason to believe that society has settled into a consensus
on the particular programs and parameters studied in EHAP.
'Ising decisions are evidently made by

families

Furthermore,

within a long run frame—

f-k, hut the irecise amount of time required is not known. As noted in

—9—

Section 5,

the problem of

lag lengths is not caav in
structural models, hut at least sortie interesting results have been oh—
below,

estimating

tamed.

For all these reasons, it

is

almost inevitable tnat Fried-ran

and

Weinberg, as well as other investIgators using the experimental data,11
eventually turn to models of the kind used in the analysis of conventional

data. Of course, it may be the case that there are other features of experimental data that make them especially useful, an issue to be discussed

below. But in an area like housing, they do not relieve

investigators

of the burden of constructing theoretical and statistical models.

Definition

2.

of Holsing Services

Given that analyses of both experimental and conventional data require the construction of models, the important question becomes wnether
or not the experirrertal data better facilitate their i.mplementation. Con-

sider, for example, the problem of making operational the left hand side

variable of the equation, "housing services." Housing is intrinsically
a multidimensional commodity -- a dwelling is characterized by its number

of

rooms, their size, the quality of construction and plumbing, etc. It

is therefore very difficult to summarize in a single number the

quanti--

ty

of

is

assumed that the amount of housing services 5 proportional to the

housing services generated by a given dwelling.

Usually t

rent paid, or, in the case of an owner—occupied dwelling, to the value
of the house. (See, e.g., Polinsky and Ellwood [l979]. The
difficulty

- 10

—

here is that the rental value of a dwclling at a given time may reflect
characceristics of the market that have nothing to do with the euar.tity

of housing services actually generated. As King [1980] points out, for
example, the special income tax treatment of rental income will generally influence market values.
An alternative tack would he to abandon the possibility of sunanar.izing housing services i.i a single variable, and instead to estimate a

series of demand functions for various housing attributes. An ianiediate
problem is the absence of observable market prices for attributes.

Recently,

Witte, et. al [1979] have implemented, the suggestion of Rosen [1974] that attri-

bute demand equations be estimated in a two step process: (1) estimate the implicit

attributeprices from an hedonic price equatiorJ2 for housing, and (2)
use these prices as explanatory variables in regressions with attribute

quantities as the dependent variables. However, Brown and Rosen [1980]
have shown that major statistical pitfalls are present in this procedure,

and that the validity of Witte, etal's results is therefore in question.
Although some progress is being made in dealing with these problems (see
Quigley [1980]), the approach that continues to predominate is the use of
rent as the single measure of the quantity of housing services.
Do the EHAP data allow the construction of more meaningful measures

of housing services? The simple answer is no. Friedman and Weinberg

[1978]

vices

,

1°

for

example, struggle with the problem of measuring housing

very much the same way as users of non-experimental data

ser-

(pp. 92—

94). Similarly, Hanusk anP Quigley's [l979a] analysis of EJIAP data
uses housing expenditures as the dependent variable in the demand equations.
Experimental data do not remove this

important

stumbling b1oc.

11 —
— .LJ

3.

Price of kousing kervices

Imagine an irLvec ti g tor with

vations on a •stup of re tors
If the housing

market jE

individuals face the
of any

same

all

(nonexperimcijta1)

of whom coma from

competitive, ii:

seems

cross—sectional obsera aarticuIr comr-onity.

reasonable to assume that all

price of housing services. However, in the ahoence

arice variation, it is impossible to estimate the price elasticity of

demand. investigators with conventional data therefore often ana3yze ohscr-•

vations across cities. Of course, the problem of measuring inter—city housing price variation still remains.

Becausa the price of housing services

is housing expenditures divided by the quantity of housing services, the
above noted difficulties in measuring the latter are bound to create prob-

lems in measuring price. Several possible Solutions are found in the literature. A popular arproach is to estimate hedonic rice equations for different cities, an usa them as the bases

for a housing price index. However,

Alexander 11975] has pointed out several problems with this approach. One
of the most important is that the selection of a set of attributes to be
included
the

in the hedonic price index must be

decided on ad hoc grounds, but

substantive implications of the estimates often depend upon the choice

made.

The user of EHAP data has an advantage in
dealing with the problem
of measuring price diffcrence:s

across observations. Recall that in a

community the effective price of
(4)

F.
1

where

is the pre—trearent

hou$ing facing the individual, P,

(l-n)po
a

Drice of housing, and
is the HP
subsidy rate (equal to zero for members of the control group). Because

— 12

of

the

variance generated in P. by the

C;.

, the

fact that

P

identical across individuals in the community no longer precludes estima—

tion of a price
then

and

can

be normalized at an arbitrary

vaiLle

(4) used as the price term. This approach is used by Friedman

and Weinberg
A

ressonse, P

[1978],and Hanuskek and Quigley 11980].

potential problm is the possibility that the before-treatment

price of rental housing may not be constant within a city. Polinsky and
Eliwood [1979, p. 199] show that even if the market is comcetitive, variation in land prices s.ithin the community will lead to differences in the
13

price of housing services.

However, Hanuskek and Quigley [1980]

argue convincingly that such differences in P0 are unlikely to be of
much imortance in the EHAP samples.

It seems safe to conclude, then,

that the eoerirnental data confer distinct benefits in estimating the
price elasticity of demand for rental housing.14 Ironically, the price

elasticity per se is unlikely to be of much use in designing a housing

allowance program. A percent of rent formula offers such attractive
opportunities
and

4.

for mutually beneficial

fraud on the part of landlords

renters that is hard to imagine it ever

being implemented.

Shift_Variables
Consider now the shift (i.e. ,non-price) variables of equation (3)

Standard theoretical considerations suggest that for income, Y , a

permanent rather than annual measure should be
for h.sve

dealt

used. Previous investi-

with he prohern of computing porrnanot income in

varius ways. Carliner 11.973] and Rosen [1979a] analyzing longitudinal
,

— 13 —

data, take an average of several year ' s worth of annual income. Polinsky

and Eliwood
sume

[1979], using Federal Housing Administration (F1i) data, as-

that the FH.A's estimate

of "effective income is

a proxy for Derrna—

nent income. Struyk [1976] uses the fitted value of a roaression of ina set of personal characteristics as his permanent income measure.
Turning now to the vector Z of other shift variables, note that
investigators with conventional data have to make arbitrary decisions with
come an

respect to which ones to choose, their measurement, and how they interact

with the other variables. Typical candidates for inclusion are race, sex
of head of household, age, numer of children, etc.
In an experimental framework, proper randomization removes the need

for specifying the shift variables (Hausman and Wise [1981]). However,
to the extent that structural models are required to obtain useful re—
suits (see Section 13.1 above), users of EHAP data are at no particular

advantage when

it comes to choosing shift variables, and defining them

appropriately. For example, Friedman and Weinberg's permanent income
measure (p. 54) is constructed using the same kind of averaging discus—
16

sed above. Similarly, their selection of demooraphic variables is made
on an ad hoc basis (p. 81).

5.

Disequilibrium
Most of the studies using cross—sectional data to examine housing

demand iplicit1y or explicitly assume that all agents are in equilibrium.
Were this not the case, then a regression of housing services on price,
income, and demographic variables could not be interoreted as a demand
couation.
data

On the other hand, analyses of

longitudinal

and time

series

often allow for the possibility that at a given point in time, houce—

17

-- 14

hoads
mont

may not be at theIr

long

—

run equilibrium positions beca;o adjust—

costs make it prohibitively expensive to respond immediately

to

changes in economic environment. It is usually assu:.ed that eu:h a dis-equilibrium is
equilibrium

that

eliminated over time as households

move qradualJy

positions18 (e.g., Rosen and Rosen [1980]) .

It

to their

•;wcll—knoe-n

such models lack a strong choice-theoretic foundation, but a tract-

able alternative is lacking.
The equilibrium assumption is just as crucial to the analysis of EHAP
data as to conventional data. Even simple comparisons of the behavior of
the control and treatment groups are less meaningful unless both groups
are observed in equilibrium positions. It is for this reason that Friedman
and Weinberg [1978, p. 71] devote a considerable amount of time to separate
analysis of those households which changed dwelling during the course of
the experiment -- movers are assumed more likely to be in equilibrium than
stayers.

(This, however, creates an important self selection problem which

is discussed in the next section.)

In addition, Friedman and Weinberg utilize the typical partial adjust-

ment model to study dynamic behavior.10 They find rather rapid adjustments
in housing behavior (p. 125) .

Hanushek and Quigley [1979a] present an in-

novative method to estimate adjustment lags in the EHAP data; but their
technique could just as well have beerL implemented using a convc•ntional

set of longitudinal data. Contrary to Friedman and Weinberg, they find

rather sluggish adjustments: only about one-fifth to one—third of the gap
between desired and actual housing consumption is closcd in each year.
One aspect of the EHPP makes proper modelling of disequilibria especial-

ly imoortant. 'or some treatment groups, individuals were ineligible for
housing

allowances unless their

housing met certain quality stenderd. (See

-

Section

II .A, ae3v .) In other words, indiidaj5 wre

sujne minimum

of these

aoount of certain housinq attributes. To the extcn that any

functions for otbr
of the housing bundle would depend not only on prices of the

constraints

attributes

but

were

binding,

then

of the
of attribute demand functions in

attributes,
tion

coristrainei to con—

the quantities

denand

constrained attrihc.os. Estin:-

presence of quantity constraints
is clearly a complicated matter. Unfortunately, given the paucity of
the

work on estimating attribute demands in the relatively simole unconstrained case (see Section II.B.2 above), one cannot expect that the more compli-

cated disequilibrium problem will be solved soon. Such work may provide an
interesting use for EHAP data in the future.

6.

Selectivity Bias

In recent years econometricians have devoted a substantial amount
of effort to the study of statistical problems that arise when the sample

used in a regression analysis is non—random (see Heckman l979].) It has
been shown that if selection into a sample is non—random, then unless certain corrective measures are taken, parameter estimates may be inconsistent.
For example, it is common to estimate separate demand ecscations for renters

and homeowners. However, since individuals self—select into their tenure
modes, the sample selection process is not random, and inconsistent coefficients may result.

(Rosen [1979a].) Similarly, if separate

regressions

are estimated for aovcrs and stayers, sample selection bias is a threat.

Friedman a d einbcrg

As
sample

11979, p.

of low—income households was offered enrollment in the

Rent plans, the demand functions were

viz.,

130] point out, although

.

.housoholds

est. mated

a random

Percent

of

from a ncr—rcnor- schsample;

that accepted the enrollment offer, were verified to

— 16 —

be

within the income eligibility limit, remained in

the

experiment, and

moved sometime between enrollment and two years after enrollment.' Each

of these criteria introduces the possibility of sample selection bias.
Of course, users of EHAP

techniques

data can take advantage of various statistical

to cietermine whether or not selectivity bias is present, arid

if so, to correct for it (Hausman and Wise £1981]). In experimental data,
then, selectivity bias is not eliminated ——

7.

it merely appears in new forms.

Participation in, and Percection of, the Proaram

To predict the aggregate response to a housing allowance progra:i,

one needs to know the nurber of eligible families, and the proportion

of those who would choose to participate. Presumably at least rough information on the first item could be obtained from census or similar

figures on the income distribution. It is hard to imagine how non-experi-

mental data could be used to illuminate the participation issue. Although
some conventional data sets have information on participation rates in
existing welfare procrams (e.g., foodstamps), probably one cannot reliably
infer from them what the patterns of participation in a quite different
program would be.

A related question concerns individuals' perceptions of the program.
In order to use results from conventional data to predict the effect of
housing allowances, one must first of all assume that people would under-

stand the program. Furthermore, it must be assumed that percent-of—rent and
(unconstrained) housing gap payments are perceived as equivalent to price arid incore
changes,

respectively. Although one can test for rational cerception of

— 17

the provisions of existing welfare programs (e.g., williams Ii975)
there is no reason necessarily to expect such results to carry over to
the housing
with

allowances case.

respect to both the participation and perceotion cuesticns,

the experinental data proido interesting insights, but no defn:te conclusions. Clearly, EHAP investigators can observe whether or not individuals participate in the experiment, and correlate participation with

various economic and demograrhic variables. The main problem is that the
results may be affected by the individuals' knowledge that they are involved

in an experiment, the "Hawthorne effect." To the extent that people act
differently when they know that their behavior is being observed as part
of an experiment, it will confound attempts to predict participation under

a universal regime An additional difficulty is that participation rates
21
may be affected by the knowledge that the program is only, temporary.

Friedman arid. Weinberg 11978] attempted direct investigation of the

issue. Fa nilies in the percent of rent experiments were asked

perception

in

what direction their housing allowances would move if their rent were

increased by $10. Only about a half understood that their allowance would
increase. However, when separate demand functions for both those who
understood and those who did not were estimated, the hypothesis that their

parameters were the same could not be rejected. Friedman and Weinberg
[1979, p. 139] conclude that, even for the people who answered the question

incorrectly,
as i they

"

... their

understocd."

response to the allowance payment can be analyzed

—18--

A more convincing test ould have henri possible if there wore van-ation in the pro—treatment rce of housing services. Suppose that the

effective Price P appears in logarithmic form on the right hand side
of the demand equation. 'ote that

nP.1 = n(l-a.)
+ nP 01
1
where P. is the pre—reatment price and o. is as defined above.
Thus, if 2n(l-c.) an 9nP, are entered

separately into the reqres-

to confirm correct perception is to test whether or
coefficients are equal. Equality would suggest that individuals

sion, a natural way

not

their

perceive

treatment induced changes in price the same way

as

those Tlnaturalivu

induced. The advantage of such a test is that it does not rely on a direct
question addressed to the participants. Unfortunately, as noted in Section
II.B.3 above, in the EHAP samples there is probably not enough variation in
the pre-treatrnent prices to make an attempt to calculate them worthwhile.

Another way to

examine the perception issue would be to compare param-

eter estimates of structural models generated by data from different programs
in

the experiment (and the control 9roup) .

If selection into the various

groups were random, and if individuals perceive program parameters correctly,

then the underlying behavioral parameters should be about the same. Of course,
to the extent that the particular specification of the structural model influences the results, they are rendered incbnclusive.

— 19

Sienul" Exernc:nt

115.

most analyses of housing demand using both

In

sectional and EPP
housing

supply

data,

it

is

conventional

cross-

assumed that the yre-treatment crice of

is constant. In effect, each household faces a cerfeotlv slastic

of housino services. From an econometric point of view, this

assumption is justified, because each household is sufficiently small
22

to be regarded as a price taker.

However, sole reliance on such do—

mand estimates to predict the overall behavioral response to housing
allowances is potentially hazardous. If a considarable number of
program participants increase their demand for housing services, then
to the extent the supply of housing services to the community slopes
upward, the pre—treatment price will rise.
Considerations such as these led, to the so-called Supply Experiment.

In two communities, all individuals who met certain income qualifications

were made eligible for housing allowances. The idea was to see whether
or not the allowances would induce increases in prices or any other impor—

tant disruptions in the housing market
In this Section I begin by summarizing the provisions of the supply
experiment, and then, as before, discuss whether or not EHAP data provide
substantial
he

improvement over those from conventional sources,

As might

expected, many of the issues that were important on the demand side are

also

present here. Such issues therefore receive only cursory discussion.

— 20

A.

—

Description of the Supoly_Exnerinon

The supply experiment began in 1973—74, with a planned duration of
10

years. In the two sites chosen, Green say, Nisconsin and Scuth lend,

Indiana, enrollment in the procrari was open to every eligible nouSenold.
All payments were made according to the "housing gap formula" (ecuation

(1)),

with b , the imolicit tax rate on income, set at 25. In

order

to

qualify for the payments, housing had to meet certain minimum standards.
Unlike the demand experiment, homeowners as well as renters were allowed

to participate. Perhaps the key methodological difference between the demand and supply experiments is that for the latter, there was no control
group.

After four years of observation at both sites, it became clear that
"The experimental progra:l ... had virtually no effect on housing prices,

either marketwiae or in the market sectors most heavily populated by

program participants' (Earnett and Lowry 11979, p. 1].) There eie two
principal explanations for this phenomenon:

(a) Because the income

elasticity of demand for housing services apparently is quite low
for program
25
participants,
(about 0.3 for renters, according to I4ulford [1979,

p. 31]) the housing allowances did not shift the market demand curve

very much, and (b) The demand changes that did take place were spread
ut over time due to adjustment lags. Since both of these phenomena were observed in the demand experiment, some critics [Brookings, 1979] have argued that
supply experiment should not have commenced until the demand

overthe1ess,
Cf

it is useful

experimental

sur)rly.

results_wera.in.

to assess the benefits that the availability

26

data will confer upon future researchers of housing

the

21 —

B.

Problems in_Predicting the Su:1y

Response

to Housing T-dlcances

Snecfcation of a Model

1.

Investigators who

wadt

to estimate housing SUiY functio:s geocrel—

ly begin by trying to use economic theory to

specify an estimable model.

A popular approach is to assume some housing production function, estimate

its paramete,and use them to infer the shape of the suoply function'
For example, Ingram and Orun [1977] asme that housing services are a
constant elasticity of substitution (C.E.S.) function of "quality capital"

and "operation inputs" (p. 284). Polinsky and Eliwood (1979] also posit

a C.E.S. production function, but assume that its arguments are land and
capital. Field tundate] uses a transcendental logarithm production function with three inputs, land, capital and labor. Poterba 11980] eschews
selection of a specific form for the production function, and instead
starts by postulatiric a supply function that is log linear in the price

of

housing, input costs, and credit availability (p. 10).

COf course, duality

considerations suggest that one can work backward from the supply cu:c'.'e to the

-underlying production function.)

The specification of the underlying technology can sometimes pre-

determine substantive results. For example, since Eliwood and PolinskyIp79]
assume constant returns to scale (p. 201) the iriplied long run scpply

curve of housing services is perfectly elastic, regardless of parameter

estimates?8
that

Postulating such

a techno].cgy then, guaroritec che result

housing allowances will have no effect on the pre—treatment price

— 22

of

housing, at least as long as in:ut

teresting

questions then

--

prices

become bow high

remain unchanged. The in-

do prices rise in the short run,

and how much time is required to reach long run equi1ibriup? These issues are discussed below in the section on dynamics; they are rtioned
to emphasize once again the importance that model specification plays
in analyses of conventional data.
here

The presence of

necessity

the supply "experimental' data does not remove the

for some kind of modelling,

control group.

particularly since there is no

Barnett 11979], for example, provides some simple

comparisons of the increase in rents in the test sites relative to those

in other U.S. cities (. 13).

Even such relatively straightforward compari-

sons, however, require an implicit model of the determinants of housing
costs, so that 'other' costs can be Subtracted out to find the 'pure

housing allowance effect. Rydell 11979] constructs a rather involved model
of monopolistic competition in housing markets in order to assess the

market impact of allowances. He simulates the model with experimental
data, but this could have been done just as well with numbers from conventional sources.

-- 23

2,3

Defi

-

ning Housnq Services and Their Price

The problems in defining housing services and tneir price are of

course as central to supply as demand. Those studying the supply c
housing with conventional data have made exactly the same sort of as-

sumptions in constructing teir price and quantity variables; see
Poterba [1980], Ingram and Cron

In

11977] or Rothenberg 11977]

this regard, the numbers

generated

by the supply experiment arc no

better than conventional data. Indeed, the difficulties associated

with

the multidimensional nature of housing are particularly vexing

because one of HAP's mandates was to find out what combination

here,

of rehabilitation of existing units, construction of new units, and irn—

provement of neighborhocd quality would be induced by houing allowances
(Allen, at. al, [1979, p. 141). To answer this question, one would need

to

quantify these attributes, compute their implicit prices, and then es-

timate supply curves or each. As noted above, researchers have still
not solved completely the problems associated with estimating demand and
supply schedules for characteristics, and nothing about experimental data
per se makes this task any elsier.

4.

Shift Variables

In a cornpetit3.ve model, the supply of housing services depends not

only upon their orn price, hut upon inpuL prices as well, so thee are
important shift variables. Housing studies using conventional
data face

of

serious difficulties in

obtaining

operational measures

housing input ccst. For example, Poterba [1980] usos the Poeckh

index

of the price of inputs

for a new one family structure to

— 24

—

construction costs. Although this is a comonlv used index, it.
is well—known that it is deficient because fixed weights arc used in its

measure

connotation. Inoram and Oran ld17j use the fuel component of the cansumei-'s price index to account for the price of all onerating inputs, nut
as Rothenbcrg [1977]

points out,

it is not clear that

this iricko cantures

all the needed information.

With respect to measuring the prices of housing inputs the experi-

mental data provide no particular advantage. For example, Rydell [1979,
p. 36] must make calculations regarding the costs of components of gross

rent similar to those who use conventional data. It should be noted, however,
that these appear to be some of the most careful computations available.

5,6 Disequilibrium and Dynamic

Issues

As suggested above, many models of housing supply begin with

a

pro-

duction function which exhibits constant returns to scale in the inputs.
Given this specification, and assuming constant input prices,the long run

supply of housing services is infinitely elastic. Thus, any demand shift
induced by a housing allowance will leave unchanged the long run price of
housing services. Fowever, the question of supply response is still interesting, because the production function does not indicate the length

of

time required to reach long run equilibrium, or the path

of

prices

during the transition. To understand the supply response, t is
crucial to model noth the process of adjustment to the new

and the presence cf any

factors

which might impede the

equilibrium,

market

from achiev-

ing equilibrium.

Thus, for axample, in one of their models Ingram and Oron 11977, p.

292] assume tba the most a landlord can invest

each

period i

limited to

—25-

the amount of cash generated by the existing investment, even if this is

insufficient to close the qap bet eon the desired and actual :riosing
stock. Poterba 11980] argues that conditions in the credit market may
the supply of housing, and he proxies these by the flow of savings

affect

deposits received by savings and loan associations. Poterba also assumes
a delayed supply response to changes in all right hand side variables,
which are entered in polynomial distributed lags (p. 10).
The designers of the supply experiment clearly were aware of the

importance

of lags in the housing supply process, as witnessed by the

fact that the experiment was given a ten year duration

five

(although only

years worth of data were collected). Because there was no control

group, however, there are no simple comparisons that one can make in
order to learn how movements toward the final equilihriinrt take place.

My guess is that even if there had been a control group (call it '8outh
Bend Prime"), structural models would still be more useful than experimen-

tal comparisons for determining the lag structure. By the time a decade
had lapsed, it is quite possible that a number of variables whicn influence adjustment patterns would have changed,so comparisons of south

Ber and "South Bend Prime" would not be

7.

very

informative.

Market Environment
In the demand experiment it was unnecessary to study market environ—

ment,

since

changes

the key question was how micro units

reacted

to exogenous

in their budget constraints. But to understand ovora.JJ effects,

the question of market structure is crucial —— the
allowances

impact of the

housing

on pre-treatment price clearly will depend mutatis mutandis

— 26 —

the degree o coupetitiveness in the market, the amount
of slack existing when the program is initiated, the extent o:E housing
upon

market

segmentation, etc.

The standard assumption is that competition prevails. As de Leeuw

arid Struyk [1975] and Poterha [1980] note, however, even given comoetition,
complications arise because two markets have to be equilibrated by the

price of housing services; the market for existing houses and the market
for new construction•

The situation is even more complicated when

one takes into account the multiplicity of tenure modes. Each type of
housing is traded in its own submarket, and each of these (interre1ated)
markets has a market clearing price. If the housing market is non-competitive, the question of supply effects is even more difficult because of the

absence of a generally accepted theory of price determination. Theoretically, one can imagine examining a group of cities that are identical except for housing market structure, and comparing the results when

are

subjected to housing allowances.

(Indeed, something of this

they

notion

was behind the selection of Green Bay and South Bend as the experimental

sites.)

In practice, such a course would be prohibitively expensive,

even if it were possible to find an appropriate group of cities. Again,
construction of structural models appears to be the more viable methodol-

ogy. For example, using data from the supply experiment, Rydeli [1979]
attempts to explain the insensitivity of housing prices to apparent variations

in

This is an

titiori.

mental

market tightness by

recourse

interesting

to a theory of monopolistic compe--

approach, but the availability ef experi-

data provides ro special advantage when it comes to testing its

va1idi ty.

—

IV.

—

Conclusion

The EJDerirnental Housing Allowance Program has generated a rich and

valuable set of data on the housing behavior of lower

income

Americans.

These data anpear to have been analyzed carefully and creatively by

the

EHAP investigators, although it is doubtless that their conclusions will

be challenged as the numbers are studied by other investigators.

2

The

issue discussed in this paper is the extent to which the experimental

nature of these data per se enhances their vaiue Specifically, are the
problems faced by investigators who have used conventional data to predict behavioral response to housing allowaices in any way mitigated
by the availability of experimental data?
With the possible exception of experimentally induced variations in
housing prices, it seems that the experimental data offer no particular

advantages. Fundamentally, this is because housing behavior is so complex,
and the policy environment so uncertain, that simple comparisons of experi-

mental and control groups are unlikely to be of much interest. Rather, the
data must be interpreted with the help of theoretical and statistical models.
Thus, if the goal was to obtain new and improved estimates of the behavioral

response to housing allowances, a social experiment was not necessary. The
30

money would have been better spent on augmenting conventional data sources.

- 23

Ref erencos

Aaron,

Hanry.

Brookings

1972. Sheters and Subsidies. Washincton,

Institution.
1979.

_______

D. C.:

Policy Imp]ications of the Housing

iinents: a Progress Report.

A11o.Tncc Lxper—

Mimeo. Washington, D.C.:

The

Brookings

Institution.
Abbott, Michael, and Ashenfelter, Orley. October 1976. Labor Supply,
Commodity Demand, and the Allocation of Time. Review of Economic

Studies 43: 389—411.

Alexander, W. E. 1975. Coriunent. Annals of Economic and Social 1easurement 4:

175—78.

Allen, Garland E., Fitts, Jerry A. and Glatt, Evelyn S.

1979. The Ex-

perimental Housing Allowance Program (E.H.A.P.). Mimeo.

Barnett, C. Lance. January 1979. Expected and Actual Effects of Housing
Allowances on Housing Prices. Working Paper. The Rand Corporation.

Barnett,

C. Lance and Lowry, Ira S.

September 1979. How Housing Allow-

ances Effect Housing Prices. Paper R-2452-HUD. The Rand Corporation.

Barro, Robert C. and Grossman, Hershel I.

1971. A General Disequilibrium

Model of Income and Employment. American Economic

Brookings Institution.

thi Conf:re.

Review 61: 82—93.

1979. Summary of Key Points of Controvcrsy at

-29—

Brown, James N. and Rosen, Harvey S. August 1980. A Note on the Estimation of

Poinoeton University.

Geoffrey. 1973. Income Elasticity of Housing Demand.

Carliner,

of

Structural Hedonic Price Models. Mince,

Economics and Statistics 55:

do LCCUW, Frank
Washington,

523—32.

and Struyk, Raymond J. 1975. The Web

of Urban Housing.

D.C.: The Urban Institute.

Field, Barry C. Undated. Estimating Substitution Elasticities in
with

at

RevIew

Housing

a Translog Cost Function. Mimeo. University of Massachusetts

Amherst.

Friedman, Joseph and Weinberg, Daniel. Seetember 1978. Draft Report on
the Demand for Rental Housing: Evidence from a Percent of Rent Hdusing

Allowance. Working Paper. Abt Associates, Inc.

Hanushek, Eric A. and Quigley, John M. 1979a. The Dynalriics of the Housing

Market: a Stock Adjustment Model of Housing Consumction. Journal of
Urban Economics 6: 90-111.

_____________________________

November l979b. Complex Public

Subsidies and Complex Household Behavior: Consumption Aspects of

Housing Allowances. Mimeo. University of Rochester.

_____

_____________

_____

August 1980. What is the Price

of Elasticity of Housing Demand? Review of Economics and Statistics

LXII:3: 449—54.

Hausman, J.

A. and

Wise, David A. January 1980. Discontinuous Pudet

Constraints and Estimation: The Demand for Housing. RevJoof
Economic Studies XLVII: 75—96.
_____

1981.

_______________________

Technical Problems in

Social

Experimentation: Cost Versus Ease of Analysis. Himeo. Harvard
University.

Beckman, James. January 1979. Sample Bias as a Specification Error.

Econometrica 47:1: 153—62.

Ingram, Gregory K. and Oron, Yitzhak. 1977. The Production of Housing
Services from Existing Dwelling Units. In Ingram, Gregory K.,, ed.,

Residential Local and Urban Housing Markets. Cambridge, MA:

Eallinger Publishing Company: 273-314.

King, Mervyn A. October 1980. An Econometric Model of Tenure Choice
and Demand for Housing as a Joint Decision. Journal of Public

Economics 14: 137—60.

Mills, Edwin S. and Sullivan, Arthur. 1979. Market Effects of the Experimental Housing Allowance Program. Mimeo. Princeton University
Nosteiler, Frederick, and Mosteller, Gale. 1979. New Statistical Methods
in Public Policy, Part 1:

Experimentation. Journal of Contemporary

Business 8: 79—92.

Mulford, John E. February 1979. The Income Elasticity of Housing LrrLar1d.
Working Paper R-2449-IIUD. The Rand Corporation

— 31 —

Polinsky, A. Mitchell and Eliwood, David T. May 1979. ? Empirical Re—
conciliation
ing.

Poterba,

of Micro and Grouped Estimates

Review of

James

N.

of the Deinard for Hous-

Economics anf Statistics LXI: 9—2Cc.

September l2O. Inflation, Income Taxes and

Owner Oc-

Economic
cupied Housing. Working Paper No. 553. National Eureau of

Research.
Quigley, John M. September 1980. Non-Linear Budget Constraints and
Consumer Demand: an Amplication to Public Prograrns for Residential

Housing. Mimeo. University of California, Berkeley.
Rand Corporation. May 1980. Sixth Annual Report of the Housing Assistance Supply Exoeriment. Santa Monica, CA.

Rosen, Harvey S. February l979a. Housing Decisions and the U.S. income
Tax: An Econometric Analysis. Journal of Public Economics 11: 1—23.

________________

April

1979b. Owner-Occupied Housing and the Federal In-

come Tax: Estimates and Simulations. Journal of Urban Economics 6:
247-66.

Rosen, Harvey S. and Rosen, Kenneth T. February 1980.

Federal Taxes and

HomeownerShip: Evidence from Time Series. Journal of Political
Economy 88: 59—75.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1974. Hedonic Prices and Irrplicit Markets. Journal of

Political Economy 82: 34—55.

— 32.

Rothenberg! Jerome. 1977. Comments on Chapter 8. In Ingram, Crccjor' K.,
ad., Residential Location and Urban housing_Markots. Cambridge, M?:
Ballinger Publishing Company: 315—21.

Rydeli, C. Peter. SeptexrLber
to

79. Sbortrun Response of Housircj Parkcts

Demand Shifts. Working Paper R-2453-HUD.

Rand Corporation.

Stafford, Frank P. 98l. Income Maintenance Policy and Work
Learning from Experiments and Labor Market

Studies.

Effort:

Mimeo.

University

of Michigan.

Struyk, Ra''mond J.

1976. Urban Homeornership.

Lexington, MA: Lexington

Books.

Williams, Robert George. 1975. Public Assistance and Work Effort.
Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section.

itte, Ann D., Surnka, Howard J. and Erekson, Homer. 1979. An Estimate
of a Structural Hedonic Price Model of the Housing Market: an Application of Rosen's Theory of Implicit Markets. Econometrica 47:
1151-73.

— 33

Footnote s

I

*

would like to thank Joseph Friedman, Jerry Hausman, Ed:in Mills,

Mitchell Polinsky and David Wise for useful conversations.

1.

A more fundamental question, perhaps, is why housing allo'ances

should

be considered at all when direct income transfers would probah1y

be preferable from th point of view of the poor. We

will

take it

as

given, however, that the public policy goal is to increase their welfare
in some manner tied to housing consumption.

2.

This sub—section is based upon Allen, etal. [l979 ,

especially

pages 28—30.

3.

The definition of Tthousehold income" was essentially post tax 'in-

come less a $300 deduction for each worker in the family.

4.

For example, in 1973 a Phoenix family with

three

or four members

would be eligible only if its income were less than $8150; for Pittsburgh,
the limit was $6250.

5.

This assumes that individuals' choices are unconstrained by quality

standards.

6,

For examnic, the nrice elasticity of dnan is

and 2

arc

(usually) evaluated at their mean vnlne;.

where

P

— 34 —

7.

Note that this need not imply

across

individuals;

that

the elasticities be identical

such will be Lhe case only for the very simple Cobb—

Douglas specification. One can also specify a random coefficients model,

which allows for a distribution of elasticities across peopic. See
Hausmsn and. Wise [i9O]

8.

This point is further developed in Mosteller and Nosteller [19791.

9.

Friedman and Weinberg of Abt Associates bring together a wealth of

information on the demand experiment: the economic theoip behind it,
sample design issues, statistical analysis of the data, and more. It is
a pity that no similar major report has been issued by the Rand Corporation for the supply experiment.

10.

One can rescue the experimental approach from this criticism by

building income-price interactions into the experimental design. However, as Hausmnan and Wise [1981] point out, the more treatment groups,

the less convincing are the results, ceteris paibus.

11.

See, e.g., Hanushek and Quigley D979a1,Milis and Sullivan 979,

or Hausman ac1 Wise 980.

12.

A regression of the prlce of a commodity R on its characteristics

(a vector X )

is

the basis of an hedonic price index for the commodity.

The implicit price of the th characteristic is R/X. .
[19741

See Rosen

— 35 -

13.

If housing services include accessibility to the work place and

the usual competitive asshmptiOnS ho'd, then the before treatment once

of housing services would be constant. But in this case, the
variable should be housing
that

ply

tive

dependent

expenditures plus conmuting costs. Pote also

if owner—occupied housing were being considered (as it 15 Ifl
experiment)

the

sup-

an additional complication would arise because the effec-

price of housing services depends upon the individual's marginal

federal income tax rate. See Rosen [l979a]or King '980]

14.

However, the value of these benefits is lessened to the extent that

the program induced price reductions are perceived as transitory.

15.

Of course, neither the necessity of using a permanent income mea-

sure nor the types of solutions just mentioned are unique to the study of
housing; they appear throughout the literature on the

estimation

of demand

functions.

16.

An additinnal problem arises because

it is not clear how to convert

the monthly EHAP payments, which are known to be temporary, into changes
in permanent income.

17.

An important exception is the work of King 98OI, who

rationing

ie.

considers

between different tenure modes in the United Kingdom.

This differs from the use of the tnm

"disequilibrium"

in much of

acrceconoriC 3 iterature, where it refers to a situation in which
markets fail to clear because of some constraint(s). See, e.g., Eanro
the

and Grossman ft9711

— 3o

19.

Unfortunately, as Friedman and Wcirberg a978, p. 127 ]ncoo, dynamic

patterns

20.

niqhL

be

affected by the limited duration of the exj:crir:iena.

Of course, Hawthorne effects can

results

21.

—

used. to brin9 into

cucatica tbc

coancrated by all social exuerimonts.

Particoation was

housing

be

orohably also influenced by

the existence of minimum

standards. Some critics of EHAP have claimed greater variation in

these standards would have provided useful information on the extent to
which they influenced participation.

See Brooking Intitution [1979,

p. 10].

22.

For many homeowners, the federal income tax generates an endogenous

price for housing services.

23.

Barnett and Lowry ft979, p. c] discuss some predictions of the

market effects of housing allowances that were made prior to ERA?.

[1979],

24.

This subsection is based upon Allen, et. al. ,

25.

In addition, only about half the eligible renters and 30% of the

eligible
p.

26.

homeo,mers had enrolled after four

(1len, et.ai., [1979,

35).
Several researchers have used data from the supply experiment to

O5tllCtC demand for housing schedulos ,

not

years

he discussed here.

e.g. , 1ulford

p.979 .

T'cc

wiJ I

— 37 —

27.

Given the production function and input prices, one can dv: the

marginal cost schedule which, under competition, is the sunpl'y cu::v.
28.
see

The assumption of a horizontal supply curve is quite comnori, e .

.

dLeeu and Struyk [1975, p. 15]. Of course, to the e:ent that :n•ut

prices change with the size of the housing industry, the long mn su'Tply
curve will have a non—zero slope.

29.

For example, Mills and Sulljvan [1979] have su;gested that problems

with econometric technique lead the EHAP investigators to underestimate
income elasticities from the demand experiment.

30.

68]

A similar conclusion is reached by Hanushek and Quigley L1979b, p.

