NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REAL EXCHANGE RATE ADJUSTMENT AND THE
WELFARE EFFECTS OF OIL PRICE DECONTROL

Paul Krugman

Working Paper No. 658

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

April 1981

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #658
April 1981

Real Exchange Rate

Adjustment

and the

Welfare Effects of Oil Price Decontrol

ABSTRACT

Conventional analysis of the welfare effects of U.S. oil price regu—
lation in the 1970's focuses on the deadweight losses in the oil market.
This paper argues that such analysis substantially understates the benefits
from decontrolling prices, because decontrol will lead to an improvement
in the U.S. terms of trade with respect to other oil importing countries.
A simple model of the relationship between oil decontrol and the terms of
trade is developed, and the impact is calculated for plausible parameter

values. The results suggest that the terms of trade benefits are several
times larger than the benefits as conventionally measured.

Paul Krugman
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute

of Technology E52—252
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
(617) 253—2655

Introduction

What are the benefits from decontrolling U.S. oil prices? Essentially,
decontrol is a way of reducing oil imports by increasing domestic supply and
reducing domestic demand. Reduced imports, in turn, release resour-ces for

other uses: if the U.S. spends less on oil imports, it can export less
or import more of other goods. The standard analysis of oil price decontrol
argues that the social cost of imported oil, in terms of additional exports
or foregone imports of other goods, can be measured by the world price --

or

perhaps by the world price plus a premium reflecting the political costs of dependence. Decontrol , by bringing the prices faced by producers and con-

sumers closer to this true social cost, leads to a better allocation of
resources.

The purpose of this paper is to argue that the world price of oil
does not measure the social cost of oil imports to the U.S. -- even thouyh
it may be the right measure if we consider the interests of the oil—importing

countries as a whole. The reason for this lies in the process by which a
reduction in oil imports releases resources for other uses. Only a fraction
of these resources will be released through a direct, compensating reduction

in U.S. exports to OPEC. For the most part, the gains from U.S. decontrol
will take the form of reduced exports to and increased imports from other

oil—importing countries. To effect these changes In trade flows, the
dollar will have to appreciate in real terms. But this appreciation, by
improving America's terms of trade, provides a secondary benefit from
decontrol.

The thesis of this paper, then, is that the benefits of oil price
decontrol come primarily via a real appreciation of the dollar; and that
because the U.S. has substantial monopoly power in world trade, these
benefits are much larger than a simple consideration of the value of oil

2.

imports saved would indicate. This argument is presented in four parts.
Section 1 presents the standard analysis of oil price controls, then dis-

cusses its problems. Section 2 develops a model which captures the
essential role of real exchange rate adjustment. Section 3 then carries
out a computation of the gains from decontrol using plausible parameter
values. Finally, Section )4 discusses some of the international implications
of this analysis.

1. The Conventional Analysis of Decontrol
The conventional analysis of the U.S. oil price control system —-

as presented, for example, by Arrow and Kalt (1979 )

-- is

based on a

partial equilibrium model of the oil market. A simplified version
such a model is illustrated in Figure 1.

of

tn the figure, SS is the domestic

3.

P

w

I

A
PS

B

+

Figure 1

Q

1
supply curve for oil, DD the domestic demand. P

is the world price, D

the price charged to consumers, PS the controlled producer price. Under
the entitlements system, the prices of domestic oil supply Q and imports
were averaged, so that
Qs

D

S

Decontrolling
the import price

÷

W

oil prices means allowing both

and D to rise to

Using conventional producer and consumer surplus

measures, the overall benefit is the sum of the deadweight production
gain, measured by the shaded triangle BDE, and the deadweight consumption

gain, measured by FHG. The political economy of controls also appears
clearly, since the aggregate net benefits are the sum of a producer gain
ACEB and a consumer loss CFHJ.

The important thing to notice about this diagram is that it does not

directly show how these net benefits are realized. The costs of decontrol
are the extra resources devoted to oil production, and the reduced use of

oil, both of which can be read directly from the diagram. The benefits,
however, are measured only by the reduction in oil imports, which is not

a good in itself. We value a reduction in oil imports only because it
allows the U.S. to export less or to import more of something else.
There is one case in which the route by which reductions in oil imports

release resources for other uses would be direct. Suppose that every dollar
reduction in U.S. imports from OPEC were to be matched by an equal reduction in OPEC purchases from the U.S. -—

i.e.,

suppose OPEC had a marginal

propensity to spend on U.S. goods of one. Then reduced oil imports would
translate directly into a reduction in resources used to produce goods

5.
and services for OPEC.
In reality, however, OPEC's marginal propensity to spend on U.S.
exports -- even in the long run, when OPEC spending and income are equal

will be much less than one. Most of the reduction in OPEC's income will
be reflected in reduced imports from other countries, rather than from

the U.S. This means that the U.S. will realize most of its benefits
not through a reduction in resources devoted to supplying OPEC with
goods and services, but in exporting less to and importing more from other
oil importing countries.

The mechanism through which this will be accomplished is through

real exchange rate adjustment. Reduced U.S. oil imports will mean an
initial U.S. balance of payments surplus, leading to dollar appreciation.
As the dollar rises, U.S. exports will fall and U.S. non—oil imports will

rise, the process continuing until balance of payments equilibrium is re-

stored. The principal channel through which oil decontrol benefits the
economy is through the exchange rate.

Will the Lwelfare triangles" in Figure 1 still give an appropriate

measure of these benefits? The answer is no. As the dollar appreciates,
the U.S. will experience an improvement in its terms of trade with respect

to other oil importers. This is a secondary benefit which is not reflected
in the world price of oil.

2. A Theoretical Model
In this section I present a model which takes account of the crucial

role of the real exchange rate in realizing the benefits of oil price de-

control. Although I make a number of simplifying assumptions, the model

is difficult to treat analytically except in special cases. Thus in the
next section some plausible parameter values are assigned and the model
is solved numerically.

6,

The basic structure of the model

follows

my own

earlier

work (Krugman

l9l) in adopting a compromise between partial and general equilibrium
analysis.

I divide the world into three regions: two oil—importing regions

and OPEC. The two importing regions are treated in partial equilibrium
fashion: their imports from OPEC and from each other depend only on
nominal prices in domestic currency (so that I neglect possible changes

in output and price levelsL OPEC, however, is treated differently. The
effect of changes in the quantity ot oil imported on OPEC's income, and
the effects of changing OPEC income on OPEC's imports, are explicitly
taken into account.

In effect, an "elasticities" approach is used for

oil importers but an "absorption" approach for OPEC. This asymmetrical
treatment can be defended as a resonable approximation to a situation in
which OPEC's marginal propensity to import other countries' goods is much

higher than their marginal propensity to import oil. And the hybrid
partial-general model is much simpler than a full general—equilibrium
treatment.1"

The equations of the model fall into four blocks: the equations
determining oil prices, outputs, and imports; the equations describing
OPEC behavior; the equations of international exchange;and a set of

equations measuring welfare impacts. Since we do not know much about
functional forms, linearity is assumed wherever possible to simplify
the computations in Section 3.

A.

The oil market.

The world price of oil is assumed to be set by OPEC, with oil

erastcally supplied at that price,

It is assumed that OPEC partially

indexes the price to the exchange rate between the dollar and other
currencies:

7.

=

- Ij

+

(OPEC pricing)

where E is the dollar price of non-US currency and

(1)

is a coefficient

of indexation.

Inside the U.S., pricing depends on the regime: the price received
by suppliers is exogenously fixed under controls, equal to the world
price after decontrol:
=
=

P

(controls)

(2)

(decontrol)

(21)

Consumer prices are a weighted average of domestic and import prices
under controls, equal to world prices after decontrol:
=

(controls)

S'°D + w

S

=

(decontroL)

(3)

(31)

The U.S. demand for oil is decreasing in the dollar price; the supply
is increasing in the price; imports are the difference between supply and
demand:

=

—D

=

+

-

=

Finally,

-

(oil

demand)

(4)

-

(oil

supply)

(5)

(p5

(oil

imports)

(6)

foreign imports depend negatively on the foreign currency

price of oil:

=

- 3'

[PIE —

PIE]

(foreign oil imports)

B. OPEC behavior.
OPEC's income comes from sales of oil to the two oil importers:

(7)

8.

=P

w [Qm

+ Q')
m

()

(OPEC income)

I assume that OPEC always spends a share c of that income on
U.S. goods:
X0 =

aV

(OPEC imports from us)

(9)

C. Trade and the exchange rate.
The U.S. is assumed to have a perfectly elastic supply of exports at

a fixed price in domestic currency. The demand for these exports
from the other oil importer depends on their price in foreign currency
and hence positively on the exchange rate:
X =

X

+

[E-]

(10)

Similarly, non—oil imports are available at a fixed price in foreign
currency, so that the domestic currency price and demand depend negatively
on the exchange rate:

1= I- IE-EJ

(11)

Finally, we come to balance of payments equilibrium. This is a
static model.

I have elsewhere developed a model in which it is clear

that a change in energy policy will set in motion a dynamic process of
payments imbalances and exchange rate changes.

In the long run, the

result is a restoration of current account balance. Here V will suppress
the dynamic complications and assume that the exchange rate immediately
adjusts to maintain trade balance:
X + X 0

El

- P

Q =0
wm

(12)

D. Welfare.
The welfare gains tram decontrol can be measured in either of two

equivalent ways. The first, which is more fundamental, is to measure the

9.

gains as the sum of the utility gained from increased consumption of
non—oil imports and the utility lost from oil imports foregone, less
the cost of resources used to produce oil and exports:
U =

E

+

[I —

'D

I]

+ - [E-EJ [I—I]

+

°D -

-

—k

(13)

- D -

[P0

- (X)

[P -

(x00)

(aggregate change in welfare)

Alternatively -- and equivalently -- we can measure the change in
welfare by the changes i:n consumers' surplus in the import and oil markets,

and producers' surplus in the oil market:
U0 =

D
—T

(P0

+

-

(hf)

P0)

(E-) + j3 (E-

(change in consumer surplus)

u =

(15)
(change in producer surplus)

It is tedious to prove but true that U =

U0

+

US;

i.e., these are

in fact equivalent ways of computing the welfare effects of decontrol.

Equation (13) is useful as a way of partitioning the welfare effects by
their source; (hf) and (15) let us apportion them by their recipients.
We are now prepared to work through the consequences of oil price
decontrol.

3.

Computing the Effects of Decontrol.

A. An overview.
The effects of decontrol can be decomposed into two parts: the
direct effects holding the exchange rate fixed, and the indirect effects

10.

resulting from the induced exchange rate change. Before calculating
these effects, it is useful to talk them through.

Holding E constant, the behavior of the oil sector is exactly
that illustrated by Figure 1, above. Domestic supply rises), domestic

demand falls, hence imports of oil fall. A reduction in U.S. oil imports
means a reduction in OPEC income, and this in turn will mean a fall in
OPEC's demand for U.S. exports.
Unless all of the fall in OPEC spending falls on U.S. goods, however ——

a = 1 in equation (9) -— the story will not stop here. Instead, since
P will fall more than X0, an incipient balance of payments surplus
will develop, requiring an appreciation of the dollar. This will then
produce a whole second round ot effects. The dollar price of oil will
fall (slightly); U.S. exports to the other oil importer will fall, U.S.
non—oil imports rise.

The welfare consequences will depend on both the inItital set of

effects and the second round. The partial equilibrium analysis of Figure 1
will give the right results only if there is no second round. By inspecting (l1) and (15), one can see that if the exchange rate does not
change, the effects will reduce to consumer and producer surplus in the
oil market. But the exchange rate can remain unchanged in only two ci rcum-

stances. Either OPEC must spend any marginal change in income entirely on
U.S. goods (a = 1); or U.S. goods must be perfect substitutes for foreign

goods (

+

= co). Since neither of these seems reasonable, it is

necessary to go through a full-scale computation.

B. Assumed parameters.
Tables I and II present the numbers that will be used in calculating
the impact of oil decontrol.

In Table I are the constant terms from the

11.

model ; the model is normal ized so that at an exchange rate of one, these

constant terms are also the equilibrium values in the presence of price

controls on oil. The numbers are chosen so as roughly to reproduce the
situation in 1978, with the U.S. importing half its consumption. Several
unrealistic features should, however, be noted. First, the complexities
of the price regulations on U.S. oil production are ignored: all oil is

assumed to be sold at theaverage price. Second, the entitlements system
is assumed to work as planned; thus I ignore the apparent fact that perhaps half of the rents from controls went to middlemen, not consumers.

Third, the effects of small-refiner bias are ignored. Finally, the
initial position is one of balanced trade, with the actual OPEC surplus
arid oil importer deficits eliminated by a proportional scaling-up of
OPEC's imports.

Table II presents the assumed parameter values. These are all
slopes, but the final column shows the implied elasticity in the
neighbonhood of the initial equilibrium.

I have attempted to choose

reasonable values based on a variety of empirical estimates.
Clearly, the numbers used here are far from being the best that

careful research could produce. Thus the results should be regarded as
illustrative rather than as a definitive estimate of the benefits and
costs of decontrol.

C. Partial equilibrium results
For comparison purposes, it is useful to have an estimate

the

welfare effects of decontrol ignoring the exchange rate adjust: ::c. That

is, we can use the equations describing the U.S. oil market to compute a

conventional, partial equilibrium set of results. These results are reported in Table III.

Oil imports are calculated to fall by about one

12.

Table I: Eguilibriumwith Controls

Variable

PS

Description

World oil price in dollars

114.5

Controlled price of US oil

9.0

Price to US consumers

Qs

Value

US

oil production

11.75

3.0

US oil consumption

6.0

Non-US oil imports

7.0

X

US non—OPEC exports

151

I

US non—oil imports

E

Exchange rate
US exports to OPEC

136.5
1.0

29

13.

Table II: Parameter values
Parameter

Description

Indexation of OPEC price to
exchange rate

Value

7.25

Implied elasticity

0.5

Oil supply response

.067

0.2

Oil demand response

.235

0.5

Foreign oil import response

.241

0.5

302

2.0

Export price response
Non-oil import price response

OPEC marginal propensity to
import US products

136.5

1.0

0.2

1.0

1 i.

Table III: Partial equilibrium computation of decontrol effects

Increase in oil supply

.3625

Reduction in oil demand

.6625

Gain in producer surplus

17.51

Loss in consumer surplus

15.61

Net gain

1.90

of which:
Production gain

1.01

Consumption gain

0.89

15.

billion barrels, producing a net gain ot 1.9 billion dollars.

It is

noticeable that this net gain is quite small compared with the redis-

tribution of income from consumers to producers. (We should keep in mind,
however, that the actual redistribution has in practice been much smaller,
since consumers actually received only part of the benefits of controlled
prices, and since much of the increase in producer surplus is taxed away).
This partial equilibrium estimate is, however, seriously misleading

in its measurement of the net gain. As we will see, a computation which
takes the international implications into account suggests much larger
gains.
C.

A full computation

To solve for the tull effects of decontrol, we need to solve the

whole system (l)—(15). The results of this computation are given in

Tables IV and V. Table IV shis values of the key variables. According
to this calculation, decontrol produces a 3.6 percent appreciation of
the dollar.

The dollar appreciation produces some important effects. There is
a slight fall in the dollar price of oil, meaning slightly less supply

and more demand than in the partial equilibrium estimate. Because the
foreign currency price of oil has increased, there is a slight fall in

rest—of-world oil imports. More importantly, there is a substantial
fall in exports, primarily because of the exchange rate appreciation but

to a limited extent because of reduced OPEC income. There is also a rise

16.

Table IV: Equilibrium after decontrol
Variable

Value

Change

P

w

14.24

-.26

01

3.35

+•35

5.42

-.53

2.06

-.94

6.93

-.07

X

X0

I
E

140.1

-10.9

25.6

-3.4

1LO.l

+3.6

.96k

-.036

17.

Table V: Welfare Effects ot Decontrol
Change in producer surplus

Change in consumer surplus: oil
non-oil imports

Equals: net gain

16.6

—14.2
5.0
7.5

of which
Reduced exports to OPEC

3.4

Reduced consumption of oil

-7.6

Increased resources used for oil production

-4.1

Reduced exports to oil importers

10.9

Increased non-oil imports

4.9

18.

in non-oil imports. The important point to notice is that the changes in
trade f1cis which offset the fall in oil imports occur mostly in reduced
exports to and imports from the other oil importer.

The most striking effect of the exchange rate cha

however, is

the way it modifies our estimates of the welfare effects of decontrol.

Table V reports these effects. There is a net gain of 7.5 billion dollars.
This compares with 1.9 billion dollars if we ignore the exchange rate

effect. Partial equilibriumestirnatesunderstate U.S. gains by nearly
75 percent.

Thesourcesof the extra gains are the slight fall in the price of
oil and, more importantly, the reduced price of non—oil imports. Note
also that all of the extra gains accrue to consumers, so that there is a
reduction in the distributional impact of decontrol (although consumers
still lose heavily).

The lcier part of Table V accounts for the gains in terms of re-

sources released and used as a result of decontrol. Here we note that
the direct effects of decontrol are costs: less use of oil, and more
resources devoted to its production. The benefits come indirectly:
fewer goods and services must be provided to OPEC, and more can be imported
from and less exported to other oil importers.

No doubt these numbers can be questioned in a number of ways. The

main point, though, is unlikely to change: the gains from decontrol
are realized primarily through a change in the terms of trade, and these
gains are substantially larger than a partial equilibrium calculation
would have suggested.

19.

It must be noticed, hc.iever, that the extra gains come in the form

of a redistribution trom other oil importers to the U.S., rather than at

OPEC's expense. For the past seven years, U.S. oM policy has been hamstrung by questions of the internal distribution of income; what this

analysis does is to suggest that some of the concern has been misplaced,
and that we ought instead to worry more about the international distributional effects of U.S. policy.

20.

Notes
1/

The combination of partial equilibrium analysis of individual markets
with an exchange rate adjustment to insure trade balance is standard

in the app] led analysis of protection: see Corden (1975). The formal
restrictions on technology and consumer preferences necessary for a
rigorous justificatl:on have been discussed by Samuelson (1971).

2L

References

Arrow, K. and J. Kalt (1979): "Energy Price Regulation: The Case of Oil'

Harvard tnstitute of Economic Research Discussin Paper #715
Corden, W. M. (1975): "The Costs and Consequences of Protection: A
Survey of Empirical Work1' in P. Kenen, ed., International Trade and
Finance, Cambridge University Press.

Krugman, P. (1981): "Oil and the Doflar," forthcoming in J. Bhandari
and B. Putnam, The International Transmission of Disturbances under
Flexible Exchange Rates, M.I.T. Press.

Samuelson, P.A. (1971): "An Exact Hume—Ricardo-Marshall Model of
International Trade," Journal of nternationa1 Economics,

1 (Feb.)

