             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          PAW MATERIALS, PROFITS, AND THE
               PRODUCTIVITY SLOWDOWN

                   Michael Bruno


               Working Paper No. 660R




        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                 Cambridge MA 02138

                   December 1981
                     (revised)




The research reported here is part of the NEER's research
program in International Studies and Productivity. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #660R
                                                       December 1981

           RAW MATERIALS, PROFITS, AND THE PRODUCTIVITY SLOWDOWN

                               Michael   Bruno



                                  ABSTRACT



     A factor-price frontier framework is used to clarify the analogy of an

increase (decrease) in raw material prices with that of autonomous technolo-

gical regress (progress). Factor-price profiles estimated for the United

States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Japan bring out the major role

of raw materials in the profit and product wage squeeze after 1972, with

some differences between countries.

     The production model, in conjunction with estimates obtained from

the factor-price frontier, attributes almost all the slowdown in total

productivity to the rise in relative raw material prices. It is also

shown that part of the apparent productivity riddle has to do with the

common use of double-deflated national accounting measures of value added,

which have an inherent measurement bias.



                                                 Michael Bruno
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Hebrew University
                                                 Jerusalem, Israel

                                                 Tel. (2)-636Ol5
RAW MATERIALS, PROFITS, AND THE PRODUCTIVITY SLOWDOWN




     The years 1973-74 mark a watershed in the economic development of the

major industrial economies. This has shown up in a number of different areas,

some of them unrelated at first sight. We now know more about the causal rela-

tionship between supply shocks, in particular the oil-price explosion, and the

post-1973 acceleration of inflation and unemployment, which could not be

explained within a traditional demand-oriented macroeconomic framework. Another

major post-1973 development is the marked slowdown in the growth rate of labour

productivity, which seems to have gone considerably beyond a normal short-run

cyclical downturn; this has so far remained an unexplained puzzle. One causal

link with the 1973 oil crisis might have been 'the effect of the profit squeeze

in slowing down capital accumulation and its derived effect on output per unit

of labour. On further examination, however, it seems that the drop in labour

productivity consists of a reduction in the conventionally measured residual

factor productivity after accounting for the capital input. Growth accounting

studies (such as Denison's [1979] for the business sector) have so far rejected

the claim made by Jorgenson [1978] that higher energy prices play the key role

in the United States slowdown. The growth accounting method may not be appro-

priate, but more complex econometric approaches applying a translog production

framework to the U.S. manufacturing sector (e.g., Norsworthy and Harper [1979]

and Berndt [1980]) have not come out with any more decisive results. The

direct energy input is simply too small, percentagewise, to explain the size-

able changes that have taken place in productivity growth. Alternative

explanations suggested, such as the slackened pace of innovation (Griliches
                                     -2-




[1980] and Nadiri [1980] are not, so far, very promising in explaining the post-

1973 break in productivity trends.

     In this paper we shall attempt to shift the emphasis to the much wider

role of the aggregate material input into manufacturing whose domestic prices,

relative to the price of final manufactured goods, increased by 35-40 percent

in the early part of the l970s, and have since, with minor fluctuations,

remained high. This can be contrasted with the 1950s and 1960s, in which there

was a systematic downward trend in these prices. (See Enoch and Pani [1981],

Lipsey and Kravis [1981], Bosworth and Lawrence 119811.)

     It is only natural that in a world of relatively stable raw material pri-

ces, economic analysis should have been conducted in terms of a net product

derived from the two major primary factors of production, labour and capital.

Once relative raw material prices change, this is no longer a valid procedure,

and it may give misleading empirical results. On the other hand, bringing

the third factor into the analysis complicates matters. Macro- or trade-

theory models with intermediate goods or econometric three- or four-factor pro-

duction function studies tend to get very complex, and it is often hard to see

the wood for the trees.

     The first object of this paper is to provide a relatively simple and trans-

parent framework within which the main short-run and long-run real effects of

raw material price increases, and in particular their effect on the manufac-

turing sector, can be analysed. This framework is based on the factor-price

frontier, which provides a concise summary of the interactions of the technology,

factor use, and real factor price effects. In particular, it brings out most

clearly the analogy of an increase (decrease) in raw material prices with that

of autonomous technological regress (progress).
                                        -3-




      In Section I, we consider a small open economy (or sector) producing one

 final good under the assumption of weak separability of the imported raw

material. An alternative capital/raw material complementarity case is also

analysed. Quite a lot of what is known about more complex economies comes out

of this simple model.

     The second part of the paper analyses and compares some of the main long-

run changes in the manufacturing sector of four major industrial economies--

the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Japan, in terms of a two-

level production model and its dual. The respective factor-price profiles

bring out the major role of raw material in the profit and product-wage squeeze

after 1972, with some interesting differences between countries (Section II).

It also throws some light on the cyclical versus long-run behaviour of profits

for the United States (cf. Feldstein and Summers [1977]). Section III addres-

ses itself to the empirical question raised at the beginning. The production

model, in conjunction with some estimates obtained from the factor-price fron-

tier, can be used to attribute much of the slowdown in total productivity to

the rise in relative raw material prices. With the possible exception of the

United Kingdom, there is no large residual left unexplained.          It is also shown

that part of the apparent productivity riddle has to do with the common use of

double-deflated national accounting measures of value added, which have an

inherent measurement bias.



I. THE FACTOR PRICE FRONTIER AND THE REAL EFFECTS OF MATERIAL INPUT PRICES


Let Q = Q(L,K,N)   be a well-behaved production function for gross output of a

final good using labour, L   ,   capital,     K ,   and a material, or an intermediate

input, N .   The price of the output is P and that of the material is
                                                                                n
                                                                   -4-




For the time being, assume that the relative price 11n =                                                        is given (as is
                                                                                                         Pa/P
the case if both N and Q are tradeable goods in a small open economy).

Let Y be the real income derived, Y = Q                                        -                 and assume optimal use of
                                                                                   llN   ,



N such that Q/N =                        .       Substituting                in Q( )         ,       one obtains a value-added

function,


(1)                   Y =      Y(L,K;ll)

with the following properties:'                               (a) Y/L =            Q/L Y/K = QIK ,



Y/fI =      -N   .
                              (b) If the Q production function is linearly homogeneous
in the three factors, L ,                        K   ,    and       N ,      the Y function will be linearly homo-
geneous in the primary factors L ,                                  K     so that the Euler equation holds for

Y(K,L):


(2)
                     TL ÷—K=
        Now consider changes in ll .                               Using lower case letters to denote log of
upper case variables, the rate of change of                                              is                It immediately fol-

lows that the partial elasticity of value added with respect to a real change

in    the price 11n             is the ratio of the                 relative shares of the material and value
added in gross output.
        Proof: '11n =               -N, thus,

                     II
                          nY        fiN
                                     n
                                                              PN
                                                               n
                           ll -              -                           -     ____
                                                                                 -
                          Y          Y                   PQ
                                                              -                1
                                                                  PnN


where      = PN/PQ (share).
                                                                                                                       Q.E.D.

       A simple corollary of this proposition is that a policy aiming at keeping

relative domestic factor shares constant in the face of a real change in raw

material prices requires both factor rentals to decrease at the rate
                                                     -5-




Tr/(1 -        ), for   given factor inputs.

       This may be used to measure net terms-of-trade effects on factor rewards

(see, e.g., Sachs [1979]). It does not require that workers receive their mar-

ginal product, only that the raw material be used optimally. Note too that the

fixed-proportion case (N = iiQ)                  can be looked on as a limiting case for which

the proposition holds directly: one has Y =                        Q(l       -
                                                                                     ulT)     and therefore

Y/Tt = -pQ = -N
       This analysis easily generalizes to the case in which N is a vector of

several inputs N. with relative prices fl =
                                                                    ni'                    (i =   1, 2, ..., s)      .   We

now have Y = Q -                     =       Y(L, K; fl, ..,      ll)            ,                 = -N1,    and

                        =   -3./(l   -
                                             ), where . = II.N./Q                     ,       = 3.     ,   and the

rate of decline of real income (and the factor shares), holding L and K

constant, will be b = (1             -


       Note that the "technical regress" term, -b                        ,       is       measured as a weighted

Divisia index of material input prices. When L and K change                                           ,    we have
  =   (1   -
               y'(c. + yf)      -b       ,   where   ci. and y are the output elasticities

(shares) of labour and capital in Q                   .    It   follows that the rate of change of

V ,   real     net output, is precisely


(4)               V =   y + b =      (1-      )'(cQ +yk) =         (1- )'(q -)
      Below we shall rewrite (4) with an independent time shift (technical pro-

gress) term added on.

       If the real product wage does not change, upon impact of a Il shift,

what will be the effect on the rate of profit? No functional specification is

required to give an approximate answer. The change in the log of the real rate

of profit, r ,       satisfies       the following equation,2
                                             -6-




(5)           r =_(aw +   Tr)/y
where   w   is the log of the real product wage, W= W/P                         ,   and a ,       , and
y     are the factor shares (as above) which need not be constant. The partial

elasticity of the rate of profit with respect to the increase in raw material

prices is thus -s/a .     If,   say,         =   0.30   ,   a   =   0.50   ,    this     implies that with

a constant real product wage, a 40 percent increase in fI leads to a 60 per-

cent drop in the rate of profit in manufacturing, not unlike some actual devel-

opments in the 1970s (e.g., in the United Kingdom).

      There is a polar case in which the real rate of return is assumed to

remain constant in the long run while the real wage becomes flexible downward.

Suppose that investment decisions are governed by a given long-run real rate

of interest, R0    (based on time preference or alternative international

investment opportunities). In that case, there will be a process of capital

decumulation which will come to an end only once the marginal product of

capital returns to the initial pre-shock level, R .                        The required drop in

the real wage is greater than in the short run and is given approximately by

/a [see equation (5) for               =   0 ; obviously, /a >                 /(l   -


      The next question relates to an intermediate short-run situation in which

the capital stock is fixed and real wages are flexible. If employment is to

remain constant in the face of a given increase in ll                      ,   by how much must the
real product wage and the real rate of return fall? At this point we make a

simple but important assumption--that the production function is weakly separa-

ble in the material input, Q = Q{G(L, K), N]                .   This implies that the marginal
rate of substitution between labour and capital depends only on L/K and is

independent of N [Leontief, 1947].
                                        - 7.-




        Consider a short-run situation in which K = K           and now require also that

L = L     (constant or full employment). It follows that (Y/L)/Y,'K) stays

constant and so do relative factor elasticities. Under profit maximization,

factor rentals equal their marginal products, and thus the incomes policy rule

stated before holds. We can now state the following proposition: Under weak

separability of material inputs and an increase in their real price (at rate

        the level of employment will stay constant in the short run if and only if

the marginal products (rentals) of labour and capital fall by the same propor-

tion, rr[/(l -      )] .    Thus, a raw material price increase acts on real factor

incomes exactly like Hicks—neutral technical regress.

        The analysis is best handled by appealing to the concept of the factor-

price frontier (FPF), which summarizes the information about the technology in

terms of the maximal combinations of the three marginal factor products,

F(W, R, ll) = 0     .   The curve F0 drawn in W -       R   space (see Figure I) for a

given relative raw material price II            is downward sloping and convex to the
                                       n0
origin. The slope of the tangent at any point measures the capital/labour ratio

that corresponds to the pair of factor prices, and its intercept on the
                                                                                     •W, axis
(OT) measures Y/L .        Likewise, the intercept on the R-axis (OS) measures
Y/K .    Weak separability of the production function implies weak separability

of the dual FPF, i.e., F0 takes the form          F{f(W. R), 'n' = 0     .   A material

input price increase, like Hicks-neutral technical regress, is thus represented

by a homothetic inward shift of F       to F1 .       At the point C on the new FPF,
on the ray OA ,    the capital/labour ratio is the same as at A .            C   is a full-

employment point, in the short run (when K =           ,L   =   1) . Marginal    factor pro-

ducts at C are reduced by the same ratio from their original level at A

Total real income per unit of labour (Y/L) falls by the same proportion from

OT to OM (and Y/K from OS to ON ).                 The case of real wage rigidity at
                                          -8-




W     ,    which may occur in the very short run, is represented by the point B where
 p0
R must of necessity fall by more than at C and the capital/labour ratio is

higher than at C          At the given capital stock, f , unemployment will emerge.

For the putty-clay case in which the capital/labour ratio cannot immediately

adjust to the new factor prices, the various solutions are given along the line

FCG i.e., in the rigid real wage, rigid capital/labour ratio case, the economy

will be at F and not at B ,        the   rate of profit falling more than at B.

          The polar case of an externally imposed long-run real rate of interest

(equal to RQ , say) is represented by the point D ,           at   which the real wage

and the capital/labour ratio are below their levels at C. In contrast to C,

the point D may represent a long run equilibrium steady-state level after

capital has adjusted to a given R0 .       With full employment of labour at D,
capital and output (gross and net) are both lower than at the initial point A.

       While the case of weak separability of intermediate inputs may be relevant

for most industrial raw materials, it is most probably not applicable to the

case of energy inputs, E, for which separability may take the alternative

form Q[L, G(K, Efl (see Berndt and Wood [1979]). Here energy combines with

capital to form a composite from which labour (and other materials, here left

out) are separable. By analogy, the resulting factor price frontier in the

W -    R    space will now contract along the R axis at the rate                   (where

      is the share of energy and 1e its log price). This rate will be inde-

pendent of the real wage. For simplicity consider an even more special case in

which the energy input is fully complementary to capital. In this case Q =

Q[L, min(K, E/)], and R = Q/K       -
                                        WL/K
                                                -
                                                    ll. Suppose    F0   is the initial

FPF, for a given 11eV An increase of Alle in the energy price then implies

that F will shift to the left by (All), i.e., at all levels of the real

wage the rate of return falls by the same amount. The resulting FPF denoted by
                                           —9--




F' will cut F1 at the point B and will lie right of F1 for all

w
 p
     <w.
        p0

       Consider again the implications of a material price increase. Here,

unlike in the previous model, full employment can in the short run be main-

tained at the initial real wage W , since the optimum capital-labour ratio
                                      p0
stays the same while the net rate of return to capita1 falls by the amount

AR =              In the long run, if the real rate of interest is R0, the capital
       _flAlle•
stock and the real wage must adjust downwards to equilibrium at the point E.

The new steady-state real wage at E is clearly above, and the capital-labour

ratio below, the respective long-run equilibrium levels under the previous

technology (compare the points E and D and the respective tangents at

these points), but otherwise the long-run implications remain the same. The

short-run effect on labour demand is, of course, different.5

       To see the short-run and long-run implications of a raw materials price

shock in this one-sector model, one may consider some simple dynamics in terms

of two key variables, the real wage and the capital stock. The change in the

real wage would react to unemployment and the change in the capital stock

(investment) to the difference between r and r0 .       This analysis is omitted
here. The upshot is that a raw material price increase in the single-sector

economy must, in the long run, entail a fall in the real wage and in the equili-

brium capital stock. This is so under both alternative technological assump-

tions made. Whether or not there is unemployment in the short run depends on

the technology; whether there is unemployment along the dynamic path to equili-

brium in either model depends on the extent of real wage rigidity.

       This analysis can clearly be modified and extended in several directions.

Most of these extensions lie outside the scope of the present paper, which

attempts to apply the FPF framework to a single large sector--manufacturing.
                                      -10-



Some of these modifications will nonetheless be indicated briefly so as to put

the analysis that follows in proper perspective.

     The first natural extension of the model would be to consider additional

sectors within a single economy. One candidate is an extractive sector whose

relative output price and profitability increases with II, It thus gradually

takes over from the final goods sector as an employment-absorbing and capital-

attracting sector. It can be shown that if the country is not self-sufficient

in raw materials and the sector is relatively capital-intensive, the short-run

effect of a rise in raw material prices will still be to increase overall unem-

ployment. An alternative source of employment could be a domestic nontradeable

goods industry (e.g., private or government services) which does not use raw

materials as an input.6

     Another modification to the model would do away with the small-economy

assumption with respect to final goods prices. If the final good is an imper-

fect substitute for the world good (priced P*), the relative raw materials

price now depends on the final goods terms of trade, P*e/P. We have un/P =

(p*e/p)(p*/p*),   where ll =
                               P/P   is the world relative price of raw materials.

Even if one only wants to apply this factor-price analysis to a single large

sector, one should keep in mind that the relative price ll may now depend

also on the real exchange rate and demand management in the economy as a whole.

For example, an external raw materials price shock (increase in fl) may be fol-

lowed by a real appreciation (a decline in P*e/P) and the sector's FPF may

partly shift back. Next, if the external final good is also imperfectly sub-

stitutable in domestic consumption, the concept of the real consumption wage

(and of real wage rigidity) must be suitably adjusted.7 Finally, one should

bear in mind that when it comes to a world equilibrium, the real rate of inter-

est (R) becomes an endogenous variable. There are good reasons, both
                                     —11—




theoretical and empirical, to suggest that one of the by-products of a supply

shock affecting all industrial countries simultaneously is a reduction in R,

at least temporarily. This, too, will be discussed elsewhere. Needless to say,

the FPF analysis of the single small economy gives only part of the story, but

for our present purpose it may be the most important part.




                   II. EMPIRICAL FACTOR-PRICE PROFILES


Empirical Background

     In this section we turn to an empirical illustration of the factor-price

profiles for the manufacturing sector of four major industrial countries: the

United States, the United Kingdom, Germany and Japan.

     Table I summarizes the change in the key cost and quantity variables dur-

ing 1955-1980 (Only the U.S. and U.K. data are almost covered for 197-

1980). The period 1955-1972 can be looked upon as representing a ?!normal?v

growth phase, 1972-1975 covers the response to the first oil and raw materials

price explosion, and 1975-1978 is a period of partial recovery before the next

price hike (1979-1980) set in. Panel 1 of Table I shows the sharp decelera-

tion in output per man-hour after 1972 and the partial recovery after 1975. In

Germany the fluctuation was much milder.8 The existin.g observations for

1979-1980 show the renewed slowdown after the next price shock.

     Panel 6 of the table shows the rate of profit in selected years There is

some evidence of a long-run fall in the rate of profit during the 1960s which

may be connected with capital deepening and a secular increase in unit wage

costs, and which can be seen by comparing the growth rate figures of the product

wage with labour productivity. While this is an interesting development in

itself, we shall not specifically discuss the period here (see, for example,
                                    —12-




Glyn and Sutcliffe [1972] and Sargent [1979]). Between 1972 and 1975 there was

a very sharp drop in the profit rate (again Germany is the exception), which

shows only partial recovery in the subsequent period. Preliminary rough esti-

mates for the first two countries suggest another profit squeeze by 1980. Com-

parison of product-wage behaviour in 1972-1978 with its 1955-1972 trend provides

some interesting intercountry differences.

     The table (panel 4) also gives a measure of the change in the real cost of

intermediate goods used by the manufacturing sectors in the four countries.

These    data appear in more detailed form in Figure II. For all four coun-

tries, an attempt was made to use an index which is as close as possible to the

wholesale price index for the aggregate material input into the manufacturing

sector, and deflate it by the manufacturers' wholesale price. Conceptually

this would include fuels, unprocessed foods from agriculture, and all other

material or intermediate inputs imported from the rest of the economy or from

abroad. It is important to stress that in most cases fuels constitute only a

relatively small share of this index.

     Most of the action in the exceptional input price behaviour over this

period is not directly accounted for by oil prices, although it may in part be

indirect (raising extraction and production costs). To show this, we have also

included an international index of the non-fuel primary exports relative to

manufacturing export prices. This was recently constructed by Kravis and Lip-

sey [l98l] and shows a broadly similar pattern. Obviously the individual coun-

try patterns need not be identical, because of the movements in relative

exchange rates and the different domestic government pricing policies. A par-

ticular case in point is Germany, which had a sharp real appreciation in the

1970s, and which also kept internal energy and agricultural prices low.
                                    -13-




     Two basic facts stand out from Figure I. One is the sustained and unam-

biguous real price shock of the early 1970s (of the order of 40% for the U.K.

and Japan, 30% for the U.S., and only 10% for Germany). With some fluctuations

and one or two additional mini-shocks, the high level was, by and large, main-

tained to the end of the decade. The other fact worth point out is that for

three of the countries (excluding Japan), this unprecedented shock was preceded

by 15 years of steady decline (of the order of 1% a year) in the relative cost

of the material input, closely associated with the relative decline of these

prices (and of oil) in the world market.


Analysis of Factor Price Profiles

     Specification of the factor price frontier depends on the choice of an

underlying production function; its estimation could be done jointly with esti-

mation of the quantity model. We delay illustration of such a jointly estima-

ted model to the next section and confine ourselves here to the analysis of

factor price profiles based on single equation estimation. The choice of the

functional form is consistent with a simple production model, and, as we shall

see, the empirical estimates will not be substantially altered when we come to

the alternative estimation technique.

     A number of authors have used a general four-factor (K, L, E, M) translog

production framework for estimation purposes. While this may be the best

approach for some purposes (e.g., specific concern for the energy input), the

results of such estimates also suggest that for a broad view of developments,

a simplified model may do no worse, and for our present purposes may be better.

We shall lump all intermediate goods, including energy, into one input and

choose the simplest production function which still seems a sufficiently realis-

tic approximation. 10
                                    -14-




     The size of the direct energy share in total manufacturing output is of the

order of 2-3%, compared to an order of magnitude of 30-65% for all other material

inputs, depending on the degree of aggregation or consolidation of the manufac-

turing sector from its constituent parts'1 If the non-energy input can be

assumed to be separable while energy may not be, the extent of overall error

coming from imposing separability on the aggregate input cannot be large.

     Another simplification involves the implicit assumption that the prices of

the aggregate input of intermediate goods from the manufacturing sector into

itself move at the same rate as the wholesale price of the manufacturing out-

put. This enables one to net out this input and consider manufacturing produc-

tion as using only labour, capital and materials (and intermediate goods) pur-

chased from outside the sector. This is certainly not an ideal choice but is

one that has to be made in the absence of a detailed and fully consistent time

series account of quantities and prices in the input-output system of the coun-

tries investigated here.'2

     Finally we come to the choice of functional specification. The simplest

would be to use a linearized level form of equation (5) with an independent

term for technical progress. If the underlying production function were Cobb-

Douglas in all three factors, this would be precisely correct. While a reason-

able assumption for the pair of labour and capital inputs in net product

V(K, L), it makes no a priori empirical sense for the substitution between N

and V. We shall choose a two-level production function with an unrestricted

constant elasticity of substitution (a) between the material input N and

the net product index V where the latter in turn is assumed to be a Cobb-

Douglas function for K and L.'3 The second order approximation to the FPF

of this function yields a functional form which is like that of the general

Cobb-Douglas with only one second order    (7r2)   term which, however, can be
                                                 -15—




ignored for empirical reasons.lL We end up estimating the following profit

function (in log level form):


(6)            r =   a'   -
                              (a/y) (w - Xt)       -              +
                                                       (/Y)'Tfn

      The first coefficient (ci./y), measuring the relative labour/capital

shares, is expected to be constant by assumption, while the second (/y)

should measure the relative materials-capital share evaluated at a base point

(for which 2nfl =         1).
      The additional intensity variable j = 2n J is a proxy for cyclical varia-

tions, here measured by deviation of the weekly hours worked from the long-run

trend. Its possible role in the production model will not be discussed here.

Itis of importance in explaining the fluctuations of profits primarily in the

case of the U.S.

      Table II gives a selection of the relevant regressions for equation (6).

The estimates for the labour-augmenting productivity factor, X, the share of

capital in value added,           =
                                      y/(l   -
                                                 ),    and the share of intermediate goods in

total costs,         (bottom panel), all have the right orders of magnitude.

Figures III and IV give a graphic representation of the factor price profiles

for the various countries. For the United States and Japan, the figure corres-

ponds to the first regression shown for each of them in Table II.

      Each of the charts is drawn in terms of the actual rate of profit (R) on

the horizontal axis and the detrended product wage                    (W = We_Xt)   on the ver-

tical axis, using the X coefficient estimated from the regression. The solid

curves represent estimated factor-price frontiers drawn for given levels of ll

(and normal man-hours, i.e., J =             1),   one representing an average pre-1973

level, the other an average post-1973 level of raw materials prices (the impli-

cit rate of change,              is noted in each graph). For the two countries
                                       -16-




represented in Figure III (the United Kingdom and Germany), the regression esti-

mates (dotted lines) are shown along with the actual observations, and the

horizontal distance between corresponding annual points measures the regression

errors. For the United States (Figure IV below), the underlying decycledu

observations are also plotted; these correct the profit rate by the intensity

factor (19 x j) from the regression [column (1) of Table II], and thus

uncover an underlying long-run pattern which is not markedly different from

that of the United Kingdom or Japan.

     For all countries, a schematic description would suggest that until 1972

there was an upward movement in         (downward in R) more or less along a

given FPF, a clear shift to a new FPF after 1972 and movement down the new

curve after 1973-1974. Clearly there are some differences between countries

in the timing and extent of the downward adjustment of the real wage after

1974 (and the upward readjustment of the rate of profit).'5 The United Kingdom

initially showed greater real wage rigidity than Japan and the United States

(with a correspondingly tighter profit squeeze) and then over-reacted in 1977

(preliminary figures for 1978-1980 suggest that the product wage rose back and

the profit rate continued to fall; the picture also shows an out-of-sample

forecast of R to 80). Japan shows the most marked reduction in real product

wage (relative to the 11 percent trend, which may be somewhat excessive). By

1977-1978, it had in fact undergone a drop of about 15 percent in both R and

W [= Wex(-O.l1t)] more or less pan passu with the rise in the cost of

raw materials, AII/(1 -   ),   as suggested by the analysis of Section I.

     In some ways the case of the United States (Figure IV) is the most inter-

esting. It is not surprising that the debate about whether the rate of profit

in the United States has been falling over time (see Feldstein and Summers
                                       —17—




[1977]) has so far been inconclusive. In the United States, more than in any of

the other countries, the fluctuations in the rate of profit turn out to be domi-

nated by the cycle. However, once the J variable is introduced, the same

long-run structural features emerge. Note that the 1974-1975 dip in profits

(to about 0.08 percent) was mostly, though not entirely, cyclical. A comparison

of 1978 with 1972 gives an approximate view of the total net effect of the raw

materials price hike on the profit-maximizing level (R*)     ,   a drop in the rate

of profit by about 10 percent (1.5 percentage points out of 13.4; see Table I).

The   trend   fall in R* from 1955 to 1971 is estimated at about 15 percent (2.5

percentage points out of 16 percent; compare the asterisked observations for

the two years). This took place pan passu with a 20 percent rise in             which

was partly moderated by a 12 percent drop in         (the asterisked 1971 observa-

tion lies much closer to the first FPF than the 1955 point).16 The figure also

includes an out-of-sample forecast of R to 1980 suggesting a further fall in

the rate of profit.'7

      In view of the very strong role of the cyclical variable in the United

States, various alternatives were tried out to see how robust the results are.

Using the measure of capacity utilization published by the FRS (j'), one gets

essentially the same results except that the coefficients for          and      are
                                                                   w
less significant.'

      The case of Germany also merits a brief separate discussion. In spite of

a much smaller rate of change in real raw materials cost, the resulting elas-

ticity with respect to         came out highly significant, and the estimated

coefficients of the production function are very reasonable, However, the

response to the 1973-1974 events was much milder than in the other three coun-

tries. The          of the two curves in Figure III are only 11 percent apart.9

The main secular change observed on the factor price profile is the upward
                                       —18-




trend in W and the accompanying downward movement of r, in which the raw

materials price had only a minor role to play. The 1973-1974 shift seems to

have moved the sector back to the FPF on which it had been in the 1960s. The

accompanying changes in factor rewards were relatively minor, and as we shall

see again later, the same is true for productivity change. This relatively

minor effect is directly related to the smallness of the shift in real raw

materials prices (see Figure II), which in turn is related to the appreciation

of the German exchange rate.

     The German case brings out the fact that our discussion of the FPF for

the manufacturing sector is of necessity limited here by the fact that we are

ignoring the links of the major factor prices with the rest of the economy.

Short of embedding the relationship analysed here within a complete general

equilibrium model for the main markets (commodities, labour, and foreign

exchange), one could at least try to assess the possible simultaneity bias in

the estimates. For the United States, Table II lists an alternative regression

which was estimated by two-stage least squares (using lagged values of the vari-

ables and P as instruments for w       and r n). The model does not seem to be
                                   p
much affected by this modification. A similar attempt for the United Kingdom

and Germany leaves the coefficient for    Tr unaffected, but suggests some

simultaneity problem in j and w. Additional estimates are discussed below.



            III. RAW MATERIAL PRICES AND PRODUCTIVITY CHANGE


     If one knew the exact shape and time shift of the factor price frontier,

it should, in principle, convey all the information that one would want to know

about factor use and total factor productivity. In the present instance, the

simple functional form chosen has its advantages as a descriptive device, but
                                           -19-




is too rough to convey all the required information, e.g., about the degree of

substitutability of materials and the domestic product. The latter is of cru-

cial importance if one wants to assess the possible role of raw materials in

accounting for the apparent slowdown in total productivity. Since the data used

here are not derived from a consistent source and we do not necessarily assume

continuous profit maximisation, one would in any case want to double-check by

also considering the quantity side.

        The CES specifications for the function Q(V, N) lends itself to a straight-

forward expression for total productivity change. A basic property of CES, in

rate-of-change form, is the simple relationship between unit factor use and

its relative price. For the material input, we thus have


(7)                 n-q=-an,
where a is the elasticity of substitution between N and V .             Substituting
for i     on the right-hand side of equation (4) and adding a labour augmenting

technical progress shift factor (A) as well, one gets


(8)                 (-   )     (k-i)              -    -

where      =   (1   -
                        )1y   is the share of capital in value added.

      The left-hand side of equation (8) is the conventional period-by-period

standard measure of total factor productivity (the "residual") in gross output

rather than value added terms. This has the advantage that q is, in princi-

ple, based on market observables while real value added (v) is not (see Sec-

tion IV. for the bias in double-deflation measures). The right-hand side

breaks this residual down into the slowdown effect of an increase in material

prices20 and the constant time shift factor. In the empirical work reported
                                       -20-



below, we shall at times also add the measure of cyclical deviations (J) from

trend, here measured by the deviation of weekly hours worked from their

trend.

      In principle, one could use the observed shares q, calculate the residu-

al for each period as is usually done, and then try to regress the residual on

n (and other variables such as the change in J). It is surprising that this

has apparently never been attempted in this form. Alternatively, if one is not

sure whether actual shares are the "true" ones, one could transfer the ( - 2)

term to the right-hand side of (8) and fit it as a mixed production function,

on the assumption that q is constant, i.e., V(K, L) is Cobb-Douglas. Rough

estimates of such a relationship may be obtained directly from a combination

of cross-section and time series on the assumption that 4' , and        are

approximately the same across countries. The following regression was run

for ten OECD countries (Canada, the United States, Japan, Belgium, France,

Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Sweden, and the United Kingdom) for the period

1956-1978:


(9)          Alog(Q/L) = c
                          t
                              + c. + O.266Alog(K/L) -   0.l79Mogll      (R2 =   0.574),
                                 1    005Lf             O.05L+    n1
where c and c.      are, respectively, time and country dummies. The average

implied relative share of capital looks reasonable, and the coefficient of

is negative and highly significant.

      If we take    to be approximately equal to 0.35 (see Table II for most

regressions) the regression (9) would imply a value of a =      0.33.   Existing

estimates obtained from more complex models for individual countries point to a

range of values for which 0.33 seems to be a lower bound. Estimates for

two countries can be based on translog functions. These are: 0.45 for the
                                    -21-




U.S. and a range of 0.5-0.7 for Japan. In the two other countries, recent esti-

mates have been obtained based on a two-level CES function. These are a range

of 0.33-0.8 for the U.K. and 0.32 for Germany.2' In all cases the coefficients

are highly significant.

     Since the above individual country estimates have been obtained under vary-

ing specifications of the underlying model, we shall also report the result of

attempting to fit the present simplified model directly. Table 3 reports two

sets of regression estimates. For each country, a two-equation model was run

simultaneously, consisting of the FPF (6) in level form and the output equation

(8) in first difference form,22 with the raw material price change lagged one

year. These are maximum likelihood (FIML) estimates utilizing the cross-

equation restrictions implied by the model for the shares ,       and in most

cases also for A.23 We have also run (8) independently as a single equation,

restricting the values of     and     to be equal to their point estimates pre-

viously obtained from the FPF in Table II. The method of estimation for each

regression is indicated in the last row of the table.

     With the exception of the U.S. or cases in which the intensity variable

was included in the productivity equation, the various models yield significant

and reasonable values for the elasticity of substitution (a). It is surpris-

ing that a single equation regression for the pre-shock period (1959-1972) in

the U.S., when r was actually falling, gives a highly significant estimate

(0.57), but it fails to show in the joint regressions for the longer period

l957_l980.2 It is less surprising that inclusion of j renders a insigni-

ficant because, at least in part, the drop in j   after a rise in ir   is endo-

genous. A more detailed specification of the demand side is required before

the separate role of commodity prices in shifting demand and supply curves can

be correctly assessed. The Durbin-Watson statistics for some of the regressions
                                      -22-



 are low.   This is particularly marked for the U.K. productivity regres-

 sions. The residuals in those clearly point to a growth slowdown that is not cap-

tured by the existing estimate of the effect of Tm        (and of j   in column (6)

of Table III).

     The overall adequacy of the raw material price hypothesis can alternatively

be gauged by comparing the unexplained slowdown in the total productivity resi-

dual between the 1960s and the l970s with the increase in the average change of

material prices, and asking what is     be the implied value of        that would

"explain away" the residual. This calculation is given in Table IV (row 10).

The resulting estimates which are all below unity can be compared with the

assortment of estimates of the elasticity of substitution found in Table III and

in the other studies quoted above. Such comparison suggests that Japan and Germany

are 'right' ibr even over-x1aiaed.           The U.S. seems to have some unexplained

residual (unless we accept the high estimate op. cit.) and the U.K. seems to

show a more sizeable discrepancy depending on whether we accept the low esti-

mates of 0.35-0.45 of Table III or the highest number quoted from the other

study (0.8). In any case, even a skeptic should admit that the rankings of

countries by the standard total productivity slowdown and the rate of change of

material prices (comparing orderings within rows 7 and 8 of Table III) are

perfectly correlated!



              IV. THE MEASUREMENT BIAS OF DOUBLE DEFLATION


     It is natural to ask why one should use gross output for the measurement of

net productivity changes when a net value added concept could be used which one

would expect to be free of raw material price effects. One could, in principle,

make correct total productivity measurements from value added figures, provided
                                                                 -23-




they are obtained from underlying gross output and intermediate input measures

based on a Divisia index procedure. Researchers, however, often rely on the

usual national accounting figures obtained by double deflation (see Denison

[1979] and Norsworthy et al. [1979]). While this should cause no problems so

long as relative intermediate goods prices did not change much, it brings about

considerable measurement bias when this is no longer so. To see what is

involved, consider our present production-function specification.25

        For the production function, we have 4 = (1                                -     + n.           From (7) we get

n = q      -
               c;   therefore,


(10)                v = 4 +         c/(l         -



Denote double-deflated value added by Vd .                                 We   have Vd =       Q
                                                                                                     - N
                                                                                                              (assuming

II   = 1       at t =    0).        Therefore,
 n

(11)                d               -N
                                           = q       +
                                                                Nn 4 n'n -
Comparing (10) and (11), we get the size of the bias in the measured growth rate
of real value added,26


                                     - if cY/(l - 11n                                  =-           a       'rr(Tf1)
(12)                Vd -    v   =                                       1)/(11 -
                                                                                            i       -         ii -

        Inspection       of equation (12) leads to several conclusions. First, there

will be no bias only if we have fixed proportions ( =                                    0),        or if there is no

change in raw material prices                            (Tr =
                                                          t'i    0).    Next, for all monotonic changes in j
                                                                                                                          n
(both up and down), the bias is always negative (Vd <v) and grows as we move

away from t = 0             Trn =        1).   This follows from the fact that rr(ll - 1) > 0

whenever II             consistently rises or falls over time, and from the fact that

(1T -      l)/(ll   -   )      is an increasing function of II                         for ll >         1    (and decreasing
                                       -24-




for II
     n
       <1).

       Consider the approximate order of magnitude of the bias in the present case

if value added is measured in constant 1972 prices.27 The right—hand side of

equation (12) consists of the product of the raw materials prices term in the

productivity equation and the factor ("a -
                                              l)/(fl ). For
                                                     -             =   0.35 and
   =   1.40, for example, this last factor is 0.38. Suppose we take all of the
observed residuals (row 7) in Table 4 as an approximate measure of ira/(l

for each country. This would imply that the approximate downward bias in the

measurement of the annual product growth rate could reach as much as (in per--

cent) 0.6, 1.1, 0.2, and 1.3 for the United States, the United Kingdom, Ger—

many, and Japan, respectively. Even if the bias were only half as great,

these would still be considerable errors in productivity growth measurement.



                            V. CONCLUDING REMARKS


       It has been shown that a relatively simple three-factor framework can go

quite a long way to explain profit and productivity behaviour in the manufac-

turing sector of some major industrial countries. The factor-price profile,

in particular, proved a useful and concise device for representing the short-

run and long-run effects of a supply shock.28

       The empirical analysis was of necessity confined to only part of a much

wider topic. While manufacturing is in many ways a leading sector in an indus-

trial economy, it accounts for less than half of employment and output. It is

an open question whether the argument presented here would also apply to other

sectors or to the economy as a whole. Manufacturing, more than any other sec-

tor, is a heavy user of raw materials whose relative price has increased. It
                                    -25-




is likely that a similar argument on a smaller scale would work for the explana-

tion of productivity slowdown in transport, agriculture, and construction. The

bulk of the service sector is immune from these shifts, but it is a sector with

inherently low productivity growth. A shift from manufacturing into services

might thus reduce the average productivity growth of the economy as a whole

but moderate the employment consequences which have not been discussed here

(see Hudson and Jorsenson [1978]). More detailed work has to be done on a sec-

tor breakdown before an aggregate productivity story can be told. It would

similarly be worthwhile to take a disaggregate look within the black box of the

manufacturing sector to check the aggregate hypothesis (especially since the

measure of aggregate output may be problematic). One could then also find out

to what extent such findings can be ascribed to analogous substitutability

within industries or to compositional shifts among the component parts.

     Another aspect of the underlying model that has been ignored in the present

empirical study is the repercussions of the profit squeeze on investment behav-

iour and the growth path of the capital stock. Part of the slowdown attributed

to the capital input is a delayed response to the profit squeeze which in turn

can be related back to the material price increase. On the other hand, induced

innovation in energy-saving equipment29 may eventually work in the other direc-

tion. Finally, the present empirical analysis has virtually avoided discussing

the role of the demand side in short-run output and productivity fluctuations.

This is indirectly related to the materials price hike both through terms-of-

trade effects on real income and through the induced response on balance of pay-

ments and stabilization policies.
                                           -26-



       *   This paper grew out of a project carried out jointly with J, Sachs at
the National Bureau for Economic Research in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and at

the Falk Institute for Economic Research in Jerusalem.                    I am indebted to the

Ford Foundation and the National Science Foundation for financial support.                       I


would also like to thank N. F. Williams of the Bank of England, T, Wakasugi of

Tohoku University and J. R. Norsworthy and M. J. Harper of the Bureau of Labor

Statistics in Washington for permission to use their data. David Lipton and

Louis Dicks-Mireaux have been very helpful in setting up some of the computa-

tions, which were carried out on the DRI system. Thanks go to Margret Eisen-

staedt for the drawings and to Susanne Freund for editorial assistance.

Finally, I wish to thank Olivier Blanchard, participants in various seminars,

and an anonymous referee for very useful comments on an earlier draft.

       'See Arrow [1974] and Bruno [1978]. Note that Y measures real income

but not the real net output of labour and capital for which a Divisia index is

required (see below).

       2This expression for the factor-price frontier can be obtained from the

dual profit function or more directly by subtracting the quantity expression

(4) from the identity q =
                               c(w
                                     +   £) ÷      +   n)   +   y(r   +   k).   The latter, in

turn, is obtained from logarithmic time differentiation of Q =                         +    + RK.
                                                                                  WL
       3Proof. The distance BA can be worked out from the elasticity

                              _lleE/RK which implies BA = tR
                          =                                  =
11e1       R/Afle) =                                           _(E/K)(Alle)
where E/K is measured at A. But this is the same as the shift from F0 to

F', since in that case ElK =         = constant.       The tangent to F' at B is

parallel to the tangent to F0 at A and must by definition be less steep

than the tangent to F1 at B. The rest of the argument follows by continuity.

       The marginal product of the fixed-proportions bundle (K,E) stays the

same (R +
                                    -27-



     5This point was raised by Tobin [1979] in his discussion of Bruno and Sachs

[1979].   In the present empirical application to the manufacturing sector, we

shall confine ourselves to the assumption of overall material separability, since

the energy input is dominated by the very much (between 10 and 15 times) larger

input of other raw materials and intermediate inputs (see below).

     6One can draw the factor-price frontier for additional sectors in the same

framework as Figure I. This and other extensions are taken up in a separate

paper (Bruno [1981]).

     7A general equilibrium analysis of the effects of raw materials prices on

macroeconomic adjustment is given in Bruno and Sachs [1979].

     8Germany was also able to lay off more of its transient labor force (see

large drop in man-hours (panel 4) (which also shows in actual employment, not

reproduced here). The two facts are probably not disconnected (see below).

     9Kravis and Lipsey's main contribution lies in showing that the properly

measured index of manufacturing exports has grown by much less during the 1970s

than the commonly used unit value index. Consideration of the domestic rela-

tive wholesale prices seems to bear out their contention. For recent detailed

studies of primary commodity prices in the 1970s, see Panic [1981], Bosworth

and Lawrence [1982].

     10The use of translog production functions was pioneered by Jorgenson and

his associates (see Christensen et al. [1973]). For its application to the

input of energy and raw materials, see Berndt and Wood [1979]. Their estimates

may be interpreted to suggest that a Cobb-Douglas specification for K and

L and the separability assumption for the non-energy material input may be

close approximations. Similar results were recently obtained in a study for

Japan (Lipton [1981]).
                                      -28-




         'In the Harper and Norsworthy [1980] data for U.S. manufacturing, also

reported in Berndt [1980], the energy share by 1977 was estimated at only 2.5%,

compared with 63% for all other intermediate inputs. Data compiled for the U.K.

by Louis Dicks-Mireaux and used in Bruno and Sachs [1981] give these figures as

3,3% and 61%, respectively, in 1977. Of the 61% share of other intermediate

inputs, roughly one-half (i.e., about 30%) are from outside manufacturing, so

that the ratio is at least 10 to 1.

     '2Only the U.S. and possibly Japan (see Lipton [1981]) lend themselves to

a more sophisticated approach.

     13A more general two-level CES function is discussed and applied to U.K.

data in Bruno and Sachs [1981]. There we also take a more comprehensive view

of the underlying set of profit and factor demand equations.

     1This term is _l/2.l12(/y)(l -   a)/(l    -
                                                   )   and must be added on the

right-hand side of (6). In the estimates this turned out to be insignificant.

    15For a detailed discussion of the different patterns of wage behaviour

after the oil shock, see Bruno and Sachs [1979].

    '6A partial regression of the FPF on the observations up to 1972 also

yields a strong negative coefficient for fi (the same is true of the United

Kingdom).

    '7We had no direct updated estimate for the observed R in                U.S.   manufac-

turing   for 1979-80, but judging by the published estimates of total corporate

profits, the direction and approximate size of movement seem right.

    '8This regression is: r = O.Ol7t     -   1.011w    -             +   3.490j'    (the stan-
                                                           l.526lT
dard errors of the coefficients are respectively 0.026, 0.985, 0.477 and 0.508).

This is not surprising in view of the fact that j and j' are very highly

correlated. The estimated elasticity of j with respect to j' is 0.171

(±0.030) which is consistent with the fact that the elasticity of r with
                                    -29-



respect to j' turns out to be 0.18 times that of the j coefficient [see

column (1) in Table II]. The capital utilization rate, J', fluctuates at

a much higher amplitude than J, but its estimated effect on R is the same.

     '9The outer curve corresponds to the minimum level of the index, reached

in 1972, and the inner curve corresponds to the maximum, reached in 1974, only

two years apart.

     201f the FPF is drawn in a detrended form, the percentage fall in real

income per unit of labour, y - 2 (in Figure I this would be approximated by

the relative drop TM/OM), is equal to (1 -             Thus the fall is gross

output per unit of labour, at given capital labour ratio, is only a a-portion

of the relative distance TM/OM (usually 0 <a < 1).

     211f   akn is the Allen-Uzawa partial elasticity of substitution and

is the material share, one can get a rough estimate of a from s (a     -   a ),
                                                                n kn        nn
the components of which are obtained from a translog model. The U.S. estimate

is based on Berndt and Wood (1979) for the year 1971. The Japanese numbers

are obtained from Lipton [1981], Tables 1.1 and 1.5, for alternative models as

well as "short-period" (1955-1972) and "long-period" (1955-1978) average esti-

mates. The U.K. (1956-1978) and German (1961-1976) estimates are obtained from

a two-level CES production function model in Bruno and Sachs [1981].

     22This form was chosen after testing the level regressions for serial/correla-

tion. and finding p    0 for the FPF and p      1 for productivity.

     231n the case of the U.S., the implied time-shift factor of the two equa-

tions is significantly different, indicating a possible inconsistency of the

sets of data used. On the other hand, the first U.S. regression was run with

a cross-equation constraint on the coefficients of the j   term. This can be

worked out on the assumption that any deviation of actual from planned output is

linearly related to j and that for such deviations labour and materials are

used in fixed proportions.
                                      -30-



     2We did try one additional direct check by using input share data obtained

from the BLS (Norsworthy and Harper {l979fl. Regressing the share     (Tm   +   n   -
                                                                                        q)
on im (as well as j)    for   the period 1958-1977 gave an elasticity of

0.672 (±0.042) or 0.86 (±0.059) when serial correlation was allowed for.

     25For a statement of the measurement bias in the more general case, see

Bruno [1978],

     26Note that (10) and (11) are the same when   ll = 1.   This would happen

when double deflation is done with a continuously shifting base year, which

amounts to the use of a Divisia index.

     27This is the base period used in the BLS data for the United States.

     8It may be worth pointing out that the FPF framework would also be rele-

vant if the productivity shock had partly come from another source.

     29The view that the productivity slowdown can be ascribed to capital becom-

ing obsolescent at the new energy prices, such as recently suggested by Baily

[1981], is in some sense complementary to the argument proposed in the present

paper,
                                       -31-



REFERENCES


Arrow, Kenneth J., "The Measurement of Real Value Added," in Nations and House-

     holds in Economic Growth: Essays in Honor of Moses Abramowitz. Paul A.

     David and Melvin W. Reder, eds. (New York and London: Academic Press,

     1974).

Artus, Jacques R., "Measures of Potential Output in Manufacturing for Eight

     Industrial Countries, 1955-1978," IMF Staff Papers, XXIV (March 1977), 1-24.

Baily, M., "Productivity and the Services of Capital and Labour," Brookings

     Papers on Economic Activity No. 1 (1981).

Berndt, E.R., Energy Price Increases and the Productivity Slowdown in United

     States Manufacturing (Department of Economics; Resources Paper No. 51).

     Vancouver: University of British Columbia, 1980.

__________ and D.O. Wood, "Enginering and Econometric Interpretations of Energy-

     Capital Complementarity," american Economic Review, LXIX (June 1979), 342-54.

Bosworth, B. and R.Z. Lawrence, Commodity Prices and the New Inflation, The

     Brookings Institution, 1982 (forthcoming).

Bruno, Michael, "Duality, Intermediate Inputs and Value-Added." In Production

     Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory and Applications, Vol. 2 (Amsterdam:

     North-Holland, 1978), Pp. 3-16.

_________ "Adjustment and Structural Change Under Supply Shocks," NBER Working
    Paper No.     (December 1981) (forthcoming in Scandinavian Journal of

    Economics).

_________ and Jeffrey Sachs, Supply Versus Demand Approaches to the Problem of
    Stagflation, Discussion Paper No. 796, Jerusalem: Falk Institute, 1979

     (appeared in Macroeconomic Policies for Growth and Stability, Institut filr

    Weltwittschaft, Kiel, 1981).
                                         -32-




           and ___________,   "Input   Price Shocks and the Slowdown in Economic

     Growth: Estimates for U.K. Manufacturing," presented at the Conference on

     Unemployment, Newnham College, Cambridge, July 1981.

Christensen, Laurits R., Dale W. Jorgenson, and Lawrence J. Lau, "Transcendental

     Logarithmic Production Frontiers," Review of Economics and Statistics, LV

     (Feb. 1973), 28-45.

Denison, E.F., Accounting for Slower Economic Growth: The United States in the

     1970s (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1979).

Enoch, C.A. and M. Pani, "Commodity Prices in the -970,"Bank of England

     Quarterly Bulletin, March 1981, 42—53.

Feldstein, Martin S. and Lawrence Summers, "Is the Rate of Profit Falling?"

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1 (1977), 211-27.

Glyn, A. and B. Sutcliffe, Capitalism in Crisis (New York: Random House, 1972).

Griliches, Zvi, "R F D and the Productivity Slowdown," ?irnerican Economic Review

     Papers and Proceedings, LXX (May 1980), 343-48.

Hill, T.P., Profits and the Rate of Return (Paris: OECD, 1979).

Holland, Daniel M. and Stewart C. Myers, "Profitability and Capital Costs for

     Manufacturing Corporations and All Nonfinancial Corporations," American

     Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, LXX (May 1980), 320-25.

Hudson, E.A. and D.W. Jorgenson, "Energy Prices and the U.S. Economy, 1972-76,"

     Natural Resource Journal, Oct. 1978, 877-97.

Jorgenson, Dale W., "Energy and the Outlook for the U.S. Economic Growth,"

     Cambridge: Department of Economics, Harvard University.

Kravis, I.B. and R.E. Lipsey, "Prices and Terms of Trade for Developed Country

     Exports of Manufactured Goods," Working Paper No. 774, National Bureau for

     Economic Research, Sept. 1981.

Leontief, W.W., "A Note on the Interrelations of Subsets of Independent
                                      -33-




     Variables of a Continuous Function with Continuous First Derivatives,"

     Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, LIII (No. 4, 1947), 343-50.

Lipton, D., Accumulation and Growth in Open Economies, Ph.D. thesis (unpublished),

     Harvard University, Oct. 1981.

Nadiri, M. Ishaq, "Sectoral Productivity Slowdown," American Economic Review

     Papers and Proceedings, LXX (May 1980), 349-52.

Norsworthy, J.R. and M.J. Harper, "Productivity Growth in Manufacturing in the

     1980's: Labour, Capital and Energy," American Statistical Association,

     Proceedings of the Business and Statistics Section, pp. 17-26.

__________             and K. Kunze, "The Slowdown in Productivity Growth:

     Analysis of Some Contributing Factors," Brookings Papers on Economic

    Activity, No. 2 (1979), 387-421.

Sachs, J.D., "Wages, Profits and Macroeconomic Adjustment: A Comparative Study,"

     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2 (1979), 269-332.

Sargent, J.R., "Productivity and Profits in UK Manufacturing," Midland Bank

    Review (Autumn 1979).

Tobin, James, "Comment on Bruno and Sachs, 'Supply Versus Demand Approaches to

     the Problem of Stagflation," Conference on Macroeconomic Policies for

     Growth and Stability--The European Perspective, Kiel, July 1979 (Appear-

    ed in Volume, op. cit. 1981).

Wakasugi, 1., K. Nishina and M. Tsuchiya, "Trends in Profitability for Japanese

     Industrial Corporations," M.I.T. Sloane School project on the Rate of

     Return to Capital, 1980.

Williams, N.P., "Influences on the Profitability of 22 Industrial Sectors,"

     Bank of England, 1980, mimeograph.
                                      -34-


                                   Table I
         Rate of Change of Selected Variables, Manufacturing Sector:
                                 1955—1980


                          United       United
                          States      Kingdom     Germany       Japan

                                (compounded annual rate, percent)


1. Gross
     1955-1972              4.3         2.7          6.0        13.6

     1972-1975             —0.7          0          -0.6            3.3
     1975-1978              7.8         1.4          3.8            9.1

     1978-1980              0.4        -5,0          2.6            7.5

2.   Output per man—hour, Q/L
     1955-1972              3.6         3.5          5.8            9.2
     1972-1975              1.4         0.7          4.7            2.3
     1975-1978              3.7         1.4          5.0            8.0
     1978-1980              1.5         0.6          2.7            6.9
3. Capital stock per man—hour, K/L
     1955-1972              2.0         4.9          6.7            6.7
     1972-1975              4.2         3.1          9.5        13.3

     1975-1978             —1.2          1.8
     1978-1980              4.4         7.9
4. Man—hours, L
     I55-1972               0.7        -0.8          0.2            4.0
     1972-1973             -2.1        -0.7         —5.3
     1975-1978              4.1           0         -1.2            1.1
     1978-1980             —1.1        -5.6         -0.1            0.6
5.   Relative price of material inputs, 11n (Index 1971 =   100),    selected years
     1955                   112          122         111             93c
     1971                   100          100         100            100
     1974                   131          147        109             158

     1978                   122         131         100             125
     1980                   128          140         110            149d
                                      -35-




Table I (cont'd). Rate of Change of Selected Variables,
                   Manufacturing Sector: 1955—1980


                           United      United
                           States     Kingdom    Germany       Japan
                               (compounded annual rate, percent)


6.   Product wage, W
                       -
      1955l972                3.0        4.3         8.4         11.4
      1972-1975              -1.9        3.7         5.8           7.9
      1975-1978               2.2       -0.2        5.6            6.3
      1978-1980              -1.8       4.4
7.   Rate of profit in manufacturing, R, selected years (pe.rcent)e
     1965                  21.5       10.2         19.0        6.8f
     1972                  13.4        8.4         13.9        5.5
     1975                     8,7       1.9        11.7          3.7
     1976                    11.2       4.3        12.7          4.4
     1977                    12.0       5.9         ..           4.5
     1978                    11.9       5.9         ..           4.8
     1980                    (9.6)     (2.8)



      a
          Defined as Index of gross output in manufacturing.
      b19751977      c1956 d1979
      eThese figures cannot be compared across countries, 1980 estimates are
rough and preliminary. f1966.

Sources: Gross output (Q) [for U.S.: FRS Index of manufacturing production],
     Man-hours (L) [for U.S. - hours paid; for others - hours worked), and Wage
     rate (W): from Bureau of Labor Statistics, International Comparisons of Manu-
     facturing Productivity and Labor Costs--Preliminary Measures for 1980 [May 1981].
     Material prices (Pn) and Wholesale prices (P): U.S., Economic Report of the
     President [1981], Tables B-55, B-56; U.K., CSO, Economic Trends [1980]; Japan,
     Bank of Japan, Bulletin; and Germany, OECD, Main Economic Indicators, various
     years.
     Capital stock (K): Gross stock, based on estimates prepared by Artus [1977].
     Rate of profit (R): U.S., from Holland and Myers [1980]; U.K., Williams [1980];
     Germany, Hill [1979]; Japan, from Wakasugi et al. [1980].
                                       -36-




                                   Table    II.
                       Factor Price Frontier: Equation (6)ä

                 United States     United Kingdom             Germany        Japan
                   1955-1978          1961—1977              1960- 1976    1966-19 78


                 Cl)       (2)b       (3)          (4)      (5)      (6)     (7)


Regression coefficients of
t (time)         0.018    0.036     0.183         0.168    0.173   0.220    0.134
                 O016     OO22                    OO72     OO63    OO7O     OO73
w               -1.413   -2.061    -3.518     -4.994      -2.672   3.698   -1.426
 P               O636     O838      1695          1757     O969    1O19     O626
                -1,177   -1.648    -2.269     -2,364      -1.910   2.902   -1.686
                 O297     OL83      O5Lf8         O61B     O83L    O8Lf9    O517
j               19.001
                 1598
                         19.347
                          1837
                                   14.035
                                    6t+99
                                                    -      2.449
                                                           1O16
                                                                      -       -

Statistics
R               0,91      0.89      0.83          0.78    0,91     0,88    0.78
DW              1.97      2.04      2.21          2.29    1.37     1.80    1,25
SE              0.08      0,09      0.21      0.24        0.05     0.06    0.14

Estimated pararnetersc
A               0,016     0,019     0.031     0.034       0.057    0.059   0.094
                0.414     0.326     0,221     0.167       0.272    0.213   0.407
                0.328     0.350     0.334     0.283       0.342    0.382   0.410



     a511 numerals are standard errors             See Table I stubs for explanation
of symbols.
     B
      Column (2) is a two-stage least-squares variant.
     C
      A    is corrected for time trend of j.
                                                                    -37-



                                                                Table III.

                                       Estimates of Production Parameters5

                 United States                         United Kingdom                       Germany                      Japan
                (1)             (2)     (3)         (4)     (5)             (6)       (7)      (8)        (9)    (10) (11)  (12)
                1957-1980             59-72 57-80           1957-1978                       1961- 1976          66-78 58-78 61-77

AF          0.019       0.018                                                                         O.06l              rO 121
            0•001       0001                      0.032 0.028 ).027 0. 059 0. 057                     0   • 0 0 3 0.102, 0    •00 6 0.090
            0.037 0.036 0.033 0002 000 8 005                                      Dm003       00O3 10.045       0,010    0.096       0   •023
            0•OOL+      O007          0 •0   12                                                       .D •0O+            ,0   •023
            0.249 0.265 (0.33)0.l56                        (0.22) (0.22) 0.218 0.197                  0.186 0.431 0.439 (0.40)
            O036 0031           00 3L                                    0 •0L+8 0,0 Li.1             0•035 0        9t
                                                                                                                  •090   0,0
            0.327 0.278 (0. 35)0. 253                      (0.33) (0.33) 0.379               0.396 0.366 0.444 0.498
            0•030   029 0   •   0 0 37             •                              o ,07 0,0     2 0,0 LL 0,0 +9 00 3                 (0.41)

    (j)    16.978 19.324
                • 720
                                                   (0)                                                    (0)    (0)                     (0)
            1           1   •530
e (j)       2.930           (0)        2,16 (0)             (0)     ).89          0.854        (0)        (0)     (0)         (0)        (0)
            0   •291                   o •to                       0 •LfG         0   •219
a          -0. 216                                                  ).35          0.132
            0   • 109   0   21
                        0.196          0.57 0.337 0.46
                                       0    0,189 0•18              I
                                                                        •15       o •229
                                                                                             0.472 0.649 0.812 0.756 0.91
                                                                                             0,287 0281 021t+ 0212029

Statistics
     IF     0.095       0.080           -         0.201                               0560.067 0.0540.1190.132
SE .
     (Q     0.014       0.026 0.01                0.023 0.02            .02       0.013 0.018 0.015 0.0450.057 0.049

     (F     2.07        2.22            -         1.76      -
                                                                                  1.76 1.84 1.82 1.14 0.87 I                             -
DW j
     lQ     2.44        2.07          1.75        1.40    1.74     [.58           2.40       1.41 2.04 1.33 1.54 1.88
Method
of              2           2         1(p)        2+1     1(p)          1                    2+1                 2        2          1(p)
Esti-
      b
mation


Notes on table:

     a Small numbers are standard errors.      Numbers in round brackets are assumed
coefficients.   (..) implies highly insignificant.  (-) not estimated.
            = single     equation OLS, 1(p) = corrected for autocorrelation.
          2 =   joint   regression using FIML, 2+1 = FIML + use of instrumental variables
                                          -38-




                                        Table IV

                   Estimated Components of Productivity Slowdown


                                          (average logarithmic rate of change)

                                 United           United
                                 States          Kingdom     Germany      Japan

Average rate of change of output (Liq)
•    196Os                        5,2
2. 1970b                          2.7              2,1         1.2         4.6
3. Average deceleration of
     output (1. less 2.)          2.5              5.3         4.6         7,7

     Of which:
4. Labour input, L                0.6              1.8         3.1         2.4
5. Capital input, K               0.0              0.3         0.8         2.0
                        C                                                   -
6. Cyclical factor                0.4              0.4         0.2

Productivity slowdown
7.   (3. less 4., 5., 6.)         1.5              2.8         0.5         3,3

Raw materials price change
8. Unweighted (ATr)               3.8              5,7         2.7         6.6
9. Weightedd                      1.9              3.1         1.6         4.6

"Implied" value of under
full accounting (7:9)             0,8              0.9         0.3         0.7



     aUnited States, 1959-1972; United Kingdom and Japan, 1958-1973; Germany, 1960-
      1973.

     bUnited States, 1973-1980; United Kingdom, 1974-1980; Japan, 1974-1978; and
      Germany, 1974-1977.
     C.EStitd effect of j       (weekly hours) from a regression for the pre-1973
      period.
     dTh.s is    (1 -            using       estimates from FPF regressions.
I               —39—




M




0




                           F0 (vu)




                       S       R
0   R1     R0
                   N




         F--re I
           Figure II
          Relative Input Price in Manufacturing 1955—80,four major industrial countries
          and the relative world price of primary exports (Kravis—Lipsey)
                                                                                            K -L
                                                                                                           /\                                -
                                                                                                                                   '   JAP
                                                                                                   /            \\
                                                                                                                                             UK
                                                                                                                                              -, I•3c
                                                                                        I
                K— L                                                                   SII
                                                                                            II                            I'•
                                                                                                                         •1
                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                             IJs
                                                                                             I
    1.2r                                                                                      II                         S
                                                                                                                          4                   —    - 122
0                                                                                  I                             S
                                                                                  I
                                                                                  /\\/ /
    11o                                                                                                                                            - 1-10
                                                                             II
    1—
                                                     —
                                                 S
                 JAP                    S
                        I —   —
                                  e—_       ,        I    I                        I                   I             I                 I
                   I                                 I    I.   I    I    I         I                   I
           54      56   SE:       £0        62       64   66   63   70   72        •'rrI               ib  •—
                                                                                                                     io
                     Figure III
w
1966=
 100
        UNITED KINGDOM
                                                       75                                    GERMANY
                     =   41%
             L\7r                                                                                   =
                                                                                             L\7r       11%
110—    75
                                        72
100-
                                                                                        63
                                             62
  90-                                                              • Actual observations
                                                                   .o   Regression line
                                                            —---oiForecast         1978—80
             --t-.   I            I   _J_                   ____                    I                   I
                          5                       10                          15                        20
             Figure     IV
w
1966=               72
                                            I                  1
 100                                                                                               OBSERVATIONS
                                                              UNITED STATES                               •
                                                                                                         Actual
                                                               A7r = 27%
                                                                                                  -----' Decycled
                                                                                                                  Forecast   79.—
110—                                                                   72
                                      69              70
        74              66
                                                 80   o
                                                                                             '4
90—            78
                                                      58
                              JAPAN                                             N
                             ZX7r=41%
                    I                 I
                                           io.
                                                          I        I   I    I   I
                                                                                15
                                                                                     I   I            I       I
                                                                                                              20
