                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 SUIT AND SETTLEMENT VS. TRIAL:
            A THEORETICAL ANALYSIS UNDER ALTERNATIVE
            METHODS FOR THE ALLOCATION OF LEGAL COSTS


                         Steven Shavell


                      Working Paper No. 662




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           April 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper /1662
                                                               April 1981



                             Suit and Settlement Vs. Trial:
                     A
                     Theoretical Analysis Under Alternative
                    Methods for the Allocation of Legal Costs


                                      ABSTRACT




     Will a party who believes that he has a legally admissible claim for

money damages decide to bring suit? if so, will he subsequently settle

with the opposing party or will he go ahead to trial? These questions are

analyzed under four methods for allocating legal costs, namely, under the

American yem, whereby each side bears its own costs; under the "indemnity"

or British yem, whereby the losing side bears all costs; under the ytem

favoring the             whereby the plaintiff pays only his own costs if

he loses and nothing otherwise; and under the ystem favor the defendant,

whereby the defendant pays only his own costs if he loses and nothing

otherwise. Following the analysis, two brief illustrations are considered

and comments are made on the relative social desirability of the methods

of allocating legal costs.



                                                 Steven Shaveil
                                                 Harvard University
                                                 Law School
                                                 Langdell 260
                                                 Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                                 (617) t1957920
                                  2



                 SUIT AND SETTLEMENT VS. TRIAL:
        A Theoretical Analysis under Alternative Methods

                for the Allocation of Legal Costs



                         Steven Shavell*


       Will a party who believes that he has a legally admis-
  sible claim for money damages decide to bring suit?
                                                             If so,
 will he subsequently settle with the opposing
                                                party or will
 he go ahead to trial? These questions are Considered
                                                        in
 this article under four methods for allocating
                                                 legal costs1,
 namely, under the American
                            ytern, whereby each side bears
 its own costs; under
                      the "indemnity" or British ystem,
 whereby the losing side bears all costs; under the
                                                         ytem
 favori the pjintiff, whereby the plaintiff pays only his
 own costs if he loses and
                             nothing otherwise; and under the
        favorp the defendant, whereby the defendant pays
 only his own costs if he loses
                                   and nothing otherwise.2
      To examine in a systematic
                                      and careful way the two
questions under the methods
                              for allocating legal costs, it
will be necessary to
                    study a simple, stylized model of the
litigation process. Analysis of this model in the text is
informal, with a series of
                             numerical examples illustrating
 the main points of interest, and so should be
                                               accessible to
 the widest audience;
                      a formal statement of the model and
proofs of results are contained in
                                    an appendix. Following
the analysis, two brief illustrations are considered
                                                      and
comJents are made on the relative
                                   social desirability of the
methods of allocating legal costs.
                             3



1.   The Model3
     The parties are assumed to view suit and settlement or

litigation solely as a financial matter and face the situa-

tion shown in Figure 1. As indicated, the plaintiff4 must
first decide whether to bring suit.5 He is assumed to be
able to bring suit at no cost,6 and to decide to do so if

and only if he would be willing to go to trial.7 Of course,
whether he would be willing to go to trial depends on an ex
ante evaluation of his chance of prevailing, on the probable
magnitude of a judgment, and on the legal costs of going to
trial and the method by which they are to be allocated.
     If the plaintiff does decide to bring suit, it is
assumed that he and the defendant will reach a settlement if
and only if there exists some settlement amount that both he

and the defendant would prefer to going to trial.8 (The
settlement process is itself assumed to be costless.9)
Thus, whether settlement will occur depends on both the

plaintifft s and the defendant's ex ante evaluations.
     These evaluations will be analyzed under two different
assumptions. According to the first, a party is assumed to

be risk neutral. Under risk neutrality a party evaluates an
uncertain prospect by its expected value, that is, by dis-

counting possible outcomes by their probabilities.'0 If the
plaintiff thinks the likelihood of obtaining a judgment for
$10,000 is 25%, then we would say that the expected value to

him of the judgment is $2,500 (i.e., 25% x $10,000) or, more

simply, that his expected judgment is $2,500.11 By definition,
                               1fd




    IcA ;zf—
                           t& a1.-t
    5




3QR J1ET       ()ç 1cTuH
                            4



a risk neutral party would be indifferent between receiving

(or paying) $2,500 for sure and receiving (or paying) or
$10,000 with probability 25%; he cares only about expected
value, not about the degree of uncertainty. In contrast a
risk averse party is one for whom uncertainty itself is
undesirable;'2 that is, he cares not only about expected
value but also about uncertainty. Thus, a risk averse party
would prefer receiving (or paying) $2,500 for sure to receiv-

ing (or paying) $10,000 with probability 25%, and this to

receiving (or paying) $100,000 with probability 2.5%J3
Most of the analysis that follows will focus on the case

where both parties are risk neutral. This case is empha-
sized only because it allows an especially simple charac-
terization to be made of certain underlying factors deter-
mining suit and settlement or trial. We stress that the
case where one or both of the parties are risk averse is not
viewed as less important and would in fact be likely to be

of significance when a party has little wealth or, more
generally, when the amount at stake is large in relation to

his assets.'4



2.   Suit
     Given the assumptions of the model and, for now, that

of risk neutrality, it is straightforward to identify and to

compare the circumstances under which a plaintiff will bring
suit under the four systems of allocating legal costs. The
first statement to be made is simply that under the American
                                  5


  ytem,

 l5
           the p i nti f f will       suit if and oily if his
 e c ted judgment would be at least as 1 ag as his
                                                   _____
           To illustrate, consider
      Example 1. The plaintiff's legal costs from a trial
      would be $1,000, and he believes that if he prevails,
      he would obtain a judgment
      thinks the likelihood of    for $10,000. Thus, if he
                               prevailing is, say, 75%, he
      will bring suit, for then his expected judgment from a
      trial would be $7,500 (i.e., 75% x $10,000), which
      would exceed his legal costs of $1,000. However, if he
      believes the chance of
                             success is only, say, 5%, he
      will not bring suit, since his expected judgment would
      be $500, which would be less than his legal costs.
      Similarly, under the British ystem, the plaintiff will
 p     suit   if and oy if his pected judgment would be at
 least as large as his expected          costs - -that is, the
 total al costs discounted y his probability of losj at
 trial.16 Consider now

     Example 2. The plaintiff's legal costs and beliefs
     concerMi3g a judgment are as in the previous example,
     and the defendant's legal costs from a trial would be
     $1,500.17,' Consequently, if the plaintiff thinks the
     Probability of prevailing is 75%, his expected judgment
     of $7,500 would exceed his expected legal costs of $625
     (i.e., 25% x $2,500), so that he would bring suit. But
     if he thinks the probability is 5%, his expected judgment
     of $500 would be below his expected legal costs of
     $2,375 (i.e., 95% x $2,500), so that he would not bring
     suit.

     Comparing the two systems, it is apparent that the
frequency of suit will be greater under the British ystem

when the plaintiff believes the likelihood of pvailin is

sufficiently high--above a "critical" level--and the frequency
will be greater under the American ystem when the likelihood
is below the critical level.18 This is so because when the

plaintiff is relatively optimistic about prevailing, his

          legal costs will be relatively low under the British
                             6



system--he will be thinking about the possibility of not
having to pay any such costs--whereas under the American
system he must bear his own costs with certainty. Thus he
will be likely to find suit a more attractive prospect under

the British system. But when the plaintiff is not optimistic,
converse reasoning explains why he would be expected to sue
more often under the American system.19 The following

example explicitly demonstrates this result.
     Example 3.  If the plaintiff believes that his chance
     of prevailing is at the "high" level of 75%, then it
     was observed that under the British system his expected
     legal costs would be $625. Since this is less than the
     $1,000 in costs that he would bear under the American
     system, the plaintiff would be more likely to bring
     suit under the British system; specifically, if his
     expected judgment would exceed $625 but would be less
     than $1,000, he would sue under the British system but
     not under the American.20/ However, if instead the
     plaintiff thinks his chance of prevailing is at the
     "low" level of 5%, his expected legal costs from going
     to trial under the British system would be, as was
     noted, $2,375, so that he would be more likely to bring
     suit under the American system; whenever his expected
     judgment would exceed $1,000 but not $2,375, he would
     sue only under the American system. The critical
     probability of prevailing--above which the plaintiff
     would find suit more attractive under the British
     system and below which under the American system--turns
     out in this example to be 60%, for at 60%, the expected
     legal costs under the British system would be $1,000
     (i.e., 40% x $2,500), which equals what they would be
     under the American system.21/

     Turning now to the other two systems, it is clear that

under the system favoring the plaintiff, he will bring suit
if and only if his expected judgment at trial would be at
least as large as his expected legal costs--his own legal
costs discounted    his probability of losing. And under
the system favoring the defendant, the plaintiff will bring
suit if and only if his expected judgment would be at least
                              7




 as large as his expected legal costs--now equal to his own

 legal costs, plus those of the defendant discounted   y the
 probability of losing.22 Moreover, with regard to a compar-
 ison of frequencies of suit under the four systems, it is

readily shown that the frequency of suit will be greatest
under the ystem favoring the plaintiff and least under the

system favoring the defendant.23 Why this should be the
case is obvious. On the one hand, the plaintiff finds the
system favoring himself most attractive--he never bears
legal costs greater than under the other systems and may
bear a lesser cost. On the other hand, the plaintiff finds

the system favoring the defendant least attractive--the

plaintiff then never bears legal costs lower than under the
other systems, and may bear a greater cost.

     How is what has been said to this point affected if the
plaintiff is assumed to be risk averse rather than risk

neutral? Plainly, the general effect of the plaintiff's
risk aversion is to reduce the likelihood of suit; for going
to trial involves uncertainty, which by definition the risk

averse plaintiff but not the risk neutral plaintiff finds

disadvantageous.25 To see this effect illustrated under the
American system, consider

    Example 4. Given that his legal costs would be $1,000
    and the prospect of receiving a judgment for $10,000, a
    risk neutral plaintiff would bring suit under the
    American system if his probability of prevailing ex-
    ceeds 10%. To see that a risk averse plaintiff would
    not bring suit as often, assume for instance that the
    plaintiff's initial wealth is $5,000 and that his
    "utility of wealth" is the square root of wealth.26/
    Then it is indeed so that the plaintiff might not sue
    when his risk-neutral counterpart would. If the risk
                             8



     averse plaintiff believes the probability of prevailing
     is, say, 11%, he would choose not to sue: if he does
     not sue, his utility of wealth is 70.71 (i.e.,5,000);
     if he goes to trial his.p.cted util4yis less, it
     is 69.30 (i.e., 11% x /14,000 + 89% x\j4,000——the utility
     of his wealth if he wins discounted by the probability
     of winning plus the utility of his wealth if he loses
     discounted by that probability).27/ In fact, for the
     particular risk averse plaintiff described here to
     bring suit, his likelihood of success must exceed
     approximately 13 l/2%.28/
Were examples of the effect of risk aversion under the other
systems as well to be considered (which would be tedious),

it would become evident that the reduction in the likelihood
of suit would not be uniform because the variability in the

plaintiff's position as between prevailing or not differs
among the systems: the variability is least under the Ameri-
can system, where it equals the magnitude of the judgment;29
it is larger under the system favoring the plaintiff, where

it equals the judgment plus the plaintiff's legal costs, and
also under the system favoring the defendant, where it

equals the judgment plus the defendant's costs;3° and the
variability is greatest under the British system, where it
equals the judgment plus the plaintiff's and the defendant's
legal costs.31 Thus, we should expect the effect of risk
aversion--the reduction in the frequency of suit--to be

strongest under the British system, less under the systems
favoring the plaintiff and the defendant, and least under
the American system.32 However, the qualitative nature of
the comparison of frequency of suit under the systems is

essentially unaltered.33
                               9



 3.    Settlement vs. trial

      Assuming that the plaintiff has found it worthwhile to
 bring suit, the question remains as to is whether he and the
 defendant will settle or go to trial. It is important to
 remember that this question is conditional upon the plaintiff's

having already brought suit. To determine the absolute
rates of settlement or litigation under the different systems

for allocating legal costs generally requires answering both
the conditional question and the prior question about the
frequency of suit.34 The two questions are treated separately
here solely for analytical convenience and for clarity. To

answer the conditional question, we will use the supposition
of the model (see p. 3, supra) that there will be a settle-
ment if and only if there is a settlement amount that both
the plaintiff and the defendant would prefer to going to
trial. As in the previous section the case where both

parties are risk neutral is considered in detail, followed
by a brief discussion of the case where one or both parties
are risk averse.

      Under the American system,35 there will be a trial if
and only if the plaintiff's estimate of the expected judgment
exceeds the defendant's estimate     at least the sum of
their legal costs.36 The simple logic behind this result is
that because the plaintiff and the defendant will save the

sum of their legal costs by settling, the only factor that
could lead to a trial is that the plaintiff's expectations

as to the likelihood of success or the judgment that could
                             10



be obtained are more optimistic than the defendant's.37

This is what would make the plaintiff find unsatisfactory
what the defendant would be willing to offer in settlement;

and, clearly, the plaintiff's feeling pessimistic relative
to the defendant could only reinforce the incentive to
settle on account of potential savings in legal costs. (As
will be seen below, this conclusion about settlement vs.

litigation is a general one, and will apply under the other

cost allocation systems as well.) Consider

     Example 5.  In this and the other examples set forth in
     this section, it will be assumed that the defendant
     believes that the plaintiff will prevail with probabil-
     ity 50% and that both the plaintiff and the defendant
     believe that the judgment the plaintiff would obtain if
     he prevailed would be for $10,000. What will vary in
     this and later examples is only the assumption concern-
     ing the plaintiff's belief about the likelihood of
     prevailing.
          Suppose first that the plaintiff's estimate of the
     likelihood of prevailing is identical to the defendant's.
     Then the plaintiff's expected judgment would equal the
     defendant's estimate of it; thus, there will not be a
     trial. To see this result explicitly, observe that the
     plaintiff's expected net gain from going to trial would
     be $4,000--his expected judgment of $5,000 (i.e., 50% x
     $10,000) less the $1,000 in legal costs--and he would
     therefore be willing to make a settlement for an amount
     exceeding $4,000. Similarly, the defendant's expected
     loss from going to trial would be $6,500-—his expected
     judgment of $5,000 plus $1,500 in legal costs--so he
     would be willing to make a settlement for an amount
     below $6,500. Consequently, both the plaintiff and the
     defendant would be willing to make a settlement for an
     amount in the range between $4,000 and $6,500. (Where
     in that range the settlement would fall would depend on
     factors (bargaining power, negotiating skill, etc.)
     lying outside the scope of present concern.)
          Now suppose that the plaintiff is somewhat more
     optimistic about his situation, believing that the
     likelihood of prevailing is 60%. Then his expected
     judgment would be $6,000, which exceeds the defendant's
     expected judgment by only $1,000, an amount less than
     the $2,500 joint legal costs, so that there would still
     be a settlement according to the result under considera-
     tion. To see why this result obtains, observe that the
                              11



     plaintiff's expected net gain from going to trial would
     now be $5,000 (i.e., $6,000—$l,000), meaning that the
     range of potential settlements is reduced to that
     between $5,000 and $6,500, but is not eliminated.
          However, the possibilities for settlement would be
     eliminated if the plaintiff's likelihood of prevailing
     is sufficiently high. If the likelihood were 80%, then
     the plaintiff's expected judgment of $8,000 would
     exceed the defendant's by $3,000, which is more than
     the sum of their legal costs, so that there would be a
     trial. To see why, note that in this instance the
     plaintiff's expected net gain from going to trial would
     be $7,000, which is more than the $6,500 maximum amount
     the defendant would be willing to pay.

     Under the British system, there will be a trial if and
onjy if the plaintiff's estimate of the expected judgment
exceeds the defendant's estimate      at least the sum of
their expected legal costs.38 This result follows from much
the same reasoning that applied above concerning the American

system, the only difference being that here the condition
determining whether there will be a trial involves the sum
of the plaintiff's and defendant's expected legal costs.
The reason for the difference is of course that what moti-

vates settlement is what the parties perceive that they will

save in legal costs; and what each party perceives himself
as saving under the British system is not his own legal

costs but rather his expected legal costs, that is, his
likelihood of loss times the costs of both parties. The

following example illustrates this.
    Example 6.  If the plaintiff's estimate of the likeli-
    hood of prevailing were 50%, equal to the defendant's,
    then since there would be no difference between the
    estimates of the expected judgment, there would be a
    settlement. Because the plaintiff's expected net gain
    from going to trial would be $3,750 (i.e., $5,000 less
    the expected legal costs of 50% x $2,500) and the
    defendant's expected loss from going to trial would be
    $6,250 (i.e., $5,000 + 50% x $2,500), the amount of the
    settlement would fall between these two figures.
                             12



         If the plaintiff thought the likelihood of success
    were 60%, then the difference between his estimate of
    the expected judgment and the defendant's would be
    $1,000, which is less than his expected legal costs of
    $1,000 (i.e., 40% x $2,500) plus the defendant's legal
    costs of $1,250. Thus, there would be a settlement; in
    fact, it would be in the range between the plaintiff's
    expected net gain of $5,000 (i.e., $6,000—$l,000) were
    he to go to trial, and the defendant's expected loss of
    $6,250.
         But if the plaintiff believed the probability of
    success were 80%, then the $3,000 difference that would
    exist between his estimate of the expected judgment and
    the defendant's would exceed his expected legal costs
    of $500 (i.e., 20% x $2,500) plus the defendant's
    $1,250; thus, there would be a trial. In this case,
    the least that the plaintiff would accept would be his
    $7,500 (i.e., $8,000 - $500) expected net gain were he
    to go to trial, which is larger than the highest amount
    the defendant would be willing to pay, $6,250, his
    expected loss were he to go to trial.

     To compare the likelihood of trial under the British
and American systems, assume that the plaintiff and defendant
agree about the magnitude of a possible judgment, so that

their opinions can diverge only in respect to the probability
of prevailing at trial.39 Then, conditional on suit having
been brought, the likelihood of trial under the British
                                                         40
system will be greater than under the American system.        In

essence, the reason for this result is that for litigation
to be a possibility in the first place, the plaintiff's
estimate of the expected judgment must exceed the defendant's,

which implies that the plaintiff's estimate of the probability

of prevailing exceeds the defendant's (by our assumption

they agree about the magnitude of a possible judgment). But
when this is true, the British system tends to reduce the
sum of expected legal costs41 and thus tends to make a trial

more likely.
                              13



      Example 7. Initially, this example illustrates that if
      the plaintiff's estimate of the probability of prevail-
      ing exceeds the defendant's, then the sum of expected
      legal costs would be smaller under the British system
      than the $2,500 sum under the American system. As
      noted before, under the British system, the defendant's
      expected costs would be $1,250. Thus, if the plaintiff's
     estimate of the likelihood of prevailing is, say, 55%,
     his expected legal costs would be $1,125 (i.e., 45% x
      $2,500) and the sum of expected costs would be $2,375
      (i.e., $1,250 + $1,125); similarly, if the plaintiff's
     estimate of the likelihood were 70%, then, his expected
     costs would be $750 (i.e., 30% x $2,500) and the sum of
     expected costs would be just $2,000. Since the sum of
     expected costs is lower under the British system, it is
     possible for there to be litigation under that system
     but not under the American system (yet impossible for
     there to be litigation under the American system but
     not under the British system). This would occur when-
     ever the difference between the plaintiff's and the
     defendant's estimates of the expected judgment exceeds
     the sum of expected costs under the British system but
     not the $2,500 sum of costs under the American system.
     For instance, if the plaintiff's estimate of the proba-
     bility of prevailing were 72%, the difference between
     the estimates of the expected judgment would be $2,200,
     which exceeds the expected sum of costs of $1,950
     (i.e., 28% x $2,500 + $1,250) but not $2,500; hence
     there would be litigation under the British syem but
     room for settlement under the American system.

It should be remarked, however, that if the assumption that
the plaintiff and the defendant agree about the magnitude of
the judgment is relaxed, then the conclusion just illustrated
may be reversed; it is possible that there would be litigation
under the American system but not under the British system.
This would occur when the plaintiff is pessimistic relative
to the defendant about the probability of prevailing, yet

believes that the judgment would be much higher should he
prevail than does the defendant. In this type of situation,
since the plaintiff is the party who is relatively pessimis-
tic about the likelihood of prevailing, the British system

tends to increase the perceived joint legal costs of the
                             14



parties43 and therefore makes it more likely that they will
settle.
        44

     Consider now the systems favoring the plaintiff or the
defendant. Under these systems the general way of expressing
the condition determining whether there is settlement or
trail is what it was before, that is, that there will be a

trial if and only if the plaintiff's estimate of the expected
judgment exceeds the defendant's estimate y at least the
sum of their expected legal costs. But, of course, since
the parties' expected legal costs will be different under
the two systems, the frequencies of settlement and litiga-
tion will also differ.45   More precisely, assuming that the
plaintiff and the defendant agree about the size of the

potential judgment, it can be shown that conditional on suit
having been brought, the likelihood of trial under either

the system favoring the plaintiff or the defendant is greater
than that under the American system and less than that under
the British system.46   There will be a greater likelihood
of litigation under the two systems in question than under

the American system because (when the plaintiff's estimate
of the chances of prevailing exceeds the defendant's) the

joint expected legal costs tend to be lower under them than
the joint costs under the American system.47 And there will
be a lesser likelihood of litigation under the two systems

than under the British system for analogous reasons. (For a
comparison of the conditional likelihood of trial under the

system favoring the plaintiff and under that favoring the
defendant, the reader is referred to the Appendix.48)
                              15



     With regard to the effect of the parties' attitudes

 toward risk on their behavior, it is clear that risk
 sion tends to promote settlement; by settling, the risk
inherent in going to trial is avoided. The differential
effect of risk aversion may be shown most easily under the
American system.

     Example 8.  If the plaintiff and the defendant are risk
     neutral, then under the American system there will be a
     trial whenever the plaintiff's estimate of the likeli-
     hood of suit is at least 75%, for at 75% the difference
     between his and the defendant's estimate of the expected
     judgment would be $2,500, which equals the sum of legal
     costs. However, if one or both of the parties are risk
     averse, there will be less litigation. Assume, say,
     that the plaintiff is risk averse, and, as in Example
     4, that he has initial wealth of $5,000 and utility of
     wealth given by its square root. Then there would be a
     settlement if the plaintiff's probability of prevailing
     were 76%. Consider, for instance, whether the amount
     $6,400 would be a mutually satisfactory settlement.
     The defendant would be willing to pay it in settlement,
     as it is less than his expected cost of going to trial
     of $6,500 (i.e., 50% x $10,000 + $1,500). And the risk
     averse plaintiff would be willing to accept it even
     though his expected gain from going to trial would be
     $6,600 (i.e., 76% x $10,000 — $1,000) because the
     expected util going to trial would be 105.10
     (i.e., 76% xl4,O00 + 24% x[4T55ö), which is less
     than the utility of th9settlement, namely 105.77
     (i.e. ,b,00o b,400).
The effect of risk aversion under the American system, as

illustrated in this example, is different from its effect

under the other systems, for, as was observed in the last
section, the risk inherent in going to trial is least under

the American system and greatest under the British system.
Accordingly, the effect of risk aversion--the promotion of

settlement--should be greatest under the British system,

intermediate under the systems favoring the plaintiff and
the defendant, and least under the American system.50
                             16



4.   Concluding discussion
     a.   Although the model considered here abstracted from

a variety of issues pertinent to litigation under the different
methods for allocating legal costs, the results obtained
should be of use for purposes of explanation or of predic-
tion.51 To illustrate, we will ask what would be expected
to follow from adoption of the British system for the alloca-
tion of costs of litigation arising in two areas, that of
automobile accidents and of accidents caused by "ultraha-
zardous" activities.

     Consider first the situation in regard to automobile
accidents. If in these accidents a harmed party's likeli-
hood of prevailing--of proving that the other party was at
fault52--is generally "low", then the number of suits (or
threats to bring suit) should fall. As was explained in the
analysis, because losing at trial is more costly under the
British system than under the American, suit is less attrac-
tive to a plaintiff under the former system when his chance
of winning is below a critical probability, this probability

depending on the relative magnitudes of the plaintiff's and
the defendant's legal costs and on the plaintiff's attitude

toward risk. When, for instance, both sides' costs would be
about equal and the plaintiff can be assumed to behave in an

approximately risk neutral manner, the analysis implies that
any likelihood of prevailing which is less than 50% would be
low enough to make suit less attractive, and therefore less

probable, under the British system. And when the plaintiff
                              17



 can be assumed to behave in a risk averse way, then the

 analysis suggests that suit would become even less attrac-
 tive under the British system, since under that system the

variability in the possible outcomes is increased. However,
because the importance of the factor of plaintiffs' risk
 aversion is limited by the extent to which individuals own

automobile liability insurance and their insurers (who
presumably act in a risk neutral way) determine whether to
bring suit, the assumption of risk neutrality may be the

appropriate one to keep in mind. With regard to the effect
of use of the British system on the number of trials as

opposed to the number of suits, recall that the likelihood
of a trial conditional on suit having been brought increases

under the British system if the litigants are taken to be
risk neutral. But a decline in the number of suits could,
and in the case under discussion, plausibly would, outweigh

the effect of an increase in the conditional likelihood of

trial, thereby resulting in a lower absolute number of
trials. Thus, the prediction is that adoption of the British
system would reduce the number of suits and the number of
trials.

     The situation in respect to accidents caused by ultra-
hazardous activities is different. In accidents of this
type, one suspects that a harmed party's likelihood of

prevailing would usually be high, for the outcome at trial
would generally be based on the doctrine of strict liability.53

Accordingly, adoption of the British system would be expected
to make suit more attractive to plaintiffs and consequently
                             18



to increase its frequency. Additionally, as noted above,
the likelihood of trial conditional on suit would also rise
if parties are assumed to behave in a risk neutral way.

However, this assumption may often be inappropriate; plain-
tiffs' risk aversion would seem a more important conside—
ration in the present context than in that of automobile

accidents, for insurers probably play a lesser role in the
present context. And if plaintiffs' (or defendants') risk
aversion is a sufficiently important consideration, the
conditional likelihood of trial would fall under the British
system due to the greater variability of financial outcomes.

Nevertheless, one would suppose that even if the conditional
likelihood of trial did fall, the effect of the increase in
the number of suits would be determinative. In summary,

then, use of the British system would be likely to result in
an increase in the number of suits and, more tentatively, in
number of trials as well.

     The differences between these two examples point up what
was no doubt evident from the analysis, that the consequences

of use of alternative systems for allocating legal costs

depend very much on context; that a variety of factors need
to be taken into account before the theoretical results can

be employed to predict or to explain; yet it is hoped that
the examples indicate also the feasibility of doing this.


     b.   The questions addressed in this article were

purely descriptive; there was no inquiry made into the social
desirability of the methods for the allocation of legal
                                19



costs.     While to have engaged in such an inquiry would have
involved us in a task beyond the scope of a single article,

we can sketch here the main elements regarding the two
issues that would have been of greatest relevance and then

can illustrate our remarks by reconsidering briefly our
examples concerning the use of the British versus the American

systems.
     The first issue involves the determination of the

socially desirable level of litigation.54 This very general
issue is of interest because, as has been the whole point of
our analysis, the allocation of legal costs affects the
level of litigation; if we wish to know whether the alloca-
tion of legal costs should be changed, we must decide whether
the current level of litigation should be changed. It will
be convenient for us to regard the socially appropriate
level of litigation as reflecting certain social benefits
and social costs. For simplicity, let us assume the social
benefits of litigation to inhere only in its deterrent and
compensatory roles, and the social costs to be comprised of

the legal costs borne by plaintiffs and by defendants plus
those public administrative expenses associated with the

operation of the courts.

     On this view, litigation will be worthwhile to society
as long as its deterrent and compensatory value exceeds

total legal costs plus public administrative expenses. By
contrast, litigation will be worthwhile to private parties,
to potential plaintiffs, when its benefits to them, namely,
                             20



their expected judgments or settlements, exceeds its costs

to them, their expected legal expenses. Thus, it is apparent
that the private benefit and cost calculation may diverge

from the social, and in any direction.55 Accordingly there
can be no general presumption about the relation between the
actual and the desirable levels of litigation, or, therefore,

about the relative appeal of the methods for allocating

legal costs; but of course conclusions can be drawn in
particular areas of litigation. (Moreover, in any area of
litigation there will be opportunity for certain plaintiffs
to bring "nuisance" suits and to deter such suits, it is

evident that the British system or the system favoring the
defendant would be desirable. 56

     Let us now briefly note the second issue that seems
necessary to consider for normative analysis. This issue
concerns the sense of fairness with which a method for the
allocation of legal costs is likely to be regarded.57 When
a party prevails at trial, it is often said that it is not
fair that he should have to bear the "loss" of his legal
costs, and thus it is said that the British system is fair

and the American system unfair (the other two systems falling

in between). One presumes that this claim about fairness is
associated with the idea that an outcome at trial estab-

lishes the moral superiority of the prevailing party or the

blameworthiness of the losing party. Hence, the weight
accorded by the analyst to the notion of fairness should

probably depend on whether the parties would be expected to
view the decision at trial as morally significant.
                              21



      Given the consideration of fairness and the previous

 issue concerning the socially desirable level of litigation,
how might we evaluate the American and British systems for

allocating legal costs in our two examples? With regard to
automobile accidents, suppose that it is believed that the
volume of litigation is too large under the American system.
Suppose, for instance, that it is felt that the social
benefits of litigation are low--that the deterrent effect of

tort liability is negligible (the primary determinants of
driving behavior being criminal liability and the desire not
to be injured); that the compensatory role of tort liability
is limited (private and social insurance providing satisfac-

tory alternative means of compensation); and that legal
costs and public administrative expenses are significant.
Then, in view of plaintiffs' often substantial gains from

bringing suit and their relatively low legal costs under the
American system, the actual volume of litigaton could indeed
be thought to exceed the desirable level. If this were the

belief and if, as suggested above, adoption of the British
system would result in a decline in the number of suits and
trials, then use of that system would enhance social welfare

relative to the goal of achieving an appropriate volume of

litigation. However, the degree to which use of the British
system would enhance welfare in virtue of its fairness might
be thought small, assuming that insurers would typically be
the litigants and bear the legal costs. Furthermore, even
                              22



 were insurers not the litigants, the relevance of the aspect

 of fairness is made problematic by the fact that automobile
 accidents are frequently not obviously due entirely to the
 fault of any one party.

      In respect to accidents caused by ultrahazardous
activities suppose that, as in the area of automobile acci-

dents, the amount of litigation is felt to be sufficient.58
Under this assumption adoption of the British system would

appear to affect litigation undesirably because it would
lead to an increase in its level. But, of course, consid-

eration of fairness would work in favor of the British

system, and might be given more weight than in the area of
automobile accidents, assuming that insurers have a lesser
role and that because of the very nature of ultrahazardous

activities and the use of strict liability approach, pre-

vailing plaintiffs would often feel that they are strongly
in the right.

     From these two examples and our general discussion, the

importance of context is again apparent; and it is clear
that context matters not only because the effects of the

systems on the litigation rate may depend on the area of
litigation, but also because the social desirability of

altering the underlying litigation rate and the weight to be
given the consideration of fairness may depend on the area
of litigation.
                                     23



                                  Appendix


     As the model has been described in the text, it will be
sufficient here to define notation and very briefly state

assumptions before presenting the formal analysis. Let


    p =   plaintiff's    probability of prevailing at trial,
          where 0 < p <      1;
    w =   magnitude of trial judgment, where we[a,bJ and
          b > a >   0;
 F(•) =   plaintiff's    cumulative probability distribution
          function (c.d.f.) over w, conditional on prevail-
          ing (F assumed non-degenerate);
    x =   plaintiff's    legal costs (before any reallocation
          of such costs) of going to trial, where x     0;
    u =   plaintiff's    initial wealth;
 U(•) =   plaintiff's    (von Neumann-Morgenstern) utility
          function (in wealth);
    q =   defendant's    probability that plaintiff will prevail;
          where 0 < q    <   1;
G(•) =    defendant's    c.d.f. over w, conditional on plaintiff
          prevailing (G assumed non-degenerate);
   y =    defendant's    legal costs of going to trial, where
          y 0
   v =    defendant's    initial wealth;
V(.) =    defendant's    (von Neumann-Morgenstern) utility
          function (in wealth); and
                              24



     s =   amount (if any) paid by defendant to plaintiff in
           settlement, where s > 0.

Several points should be noted.    (i) The plaintiff's and the
defendant's (subjective) beliefs are allowed to differ both

as to who will prevail and as to the trial judgment. (ii) The
legal costs x and y are taken as fixed. Also, it is assumed
that they are borne only if there is a trial; otherwise (if
there is no suit or if there is a suit and a settlement)
neither side bears any legal costs. (iii) When the parties
are presumed to be risk neutral, their utility functions
will be taken to equal wealth (and their levels of initial

wealth will be ignored) without loss of generality.


     By the plaintiff's bringing suit is meant that he

threatens the defendant with going to trial and that either
a trial actually occurs or else the defendant settles with

the plaintiff. This was illustrated in Figure 1 as the
plaintiff's choosing the action "bring suit" in the first
step of a two step game. It is assumed that the plaintiff
will bring suit if and only if going to trial would increase

or leave equal59 his expected utility. This assumption is
in accord with that of "perfect equilibrium" of game theory,
under which players only make threats that they would later

be willing to carry through.6° In addition, the assumption
is clearly equivalent to an assumption that the defendant

would not settle if the plaintiff's expected utility from
going to trial were less than that of not going to trial.
                                     25



       PROPOSITION l.(a) A risk neutral plaintiff will bring
suit if and only if his estimate of the expected value of

the trial judgment exceeds his estimate of the expected
legal costs he would bear. Consequently, under the American
system, he will bring suit precisely when
                              b
(1)                          pjwdF(w)
                              a

under the British system, he will bring suit when
                    b
(2)                pfwdF(w)          (l-p)(x+y);
                      a

under the system favoring the plaintiff, he will bring suit
when

                           b
(3)                       pfwdF(w)        (1-p)x;
                           a

and under the system favoring the defendant, he will bring
suit when

                       b
(4)                   pfwdF(w)        x+(l-p)y.
                       a

It follows that the number of suits will be greatest under

the system favoring the plaintiff and least under the system

favoring the defendant. However, a comparison between the
American and British systems depends on the plaintiff's
beliefs: There will be more suits under the British system

if the plaintiff is sufficiently optimistic about prevailing,
and specifically if
                                 26



(5)                        p >

but   otherwise (if the inequality (5) is reversed) there will
be more suits under the American system. (Figure 2 summar-
izes the propensity to sue under the different systems.)

       (b) A risk averse plaintiff will bring suit strictly
less often than a risk neutral plaintiff.61



      Proof: With regard to part (a), formulas (1) -     (4)
follow immediately from our assumptions and the definitions
of the various systems for payment of legal costs.

      Since (l-p)x is less than x, (l-p)(x+y), and also
x +   (l-p)y,   clearly (3) may be satisfied when (1) or (2) or
(4) is not and if (1) or (2) or (4) is satisfied, (3) must
be. Thus there are more suits under the system favoring the
plaintiff than under the other three systems. Since x +        (l-p)y
exceeds x, (l-p)(x+y), and (l-p)x, it is also clear that
there are fewer suits under the system favoring the defendant

than under the other systems. With regard to the American
and British systems, note that (l-p)(x+y)      x if and only if

y/(x+y)     p. Thus if and only if (5) holds is it true that

(1) implies (2) but (2) does not imply (1); that is, there
are more suits under the British system.

      Part (b) will be shown for the American system. (The
argument under the other systems is virtually the same.) It
will first be shown that if a risk averse plaintiff brings

suit, so would a risk neutral plaintiff. Now if a risk

averse plaintiff brings suit, then
OS wu&a p >             — pIhH rdchveIy
           -tr       Ci'JoIvg
                            Eri4ik. 5yevv

       I                                         S




                       pkvi4.viI ; e' pct?d


    Pr     p<
              5 Sf
                      c'4O(jy\
                         er
                                 i+;
                           — plairhuI riive1y p;
                                                      --


                 r
                 I
                                                Si('i\ 4C'Cl1CIJ
____                        _       I




                                                      (i-p
                           p)ct4rf' ekp(tei jLr.2?€


              RE(,toN oF suvr
CL utio ot SIi ?Iatf5 pecte4 j2e
                                               27



             b
(6)         pfTJ(u+w-x)dF(w) +                  (1-p)U(u-x)       >   U(u).
             a

But since U is strictly concave, Jensen's inequality62 gives
              b                                 b
(7)    U(u + pfwdF(w) -            x)      >   pfU(u+w-x)dF(w)         +   (l-p)U(u-x).
                 a                              a

           b                                                  a
Hence U(u+pfwdF(w) -          x)   >    U(u),       so that pfwdF(w) >        x,   which,
           a                                                  a

by (1), means that a risk neutral plaintiff would also bring

suit. To complete the proof of (b), an example will be
given in which a risk neutral plaintiff brings suit but a
risk averse plaintiff would not. Consider an x and F such
that
                                       b
(8)                                    fwdF(w) > x
                                       a

and define probabilities p(c) for small non-negative c by
                                       b
(9)                           p(YfwdF(w) -x =
                                       a

(Equation (8) assures that p(€) >                     0.)   Using (7) and (9), we
have

              b
(10)      p(0)fU(ui-w—x)dF(w) +                     (l—p(O)) U(u—x) <
                 a
so that a risk averse plaintiff would not bring suit. Since
(10) is a strict inequality and the left-hand-side is contin-
uous in the probability of prevailing, the risk averse
plaintiff would still be discouraged from bringing suit for

p(c) for small       >   0.        But by (9) and (1), a risk neutral

plaintiff would bring suit for such probabilities. Q.E.D.
                                   28



       It is assumed that if the plaintiff brings suit, there

will be a settlement if and only if there exists some settlement
amount which would result in a strictly higher utility for

each party than his expected utility of going to trial.
       PROPOSITION 2.(a) A risk neutral plaintiff who has
brought suit and a risk neutral defendant will go to trial
rather than settle if and only if the plaintiff's estimate

of the expected value of the trial judgment exceeds the
defendant's estimate of it by at least the sum of their

respective expected legal costs. Hence, under the American
system, there will be a trial when

                       b          b
(11)                  pfwdF(w) - qfwdG(w)       x +   y;
                       a          a

under the British system, there will be a trial when
              b          b
(12)         pfwdF(w) - qfwdG(w)        (l-p)(x-l-y) +     q(x+y);
              a            a

under the system favoring the plaintiff, there will be a
trial when

                   b          b
(13)              pfwdF(w) - qfwdG(w)      (l-p)x +      (qx+y);
                   a          a

and under the system favoring the defendant, there will be a
trial when63

              b          b
(14)         pfwdF(w) - qfwdG(w)         (x +   (1-p)y)     +   qy.
              a          a

The comparison of rates of litigation (conditional on suit
having been brought) depend on a variety of factors.

(i) Suppose first that the plaintiff's chance of prevailing
                                 29



exceeds the defendant's estimate of the plaintiff's chance;

i.e., suppose p >    q.   Then the likelihood of trial will be

greatest under the British system and least under the Ameri-
can system; and the likelihood of trial under the system

favoring the plaintiff will be greater or less than that
under the system favoring the defendant according as the
plaintiff's legal costs are greater or less than the defendant's.
On the other hand, (ii) suppose that the plaintiff's chance
of prevailing is less than the defendant's estimate; i.e.,
p <   q.64   Then the situation is reversed: The likelihood of
trial will be greatest under the American system and least

under the British system; and the likelihood of trial under

the system favoring the plaintiff is greater or less than
that under the system favoring the defendant according as

the plaintiff's legal costs are less or greater than the

defendant's. However, (iii) if the plaintiff's chance of
prevailing equals the defendant's estimate, p = q, then the
likelihood of trial is not affected by the system determining

payment of legal costs. (These results are illustrated in
Figure 3).
      (b) If one or both of the parties are risk averse,

then they will settle strictly more often than if both were
risk neutral.



      Proof: To prove part (a), let £ designate the plain-
tiff's expected legal costs and ii the defendant's. Thus
under the American system, 2 =        x   and   y; under the
 ()          JVA&


                                     -J



                                                              1?LL


         (I-p)(t?)-t-)
                                           £4&Lt44CL. ''
() ccse JhQ
                         f tAJ(VL
                                          1£ b $ 7"V1Vh c1t(

                                                             5Jstf
                                                                             9riti,h s1.steN

                                                                        (l-p)((x)
                                              IcIc    i'd'




      Cc&Q
                     F-                                       cLQ   f         _______________




                                                 (i. +U-p)) +'           +)= p)*j)
                                          d           ; epc(G

                                     OF LlTI!\TioN
                    0.                o1  the ciJ5erenc.e.
             Ee pI&itthf's          s-b.it,e oftk. espete4 jw1nient Qscl the

                                                     3
      rj)ry                of lke +vc
                                                        C
                                                              &c        "1
                                              30



British system,            =    (1-p)(x-i-y) and Ji = q(x+y); under the
system favoring the plaintiff, 2Tt                  = (l-p)x       and        = qx+y;

and under the system favoring the defendant,                             =    x   +   (1-p)y
and      =   gy.
       Under our assumptions, there will be a settlement if
there exists a settlement amount s such that both the plain-
tiff and the defendant would be made better off by settling

for than if they had gone to trial. Thus, there will be a
settlement if there is an s such that

                                          b
(15)                               s >   pfwdF(w)   -


and
                                         b
(16)                               s < qfwdG(w) +


Subtracting        (16) from (15) and rearranging terms gives
                        b          b
(17)                   pfwdF(w) - qfwdG(w)           <         +
                       a                  a

Conversely, if (17) holds, there exist s satisfying (15) and
(16). For example if
             b                                                b                   b
(18)    s = pfwdF(w)
               a
                           -
                                     + l/2{I2o           -   (pfwdF(w)
                                                               a
                                                                          -   qfwdG(w))],
                                                                                  a



then (15) holds; and so does (16), since from (18) and (17),
                b                                             b                   b
(19)     s <   pfwdF(w)        -         + [2 +          — (pJ'wdF(w) — qJ'wdG(w))]
                   a                                          a                   a
                                    b
and the right-hand side reduces to qfwdG(w) +
                                                     a
                                                                     9.
                                 31



       Thus, there will be settlement if and only if (17)
holds, and hence trial if and only if the opposite inequal-
 ity holds. From this and the definitions of             and     (and
what they were observed to equal under the different rules),

 (ll)-(l4) immediately follow. And from (ll)-(14), items
 (i)-(iii) and Figure 3 also follow. For example, suppose
p>q. Then
(20)        (x+y) >   (l-p+q)(x+y)     (1-p)(x+y) +    q(x+y).
This, (11), and (12) imply that a trial is more likely under
the British system. The other relationships are similarly
established.

       Part (b) will be shown only for the American system.

(The arguments under the other systems are similar.) It
will first be shown that if a risk neutral plaintiff and

risk neutral defendant would settle, then a risk neutral
plaintiff and a risk averse defendant would also settle.
Then it will be shown that the converse may not be true.
(The cases of a risk averse plaintiff and a risk neutral
defendant or of a risk averse plaintiff and a risk averse

defendant are similar.) Now if a risk neutral plaintiff and
a risk neutral defendant settle for s, then in particular,

rewriting (16) for the American system, we obtain
                         b
(21)              s <   qf(w+y)dG(w)   +   (1—q)(y).
                         a

Multiplying by -1, and adding to both sides v, the initial
wealth of the defendant, we get
                                       32



                         b
(22)             v-s >   qf(v-w-y)dG(w)          +    (l-q)(v-y).
                         a

If the defendant is risk averse, then (22) and Jensen's

inequality imply
                       b
(23)      V(v—s) > V (qf(v—w—y)dG(w) +                     (l—q)(v—y))
                      a

                   b
             >    qfV(v-w-y)dG(w)           +   (l—q)V(v-y).
                   a

Thus the risk averse defendant and the risk neutral plain-
tiff would also settle. On the other hand, consider a p, F,

q, G, x, and y such that
                   b          b
(24)              pfwdF(w) - qfwdG(w) -                  (x+y)   >   0
                   a               a

and define positive probabilities p(c) for small non-negative
c by
                     b          b
(25)             p(c)fwdF(w) - qfwdG(w) -                  (x+y)     =   c.
                     a          a

Note that this means that for c > 0, a risk neutral plaintiff
                                        b
would bring suit (for (25) implies p(c).fwdF(w) > x), but
                                        a

would not settle with a risk neutral defendant (by (11)).
Now assume that the defendant is risk averse and consider a
potential settment offer from him of s(c), where
                               b
(26)                   s(s) = qfwdG(w) +             y   +2c.
                               a

By Jensen's inequality,
                                 33



                 b
(27)            qj'V(v-w-y)dG(w) +    (l-q)V(v-y)
                 a

                        b
                <   V(v-fwdG(w) -y) = V (v-s(O)),
                         a

so that the defendant would strictly prefer to settle for
s(O) then to go to trial. Since the inequality is strict
and s(c) is continuous in g,     the defendant would also strictly
prefer to settle for s(c) for c > 0 and sufficiently small.
Also, the plaintiff who thinks he will prevail with probabil-

ity p(c) would prefer to settle for s(s), assuming          >   0,
than to go to trial: from (25) and (26), we have
                        b                             b
(28)     s(c)       p(c)JwdF(w) — x — c + 2E   >   p()fwdF(w)   —    x
                        a                             a

for c > 0.   Thus, if c is sufficiently small, there would be

a settlement between a risk neutral plaintiff and the risk
averse defendant even though there would be a trial between
a risk neutral plaintiff and a risk neutral defendant.

Q.E.D.
                           34



                        Footnotes
*    Assistant   Professor, Harvard Law School.   I wish
     to thank Mark Freeman and David Skalak for able

     research assistance; Abram Chayes, Bruce Greenwald,
     Richard Markus, Thomas Rowe, Frank Sander, and

     David Shapiro for helpful comments; and the National
     Science Foundation (grant number SES-8014208) for
     financial support.
1.   The analysis to be presented of suit, settlement,
     and trial and of the methods for allocating costs
     builds on earlier work in William Landes, An

     Economic Analysis of the Courts, 14 Journal of Law
     and Economics 61 (1971), a theoretical and empiri-

     cal study focusing on settlement vs. trial in
     criminal cases; in John Gould, The Economics of
     Legal Conflicts, 2 Journal of Legal Studies 279
     (1973), a formal theoretical investigation of
     settlement vs. trial under the American system in
     civil cases; and in Richard Posner, Economic

     Analysis of Law 434-440, 445-453 (2nd ed. 1977), a

     theoretically oriented and quite general discussion
     of issues pertinent to settlement vs. trial under
     the American and under the British system. The

     analysis is also informed by Philip Mause, Winner
     Takes All: A Re-Examination of the Indemnity

     System, 55 Iowa Law Review 26 (1969), a key refer-

     ence on litigation under the British and under the
     American system.
                        35



          The contribution made here lies principally
     in the distinction drawn between the question

     concerning suit and the subsequent question con-
     cerning settlement vs. trial. However, the general-
     ity of the analysis--the consideration of the four
     methods of allocating costs, the allowance for
     parties' differing beliefs not only as to the
     likelihood of prevailing but also as to the
     judgment (which is taken to be continously van-
     able)--may also be of interest.
2.   The American system is the prevailing method for
     allocating legal costs in the United States,

     although exceptions to its use are made in certain

     jurisdictions for certain categories of case;
     whereas the British system is the usual rule

     determining the bearing of legal costs in the

     United Kingdom. For details, see Mause, supra
     note 1, and references cited therein. The systems
     favoring the plaintiff or the defendant are chiefly
     of theoretical interest. (However, at least one
     instance of their use may be noted--the state of

     Florida has recently adopted (Chapter 80-67) the
     system favoring the defendant in medical malpractice

     cases.)
3.   The usual cautionary remark should be made about
     this model, that the aim is not for descriptive

     accuracy, but rather for sufficient simplicity and
                           36



     analytic tractability as to provide a generally
     useful tool for thought and guide for the design
     of empirical research.
4.   For simplicity, the party contemplating suit will
     be referred to as the "plaintiff" even though he

     may decide against bringing suit.
5.   From Figure 1, it is clear that "bringing suit" is
     interpreted as        action which results ultimately
     in settlement or in trial. Thus, we would consider
     a mere threat to initiate formal proceedings as a
     suit if the threat resulted in a settlement.
6.   This assumption is inessential; all that will
     matter to our results is that going to trial

     involves legal costs in addition to any connected
     with bringing suit.
7.   Thus, it is implicitly assumed that when the

     plaintiff would not be willing to go ahead to
     trial, he would not bring suit merely in the hope
     of extracting a settlement from the defendant.
     Note that this assumption would be plausible if,
     in the latter case, the plaintiff believed that
     the defendant knew the plaintiff's position, for

     then the defendant might not in fact offer any-
     thing in settlement.
8.   The existence of a mutually attractive settlement

     amount is of course a necessary condition for

     there to be a settlement. Thus, the force of the
                           37



      assumption is that the existence of such an amount

      is also a sufficient condition for settlement,

      that problems of bargaining would not defeat
      settlement when it is a possibility.

9.    The sole importance of this assumption is that it
      means that settlement is less costly than litiga-
      tion.

10.   For an introductory treatment of these and other

      aspects of decision theory, see Howard Raiffa,

      Decision Analysis (1968).
11.   The $2,500 figure may be thought of as the average
      amount the plaintiff would gain were he to go to
      trial repeatedly under very similar circumstances.

      The reader should be careful to keep this interpre-

      tation and terminology in mind and not, say, to

      think of the $10,000 figure as the expected judg-
      ment.

12.   Another possibility is that a party is risk loving
      and finds uncertainty inherently desirable.
      Although this possibility is not analyzed, it will

      be clear how it would alter our conclusions.

13.   Exactly how a party weighs expected value against
      uncertainty depends on his degree of risk aversion.
      See Raiffa, supra note 10 and John Pratt, Risk
      Aversion in the Small and in the Large, 32 Econom-

      etrica 122 (1964).
                            38


14.   It is plausible and often assumed that individuals

      display a risk averse attitude in respect to the

      possibility of large fluctuations in their wealth,
      and especially to losses that would leave them in

      a financially precarious position. (For example,
      the hypothesis of risk aversion is used to explain
      the purchase of insurance.)
15.   Let p denote the plaintiff's estimate of his
      chance of prevailing, w his estimate of his judg-
      ment, and x his legal costs were he to go to
      trial.   (This notation and the assumption that
      there is a single estimated value (rather than a
      range of values) will be used without further
      comment in the present footnote and in other
      footnotes. The Appendix considers a more general
      case.) Then under the American system he would
      bring suit if pw >    x.   See Proposition 1(a) and
      equation (1) of the Appendix (which, as noted
      before, allows for the plaintiff to contemplate a

      range of possible magnitudes of the judgment
      should he prevail).

16.   Let y denote the defendant's legal costs were he
      to go to trial. Then the plaintiff would bring
      suit if pw >   (l-p)(x+y).   See more generally

      Proposition 1(a) and equation (2) of the Appendix.
17.   The plaintiff's and the defendant's legal costs
      will also be assumed to be $1,000 and $1,500,

      respectively, in later examples.
                            39



18.   Specifically, the frequency of suit will be higher
      under the British system if p >    y/(x+y) and higher
      under the American system if p    < y/(x+y).  (If
      p =   y/(x+y),   the plaintiff will sue under the
      British system if and only if he would under the

      American system.) Thus, "sufficiently high" means
      exceeding y/(x+y), etc. See more generally Proposi-
      tion 1(a) and equation (5) of the Appendix.
             It should also be observed that the plaintiff's
      assessment of his chance of prevailing, and thus

      the comparison of frequencies of suit,        depend
      on the relevant legal rule or area of law. For
      instance, one would expect that a party who suffers
      a loss would generally be more optimistic about
      his chance of prevailing under a strict liability
      approach than he would under a fault-based approach.
      Thus, one might expect the ratio of suits under

      the British system to suits under the American
      system to be higher under a strict liability

      approach than under a negligence approach. See
      the discussion in the concluding section.
19.   Because so-called nuisance suits typically have a

      low probability of succeeding, this conclusion is
      in line with the notion that such suits are more

      likely brought under the American than the British

      system. See for example Mause, supra note 1.
                         40



20.   Suppose for instance that the plaintiff believes

      that if he prevails; he will receive a judgment
      for $1,200. Then his expected judgment would be
      $900.

21.   The critical probability equals y/(x+y); see note

      18 supra and Proposition 1(a) and equation (5) of
      the Appendix. In this example the plaintiff's
      cost x was $1,000 and the defendant's y was $1,500,

      so y/(x+y)   $l,500/$2,500 = 60%.    If the defendant's
      costs were not $1,500 but $1,000, and thus equal
      to the plaintiff's, then the critical probability

      would be 50% (since y/(x+y) =   $l,000/$2,000);   and

      were the defendant's costs $500, the critical

      probability would be 33% (since y/(x+y)     $500/
      $1,500). That the critical probability falls when
      the defendant's legal costs fall simply reflects
      the fact that the smaller the defendant's costs,
      the more attractive the British system becomes to

      the plaintiff.
22.   We will refrain from illustrating this in the

      text, but it may be helpful to provide one calcu-

      lation here: If the plaintiff believes his chance
      of prevailing is 75%, then under the system favoring
      himself his expected legal costs would be $250

      (i.e., 25% x $1,000), while under the system
      favoring the defendant they would be $1,375 (i.e.,
      $1000 + 25% x $1,500), so the plaintiff would sue
                              41



      under the former system if his expected judgment
      exceeds $250 and under the latter, if it exceeds

      $1,375. More generally, the plaintiff will bring
      suit under the system favoring himself when pw >

      (1-p)x,   and under the system favoring the defendant
      when pw >   x+(l-p)y.        See equations (3) and (4)

      and Proposition 1(a).
23.   See Proposition 1(a) and Figure 2.
25.   See Proposition 1(b).
           The reader should recall that risk aversion
      becomes an important factor whenever a party is

      poor or when the amount at stake or legal fees are
      large in relation to his assets. However, if such
      a party and his counsel employ a contingent fee

      arrangement, counsel's willingness and abilty to
      bear risk will be relevant, since the party will
      not himself bear the risk of paying legal fees if
      he does not prevail; thus, the effect of the
      party's risk aversion will be diminished.

26.   To perform calculations illustrating the effect of

      risk aversion, it is necessary to make explicit

      assumptions about the plaintiff's utility of
      wealth and then to determine his expected utility
      (to be explained) in the various situations under
      consideration. (Some readers may not find such
      calculations instructive and may omit this and
      subsequent examples of the effect of risk aversion
                         42



      without loss of continuity.) The importance of
      the particular assumption that the utility of
      wealth is its square root is only that it implies
      that the increment in utility from an extra dollar
      declines as the absolute level of wealth increases,

      that is, so-called declining marginal utility of
      wealth. This in turn is the logical equivalent to
      an assumption of risk aversion. The intuition

      behind the relationship between declining marginal
      utility of wealth and the existence of risk aver-
      sion is as follows. If the marginal utility of
      wealth declines as the absolute level of wealth
      increases, then the loss of an amount reduces
      utility more than the gain of an equal amount

      would increase utility. This notion that losses

      "hurt" more than equivalent gains "help" comports
      with the notion that an individual would prefer

      his present position to taking a risk (unless of
      course the prospect of gains was sufficiently

      attractive to outweigh the possibility of loss).
27.   An individual's expected utility may be inter-
      preted as the utility he would enjoy on average
      were he to engage in the risky activity repeatedly.
28.   Were the plaintiff more risk averse, that is, if
      the proportional rate of decline of his marginal

      utility of wealth were greater, then the likeli-
      hood of success would have to be higher than
      13 1/2% before he would bring suit.
                         43



29.   In Example 4, the plaintiff's wealth under the

      American system is $5,000 — $1,000 = $4,000 if he
      loses and $5,000 —$1,000 + $10,000 = $14,000 if he

      prevails, the difference being the $10,000 judgment.
30.   In Example 4 the plaintiff's wealth under the

      system favoring himself is $5,000 - $1,000
      $4,000 if he loses and $5,000 + $10,000 = $15,000
      if he prevails, so the difference is $11,000, the
      judgment plus his own legal costs. If the defen-
      dant's legal costs are $1,500, the plaintiff's
      wealth under the system favoring the defendant is
      $5,000 — $1,000 — $1,500 = $2,500 if he loses and

      $5,000 — $1,000 + $10,000 = $14,000 if he does

      not, so the difference is $11,500, the judgment

      plus the defendant's legal costs.

31.   In Example 4 the plaintiff's wealth under the

      British system is $5,000 — $1,000 — $1,500 =

      $2,500 if he loses and $5,000 + $10,000 = $15,000
      if he prevails, so the difference is $12,500, the
      judgment plus his and the defendant's legal costs.

32.   It is difficult to find simple conditions under

      which this is always true; see note 61, infra.
      Nevertheless, it is the most plausible conclusion
      and should be borne in mind. For instance, if
      plaintiffs are poor and very risk averse then the

      making of "meritorious" suits might be discouraged
      under the British system relative to under the
                             44



       American system. (But as remarked in note 25,
       supra, contingent fee arrangements provide an
       offsetting factor.)
33.   The frequency of suit is still greatest under the

      system favoring the plaintiff and least under that
      favoring the defendant. Also, the relationship
      between the American and British systems still

      depends on the plaintiff's estimate of the proba-
      bility of prevailing; see note 61, infra.
34.   When, for instance, it is said below that given

      suit (and among other assumptions, that the parties
      are risk neutral), trial would be more likely

      under the British system than under the American
      system, it will not be possible to infer that the
      absolute number of trials would be higher under

      the British system, for it might be that the
      volume of suits would be lower under the British

      system. See the discussion in the concluding
      section.

35.   The analysis presented here of settlement vs.
      litigation under the American system is essen-
      tially the same as that first done by Landes, by

      Gould, and by Posner, supra note 1.
36.   Let q denote the defendant's estimate of the

      plaintiff's chance of prevailing, w' his estimate
      of the judgment that he would have to pay if the

      plaintiff prevailed, and let p. w, x, and y be as
                             45



      defined in notes 15 and 16, supra. Then there
      will be a trial if and only if pw - qw'             x +   y.
      This is shown in Proposition 2(a) (see equation
      (11)), which employs more or less the following

      argument (which also underlies Example 5): A
      settlement will be possible whenever the most the
      defendant would be willing to pay exceeds the
      minimum amount that the plaintiff would find
      acceptable. But the most the defendant would pay

      is the expected judgment plus his legal costs,
      that is qw' +    y;   similarly, the least the plaintiff
      would accept is pw-x. Thus, there will be a
      settlement when qw' + y     >   pw -   x,   or equivalently,
      when pw-qw' < x +     y.
37.   This comports with the notion that what leads to
      litigation is uncertainty as to the law or as to
      the facts. Without such uncertainty, the plain-
      tiff's beliefs about his chances or possible
      judgment could not differ from the defendant's.
38.   There will be a trial when pw - qw'             (l-p)(x+y) +

      q(x+y);   see more generally Proposition 2(a) and

      equation (12).
39.   While this assumption reflects the notion that the
      parties to a suit will probably to disagree more
      in their estimates of the likelihood of prevailing

      than in their estimates of the size of a judgment,

      the assumption is clearly inappropriate in many
                            46



      plausible situations. The text comments on the

      implication of relaxing the assumption, and the
      Appendix considers the most general type of diver-
      gence in beliefs between the plaintiff and the
      defendant.
40.   Something like this point was, to my knowledge,
      first made by Mause, supra note 1, who advanced

      its plausibility employing a numerical example;

      Posner, supra note 1, first proved it under the
      assumption made here in the text (that w=w'). A
      more precise statement of the point is that there
      will be a trial under the British system but not
      under the American system if pw - qw exceeds

      (l-p)(x+y) and is less than x+y; and if there is a
      trial under the American system, there must neces-
      sarily be a trial under the British system. See,

      more generally, Proposition 2(a) (which expresses
      the comparison in a slightly different way, in
      terms of the relationship between p and q).
           It bears repeating that the result under

      consideration, like all results in this section,
      concerns the likelihood of trial given suit; in

      particular, it does not mean that the number of
      suits would be higher under the British system.
      See note 34, supra.
41.   This general point is clearly illustrated by the
      extreme case where the plaintiff believes he is
                          47



      virtually certain to win and the defendant thinks

      the plaintiff is virtually certain to lose. Then,
      under the British system, each party would believe
      that he would not have to bear legal costs, so the

      sum of expected legal costs would be negligible.
42.   Specifically, under the American system, there
      will be a settlement in the range between the

      plaintiff's expected net gain of $6,200 (i.e.,
      $7,200 -   $1,000) and the defendant's expected loss
      of $6,500. Under the British system, by contrast,

      the plaintiff's expected net gain of $6,500 (i.e.
      $7,200 - 28% x $2,500) exceeds the defendant's

      expected loss of $6,250. In fact, it may be
      verified that (given our other assumptions) when-
      ever the plaintiff's estimate of prevailing falls
      between 70% and 75%, there would be litigation
      under the British system and settlement under the

      American system.
43.   Think of the situation converse to that described
      in note 41 supra: Suppose the plaintiff thinks he

      is very unlikely to prevail and the defendant

      thinks the plaintiff is very likely to prevail.
      Then, under the British system, each party would
      believe that he would probably have to pay the
      entire legal costs, so the expected sum of costs
      would be high (approaching twice the actual sum of
      costs, which is the relevant figure under the

      American system).
                            48



44.   Consider the following example (and see Proposi-
      tion 2(a)). The defendant's beliefs are as in the
      examples of this section; he believes that he will
      lose with probability 50% and pay a judgment of
      $10,000. But the plaintiff's beliefs are different;
      he thinks that his chance of prevailing is only

      40%, yet that if he succeeds at trial, he will

      receive a judgment for $19,000. Thus, under the
      American system, the plaintiff's expected net gain
      from going to trial would be $6,600 (i.e., 40% x
      $19,000 -   $1,000) and the defendant's expected
      loss would be $6,500, so there would be no room
      for settlement. Under the British system, however,

      the plaintiff's expected net gain from going to
      trial would be $6,100 (i.e., 40% x $19,000 — 60% x

      $2,500) and the defendant's expected loss would be
      $6,250, so there would be a settlement.
45.   There will be litigation under the system favoring
      the plaintiff when pw - qw'             (l-p)x +   (qx+y), and
      under the system favoring the defendant when
      pw - qw'     (x +   (l-p)y)   +   qy.    See generally
      Proposition 2(a) and equations (13) and (14).
46.   See generally Proposition 2(a).
47.   To see why, suppose that the plaintiff thinks he
      is almost sure to prevail and that the defendant

      believes that the plaintiff is almost sure to
      lose. Then under the system favoring the plain-
                            49



      tiff, the plaintiff will believe that he will not

      have to bear any legal costs and the defendant
      will think that he will have to bear only his own,
      so that the sum of expected legal costs will be

      approximately equal to the defendant's costs
      alone. Similarly, under the system favoring the
      defendant, the sum of expected legal costs will be
      approximately equal to the plaintiff's costs. In
      either case, then, the sum of expected costs is
      less than the sum of costs under the American
      system, namely, the sum of the plaintiff's and the

      defendant's legal costs.

48.   See Proposition 2(a) and Figure 3.
49.   In fact, there would be settlement so long as the
      plaintiff's estimate of the chance of prevailing
      were less than 79.88%. (If p=79.88%, then the

      plaintiff's expected utility were he to go to
      trial of pJl4,O00 +    (l-p)Jwould    just equal
      his utility of'll,500 (were the defendant to make
      his maximum offer of $6,500.) If the plaintiff
      were more (less) risk averse or if the defendant
      were risk averse, this threshold probability would

      be higher (lower).
50.   As was true in respect to suit, it is difficult to
      find appealing assumptions under which this is

      always the case, but intuition suggests it is the
      typical result. Thus, for instance, it could well
                         50



      be that if one or the other of the parties is very

      risk averse there would be a settlement under the

      British system and a trial under the American

      system, reversing the previous result that the
      likelihood of a trial is greater under the British
      system than under the American system.
51.   I am well aware of many of these excluded issues,

      for example, of those related to use of contingent
      fee arrangements, or to the fact that legal costs
      are variable (and are likely to be influenced by
      the method for allocating costs) rather than
      fixed, or to the possibility that counsel's incen-

      tives may differ from his client's, or to the
      non-financial aspects of legal outcomes
      However, as was indicated at the outset, it was
      necessary to exclude all but a few issues to gain

      an understanding through the use of theory of our
      subject, for it is a complicated one. If the
      theoretical investigation has been successful, it
      will allow the analyst studying a particular area
      and striving for realism to determine the impor-
      tance and role of the excluded factors more easily
      than would otherwise have been possible.
52.   Consider a state where some form of the negligence

      rule determines liability (rather than no-fault

      legislation).
                         51



53.   See, for example, William L. Prosser, Law of

      Torts, 505—516, (4th ed. 1971).
54.   The point of view described in this paragraph is
      developed in Steven Shavell, "The Social versus

      the Private Incentive to Bring Suit," Harvard Law

      School, 1981.

55.   Specifically, in respect to benefits it is clearly
      possible for the social benefits to outweigh the
      private--perhaps the deterrent effect of liability

      would be especially large in relation to plaintiffs'

      gains--and clearly possible also for the private
      benefits to exceed the social benefits--perhaps
      plaintiffs' gains are large in relation to the

      deterrent effect of liability and no special need
      for compensation of plaintiffs through use of the
      legal system exists. On the other hand, in respect
      to costs, it appears that the social costs would

      be likely to outweigh the private, for total legal

      costs plus public administrative expenses exceed
      plaintiffs' expected legal costs under any method
      for the allocation of legal costs. In other
      words, the divergence between social and private

      costs suggests a tendency toward excessive litiga-
      tion, and that between social and private benefits,

      either a reinforcing or contrary tendency, the
      consequence being that the net effect is indeterminate.
                            52



56.   See note 19, supra. The deterrence of nuisance
      suits should be seen as a logically distinct goal

      from that of altering the overall rate of litiga-
      tion. Presumably, we would always wish to deter
      nuisance suits--because they are suits with rather
      special characteristics that make them identifiable
      as subversive of the purpose of the legal process.

      But most suits (or potential suits) do not have
      the characteristics of nuisance suits and as we
      have explained, there is no general presumption
      about whether we would wish to increase or reduce

      the overall level of this usual type of suit.
57.   Although the reader may regard inclusion of the
      goal of adherence to a sense of fairness as "non-
      economic" and thus out of place in an analysis

      using the methodology of microeconoxnic theory,
      that would be a mistake. If individuals care
      about an aspect of the legal process, that should
      enter into a normative calculus (or, a descriptive

      model) just as should, say, the number of accidents

      or litigation costs; indeed, from the viewpoint of
      formal theory, there is no distinction among any
      of these variables.

58.   The reader is reminded that this is only an illustra-

      tive hypothesis.
59.   The assumption that the plaintiff will bring suit
      when the expected utility of going to trial equals
                          53



      the utility of not doing so is of course a conven-

      tion; and we will use without comment a similar

      convention when we analyze settlement.

60.   See for example Reinhard Selten, Reexamination of
      the Perfectness Concept of Equilibrium Points in
      Extensive Games, 4 International Journal of Game

      Theory 25 (1975).
61.   It can also be shown true of a risk averse plain-
      tiff that (i) the number of suits will be greatest

      under the system favoring him and (ii) least under
      the system favoring the defendant. With regard to
      the frequency of suit under the American and the

      British systems, one can show a partial analogue

      to (iii) of Proposition 1(a): given x, y and F,
      then if p is sufficiently high, the plaintiff will
      sue under the British system, whereas he might not
      under the American system. However, there is no
      necessary effect of the plaintiff's risk aversion
      on the relative frequency of suit under the American

      vs. the British systems: Examples can be constructed
      in which if the plaintiff is risk averse, the
      ratio of suits under the American system to suits

      under the British system is higher than if the
      plaintiff is risk neutral; examples can also be
      constructed in which the ratio is lower.

62.   See, for example, Morris De Groot, Optimal Statis-

      tical Decisions 97 (1970).
                                54



63.   Moreover, it will be clear that (conditional on
      suit having been brought) under the American

      system if (11) does not hold, the settlement s
      will be in the interval
           b               b
      (p5 wdF(w)-x,       qfwdG(w)-i-y); under the British System,
           a               a
                                            b
      if (12) does not hold, s will be in (pfwdF(w) -
                                                            a
                      b
      (l-p)(x+y), qfwdG(w) +         q(x+y));        under the system
                      a

      favoring the plaintiff, if (13) does not hold, s will
               b                             b
      be in (p5 wdF(w) -       (l-p)x,       qfwdG(w) + qx +     y);   and
               a                              a

      under the system favoring the defendant, if (14) does
                               b
      not hold, s will be in (pfwdF(w) -
                                         a
                                                       (x   +   (l-p)y),
       b
      qfwdG(w) -   qy).
       a

64.   This case and the next, when p = q are probably

      much less important than the first. The reason is
      that when p < q, the absolute number of trials is

      likely to be very low under all the systems. In

      fact, suppose (as might often be true) that when
      the plaintiff's opinion about the likelihood of
      prevailing is pessimistic relative to the defendant's,
      so is the plaintiff's opinion about the trial
      judgment. Then there will be no litigation whatever:
                          b         b
      if when p < q, then fwdF(w) < fwdG(w), it follows that
                                a                a

      (ll)-(14) can not be satisfied.
