                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DISTRIBUTIONAL IMPLICATIONS
                 OF IMPERFECT CAPITAL MARKETS



                          Joon Koo Lee


                     Working Paper No. 663




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          April 1981




This paper is based on parts of my Ph.D. dissertation. I wish to
express my deep gratitude to Alan Blinder for his encouragement and
valuable advice. I am also grateful to Harvey Rosen, Roger Gordon
and Thad Mirer for their helpful suggestions. Financial support
for this research was provided with a grant from the Sloan
Foundation to the Princeton University Economics Department.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #663
                                                              April 1981



             Distributional Implications of Imperfect Capital Markets



                                       ABSTRACT



      The primary aim of this study is to analyze the impact of imperfections

in capital markets on individuals' lifetime allocation plans and the re-

sulting implications for income distribution. The model builds upon Samuel—

son's overlapping generation model with human capital and bequest motives

playing central roles. The model developed here introduces a limit on

the individual's ability to borrow. One of the most important consequences

of this constraint is that human investment falls short of the level where

its marginal return is equal to that of non—human investment. The com-

parative static results show that an individual who has been subject to

the borrowing constraint would increase human investment unambiguously

if he were allowed to borrow freely against future earnings. Discussions

of the distributive implications of this result suggest that the, elimination

of   the borrowing constraint has   a potential of enhancing both intragenerational

income   equality and intergenerational mobility. The simulation results
show that the elimination of the borrowing limit would bring about a sig-
nificant improvement in income distribution without having an adverse effect
on efficiency.

                                                  Joon Koo Lee
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  State University of New York
                                                   at Albany
                                                  Albany, New York 12222
                                                                                        2.
         Although a satisfactory theory of the distribution of income is yet to
 come, significant progress has been made toward that goal by a series of attempts
 to establish general theories of income distribution by cbmbinirig existing
 piecemeal theories into single synthetic models. One such example is Blinder's

 (1974) work which incorporates various elements of piecemeal theories. One of

 his main conclusions -   is   that inequality in income should not

 be ascribed to any single factor, but should be conceived as resulting from the

 optimizing behavior of individuals which can be affected by a number of factors.

 There    is one potential cause of inequality,   however, which evaded his attention

 totally:    imperfect capital markets. Different income classes would be affected
differentially    by the imperfection in capital markets. Therefore, we might

suspect that the present income distribution is influenced by the conditions of

capital markets.

      In a world of imperfect capital markets, the timing of the receipt of inter-

generational wealth transfers plays an important role in one's lifetime allocation

processes. As long as the capital markets are perfect, the assumption that

bequest-at-death is the only channel of intergenerational wealth transfers, adopted

in almost every study in the field as well as in Blinder's, does riot pose any

serious analytic problem even though a large portion of such transfers is actually

made in theform of inter vivos transfers. Ishikawa (1974) points out that, though

in a world of perfect capital markets people are indifferent to the tlrnng of

wealth transfers, such neutrality no longer holds if there is some imperfection

in captal markets. There ae several studies confirming that poeple pass large

sums of money to their descendants while the donors are still alive.       In this

study, therefore, both capital market imperfections and alternative channels of

intergenerational wealth transfers are explicitly introduced.

     The task of investigating the     distributive implications of imperfect capital
markets   will be carried out using both theoretical models and simulation techniques.

The use of numerichl simulation in the study of the size distribution of income
                                                                                                     3.




                                                         his        pioneering work, Pryor (1973)
                          rather a recent phenomenon. In
        or wealth is
                                               rethods can be usefully employed in
•       demonstrated that numerical simulation                           The potential of
                                                   social institutions.
                                         impact of various
                                                                                       's works
                                                   demonstrated by a series of Blinder
    •
        analyzing distributional

        such methods was more convincingly
                                                   inequality in income throughnumerical
                              His decomposition of
         (l97t, 1976).                                     on this subject. We should
                    added a new dimension to our knowledge
         simulation                                                       at al. (1976)
                                 contributions along this line by Orcutt
         also mention important                                            new tool for
                              simulation model proved -to be a significant
         whose microanalytic                                     of income distribution.
                                            well as the analysis
         policy exploration in general as                an explicit or implicit assurnptlor!
                        all these works were done under
         However,                                                              capital market
                                                     the fact that the existence of
                                  markets, despite
          of   perfect capita].                                                      the present
                                                          factor in understanding
                                  he a very important
         -imperfection might                                                       markets could provide
                                                            of imperfect capital
                                           The assumption
                income distribution.
                                                                           implications of various
                                                 which the distributive
                                 setting under
          a more realistic

          policy measures are analyzed.
                                                                    It is shown how our
                                     the basic theoretical model.
                Section I introduces
                                                              his or her life to maximize
                                               resources over
                          individual allocates
           representative
                                                conditions. The main focus ison the
                            with given initial
           lifetime utility                                     constraint which he has been
                                 to an easing of the borrowing
           individual's response                                   limit leads to an
                                             increase in borrowing
            subject to. It is found that an                                                II
                                                                                  individual. Section
                                                              of a constrained
                                        in human investment
           unambiguous increase                                                          simulation
                                             simulation   model. Section III reports the
           presents the setup of the
                                                                              capital markets. The
                                                            impact of imperfect
                                       the distributional
            results concerning
                     fr                                              will be compared with
                                                                                             the results
               results    under various alternative assumptions
                                                                                  IV concludes the study
                                       Set of standard assumptions. Section
               obtained    under the
                                                                -



               with some policy recommendations.


               I.   The Model
                                                                             (1958) overlapping generation
                                                         the Samuelson
                     The   present model is a version of               central roles. An individual
                                                       motives playing
               model with human capitOl and bequest
                                                                                           L.

decision maker, assumed to live two periods of equal length, chooses at economic
age zero   an optimal plan of consumption, human investment, leisure and bequest to

maximize hi (r lier) lifetime utility. He is nOt "economically born" until

after he is ready to choose and implement optimal plans of his own.           He bears

a child "asexually" during the first period, who begins his own economic life at

the beginning of the next period. This rather simplistic           assumption about the
reproduction      process is adopted here to avoid the complications arising from

different regimes of mating behavior, quantity vs. quality of children, population

growth, and soon.

       He consumes and works throughout his economic life, i.e., in both periods.

The basic asymmetry between the two periods is that he divides his time between

work and human investment in the firs-t period, while, in the second period, he

chooses between work and leisure, instead of human investment. Bequest motives

are also explicitly introduced in the model. Rather than stipulating that the

only   channel of intergenerational wealth transfer is through bequests-at-death,
I assume that a substantial amount       of   non-human wealth is potentially transferable
to the next generation       while the agent is still a1ive.
       To focus   on agents' microeconomic optimization behavior, I assume away such
macroeconomic concerns as growth, changed in the price level, unemployment and so
on.    I also   assume at first that people have perfect foresight about events in the
future; this assumption will be relaxed later on. It is also assumed that

individual neither derives utility from the mere possession of human or non-human

wealth, nor derives disutility from being in debt.

       At economic age zero, a representative individual chooses an optimal lifetime

plan with exogenously given wage rate (w1), non—human wealth (A0).,. and an

inheritance     (I) which he has not   yet received but which he   knows will be   given at

the beginning of the second period. In the first         period, he   decides the amount

of time to be devoted to human capital accumulation (rn1), own consumption (C1),

and inter vivos transfers CT). The costs involved in human investment consist of
                                                                                                       5.



 foregone earnings (w1m1) and direct costs. Since the                   latter   accounts for only a

 smi1l   portion of total costs, it is assumed that foregone earnings are the                 Only

 costs of accumulating human capital. The stock of non—human capital at the end
 of the first period is then,

 (1)                              A1 =   {i +   (1_t2)r}A0±(l_t1)w1(1_m1)   C1 -   (l+t3)T

           where r:           interest rate

                    t1: wage income tax rate

                    t2: interest income tax rate

                    t3: tax rate on inter vivos gifts.


 Interest is assumed to accrue at the beginning of each period. It is also assumed•

 that A1 could be negative though not without limit. The borrowing limit can be a

function of many factora. The most important of all must be his present earning

ability. Therefore the capital market constraint is expressed as                       -




                         A1        —(l-t1)qw1

where q is a certain positive number.

       His wage rate in the second period is given by


                              =
                                   w1 g(m1)


where g(m1) is strictly concave human capital production function. He is assumed not

to do ny human investment in the second period, while spending 2 of his time as

leisure. His stock of non-human wealth at the end of his life is given by,


()         A2
                =   {l        (l-t2)r}     (A1÷I)     (l-t1)   w1 g(m1) (l_2)_ C2

which is assumed to be non-negative
                                                                                    6.



One   thing that deserves our attention is that T and (l-t)A2 of the current
generation coincide with A0 and I of the next generation respectively where t
denotes the tax rate on bequests-at-death.
      The objective funotion which the agent tries to maximize consists of two

parts: own utility and utility arising from the satisfaction of bequest motives.

Therefore, it is weitten as


(5)                              ÷ B{T,(l—t1)A2}
               u(c1,


where arguments     are as defined in   the previous section. The own utility part of

the objective function, U(C1, C2, 22),is assumed to be monotone, strictly concave

in C1, C2, and 2' and twice differentiable. I also assume that this function is

additively separable. This is a somewhat restrictive assumption, but concrete

results cannot be derived without additive separability. The relationship

between the two arguments in the B function is important. I assume that the true

rela-tionship lies somewhere between two polar cases: additive separability and

perfect substitutability. In addition, I assume the B function is strictly concave.

      We can observe the effects of the introduction of the capital market

imperfection by comparing two systems of first-order conditions: one where the

capital market constraint is not binding and the other with tho constraint binding.

Assuming for simplicity that all the endogenous variables have interior solutions)

the following set of conditions will lead to an intertemporal optimum in case the

capital market constraint is not binding.
      p
                U
(6)                   =   1
                U2
                              (l—t2)r

               B
(7)                       (l±t)(l-tL) {l ÷ (l-t 2)r}
               B2
                                                                                                           7.

  The interpretation of these conditions are straightforward. The condition which
 must he     satisfied for optimal human investment is given by,


  (8)
                         g'(m1)(l-i2)          1 e (l-t2)r

 The left—hand side of this equation denotes the resulting increase in wage
 earnings in the -sect ad period when an extra dollar is invested in the accumulation
 of human capital, while the right-hand side denotes its opportunity cost. What
 this equation requires is simply that the costs and benefits of human                        investment
 should be equal at the margin.
        In   contrast, when the capital market constraint is strictly binding, inter-
 temporal    optimality conditions are changed to,

                    U1       = 1 +
                     2
                                     (1-t)r

                         =
                              (1±t3)(l-t   )   {i (l-t2)r          +


where    p and   A denote the shadow price of the borowing constraint and the marginal

utility of terminal non-human wealth (A2) respectively, which are both strictly

positive. Clearly, {i
                                     (l-t2)r   +         is   bigger than {i +
                                                                                 (1-t2)r}.   In the

presence of the strictly binding capital market constraint, the effective rate

of interest the agent faces is greater than the market rate of interest because

the former includes the shadow price of the borrowing constraint (n).                         The capital
market constraint acts as a distortionary factor, preventing him from allocating
        fr

resources as well as he could under perfect capital markets. The optimal human
inYestment condition is now changed to,

                             g'(rn1)(l-2) =        1 +
                                                         (1—t)r    +
                                                                                              8.



He   makes human investment up to the point where its marginal return is equal to
the effective, rate of interest. Hence human investment will fall short of the
unconstrained optimal level. i.e.,       where   the marginal return is   equal   to market
opportunity cost.        There is possibly alink between thus distorted human investment

and the distribution of income. Since each individual is bound by the borrowing

constraint to a different degree, the distribution of earnings in the presence

of capital market imperfection must be different from what would have been in the

absence of such imperfection. The existence of imperfections in capital markets

could provide an important clue in understanding the causes of existing inequalities.

The comparative static exercises in the next subsection will tell us what kind of

distributional changes we can expect from eliminating such imperfection.


Comparative    Statics
      To focus on the effects the capital market constraint, I limit attention to

the case where all of the six endogenous variables have interior solutions. The

comparative static results for non—binding and strictly binding capital market

constraint cases are summarized in Tables 1 and        2.   Of all the comparative static

results, the ones of greatest interest are those involving the change in q, the

proportion   Of potential     wage earnings which determines the borrowing limit of the

agent,    for it is these results that suggest what kinds of distributional changes
we can expect from easing the      capital   market constraint. Though not adding
directly   to the stream of income, an increase in q allows      the agent to choose from
among afr wider range of alternatives. Our primary interest lies in its impact on
the behavior of human investment. The finding is,


()                       :'   >o      fOr people for whom the con'staint is 'bindi.

What this result means is clear: people are willing to invest more           in human
capital    if they are able to borrow more, for there are unexploited opportunities
                                                                                            9.


     involved    in human investment. Recall that an agent invests in human capital up to
     the point where the marginal increase in next periods income is equal to the
     opportunity cost of funds and that this opportunity cost is higher than the going
     market rate of interest when the capital market constraint is binding:

     (8')                      g'(m1)(l-2)
                                                 1 +
                                                       (l-t)r +
    An   increase in q   drives down   the                                            (n),
                                             shadow price of the capital market contraint

    thus    lowering the value of the right--hand side of the equation. Unless an increase
             absorbs all the decrease in the right-hand side, the agent will match this
    decrease by increasing human investment. The comparative static result we just
    obtained tells us that        does not in fact rise this much.
            An increase in the borrowing limit (q) has the potential of enhancing the
    economic well—being of consumers. The theorem of second best tells us that economic
    well-being improves if all distortions are uniformly decreased. There is only one
    source of distrotion in this model -- the existence of the capital market constraint
    which causes a divergence between the effective rate and the market rate of
    in-terest (by the amount of ).     rise in q narrows the divergence by lowering p.
                                         A

    This is clearly beneficial, according to the theorem of second best.
            An increase in q may also contribute to an equalization of the distribution of

    income or wealth. it is quite plausible that such a change is relatively more

    beneficial to the poor    than to the rich. We have seen that those who have been
    constrained by the borrowing limit invariably respond to a rise in q by increasing
    their human investments (m1). Consequently their wage income will increase. This
    will benefit the rich as well as the poor, since a rich person is as likely as a
    poor one is to be constrained by the borrowing limit. However, the increase in wage
    income by an equal arriount would mean more to a poor person, since it is a larger
-
    proportion of his income. The endowments of non-human capital would be the more
    important   in determining the individual's economic condition, the more the capital
                                                                                         10.

 market constraint is binding. It is well known that the distribution of non-human
 capital is much more uneven than that of capital. As the relative importasce of
 wage .inoome among total income increases as a result of the rise in q, we can
 expect that the distribution of income becomes more equal. Whether there will be
 an actual equalization of the distribution of income, or how much equalization will
 be realized if there is any is, of course, ultimately an ernpiri.ca]. matter. The
 simulation exercises in following sections will shed some light on this point.

 Uncertain Returns from Human Investment
       Until now, it has been assumed that the a;ent has perfect foresight. It can
 be shown, however, that our most important result in the previous subsection,
                        din
 (9)
                        dq     >0,
still holds true even in the setting of uncertainty. Among several sources of
uncertainty in the context of the present model, I limit my at-tention to the case
where the returns from human investments are uncertain.
       The wage rate for the second period now depends on the time spent for human
investment (m1) and on the future state of the world (0).

(10)                      w9              0)
                               w1 g(m1,

where 0 is a random variable with a knon distribution. As in the certainty case,
I assume that g1 > 0 and g11 < 0. The derivative with respect to 0 could have
eitherign; for concreteness, I assume g2 >     0.
       The agent is assumed to know only the distribution of 0 at the beginning of
his life. His lifetime allocation plan should be based on this distribution. Once
he knows the actual wage rate in the market, he may find it desirable to modify the
plan. Unlike the case of perfect foresight, therefore, his optimization process
will consist of two stages. (See Appendix 2).
                                                                                     I
                                                                                              11.


       WiLe   most of the comparative static results under uncertainty are
ambiguous, the response of human investment to an increase in the borrowing
limit (q) is unambiguously positive under plausible assumptions as shown in
 Appendix 2. It is thus proved that constrained individuals are willing to
 invest more in human capital if they are able to borrow more even though
 its future returns are uncertain. This finding can be used in addressing
one of the important questions in the theory o.f human investment. There are several
alternative explanations as to the observed gap between the marginal returns to
human and non-human investments. Lazear (1977) attributes this tendency to the fact
that   the marginal utility of education is negative. According to Levhari and Weiss

(1971k), human investment may stop short         of the level where   its expected marginal

return   is equal to the marginal return on       non-human capital, if the characteristics

of   the random variable satisfy certain conditions. What I have been trying to show
is that a substantial part of such a tendency may be attributed to the imperfection
                       dm1—
in canital markets. That           is   positive even under the assumotion of uncertain
                              dq
returns from human investment strongly suggests that uncertainty alone cannot

explain the whole thing. Lazears assertion that the negative marginal utility

of education is a key to the observed cleavage is hardly convincing. One commoly

observed fact is that those who are       very   rich are likely to receive more education

than the average person. Since they do not depend on wage earnings so much as the

average persona they have no reason to receive more education if it gives them

disutility. The implication is that they might derive positive utility from

education. However, I can show that                is still positive even if human

investment (m1) enters the utility function         as a   disutility as Lazear's work

suggests.
                                                                                                        12.



II. Basic Setup of the Simulation Model

Objective      Function
        Tlie objective function is assumed     to take the form of        an iso-elastic function:

                                                                                  £ly
(12)
              u(c1, 02, )      +
                                   B(T, (1-t)A2)   =           ÷     i---- +
                                                          7/
                    +
                        cY
                             [TC + {(1t)flA2}CT

The utility-of-bequest part takes a slightly different form from the own utility

part because of the special relationship between T and A2. If the two arguments of

the B function are        perfectly substitutable, then C should be        equal to one, If, on

the    other hand, they are additively separable, then              should be equal to zero. The

standard case assumes that the relationship is an intermediate one. Later on, the

simulation results for the standard case will be compared with those for the two

polar cases.


Creating a Sample of Indiriduals

       The simulation model starts with a sample of 200 individuals with given

distributions of initial wage rates (w1), receipts of inter vivos transfers (A0)

and inheritances (I) and a set of eight taste parameters, , p,                    , T , , C, U, and
n.

A. The Distribution of Initial Wage Rates (w1)

        The   creation of •the distribution of w1 was performed on             the   basis of actual.
micro-data     from the Current Population Reports and Ohio State University's National

Longitudinal Survey (NLS). The Consumer Income of the Current Population Reports

has a break-down of average full-time wage             earnings    by age and the level of

education.      This can be used for computing the discounted sum of wage earnings
during the second period for each education level, which in turn will be converted
                                                                                             3-3.




to   the relevant wage rates by assuming that the average individual works only two-
thiidk; of total time avaiiabie, As a result, the        average   wage rate of the lowest
education group turns out to be 297. 6 thousand dollars. This group of people can
be   identified   with those who do not invest at all or only a very small amount       in

human   capital formation Therefore, the average initial wage rates which is
equal, by    assumption,   to the average second-period wage   rate   of those who do
not invest human capital at all, should he very close to this figure. I
assume it to be 280 thousand dollars.

      The next step is to choose the adequatedispersionof the variable. The mean

hourly wage rate of 10,128 respondents of NLS (full-time male workers of ages

between 16 and 24) is $2.71, while the standard deviation is $1.11. Accordingly,

the standard deviation of wage rates is set to 114.7 thousand dollars. The

observation of the frequency distribution of young workers strongly suggests that

a log-normal distribution, not a normal distribution, is a proper representation

of the actual distribution. A sample of 200 initial wage rates is drawn from a

log-normal   distribution with   the mean of 5.5572 and the standard deviation of

Q•3939/ The        highest wage rate in the sample is 711.4 thousand dollars fo.r one

period while the lowest is 93.0 thousand dollars. The Cmi ratio for w1 turns out

to be 0.211.—/
           U.


B. The Distribution of Intergenerational Wealth Transfers (A0 and I)

      Of the two kinds of intergenerational    transfers, some pieces of information
have ben gathered about bequests or inheritances received. However, nothing
significant is known about inter vivos     gifts.   Therefore, the distribution of the

theoretical variable A0 in this study must be created completely out of guesswork.

Since no updated and improved data on inheritances is known to me, I use the same

data set as Blinder's (1974), that is, those collected by the Survey Research Center
                                                                                     iLL

for creating the distribution of inheritances      (T).    rfhe   only significant
modification is blowing up the magnitudes of inheritances to adjust for the change
in   purchasing   power.' The distribution of inheritances is created by taking an
upper   tail of a normal distribution with the mean of -20967.7 and the standard

deviation of 40322.6; this makes the relative frequencies be 30.1% for those with

positive inheritances and 3.9% for those with $50,000 or more       respectively.
      The distribution of inter vivos gifts is created in a similar way. An upper

rail of a normal distribution with the mean of p4902.0 and the      standard deviation of
19607.8   is taken so that the relative frequencies by 59.9% for those with positive

inter vivos   gifts   and 10.0% for those with $30,000 or more respectively; The

correlation coefficient between A0 and I is expected to be very high. This is

set to 0.95 arbitrarily.

      However, one further modification should be made to the products of the

random number generator. The highest inheritance produced is merely $108,610, far

from the magnitudewhicb we    normally   expect to be the inheritance of a millionaire.

To make the created sample look more realistic, I multiply the seven highest

inheritances by numers from 2 to 9. And inter vivos gifts matched with them are

also multiplied by the same numbers respectively. The Gini coefficients of the

variables A0 and I turn out to be 0.805 and 0.913 respectively. Intergenerational

wealth transfers are set to be distributed quite unequally. The correlation

coefficient   between w0 and A0 as well as between w0 and I   is set to by 0.12 using

the estimate of Blinder (1976).
                                                                                            15



 The Distribution of Taste Parameters
               taste parameters which could conceivably vary across individuals,
        Of eight

 I allow only four variables to vary keeping the rdst four invariant for the whole
samule population. The criterion of such a division is not the importance of
variables, but sheer convenience. The four variables which will be held invariant
across individuals are:

        (i)   a, the   speed at which the marginal utility of consumption declines

              as consumption increases, is set to 1.5.

       (ii) y, the speed at which the marginal utility of leisure declines as

              consumption of leisure increases, is also set to 1.5.

      (iii) c and , which, as a group, determine the relationship between the
              two   arguments in   the   B function and the speed at which   the marginal

              utility of intergenerational      wealth transfers declines as their
              quantities   increase are set to 0.7 and 0.9 respectively.

The choice of 1.5 for a      is    consistent with most of other studies on the suhject.

The parameter y is set equal to a for the standard case since there is no conclusive

evidence about the       income elasticity of leisure    consumption. But a higher and

a lower value of -y will also be tried to see the impact of different income

elasticities of leisure consumption on the distribution of income. The choice of

the values for E and        is made to satisfy the following two requirements. First,

the income elasticity of intergenerational wealth transfers should be higher than

that of consumption or leisure choice. Second, the average ratio of inter vivos

gifts to bequests-at—death individuals choose should lie in some reasonable region.

After numerous iteration, it was found out that the choice of 0.7 for £ and 0.9
for     satisfies the above requirements fairly well.

       All the parameters which are allowed to vary across individuals are assumed

to have normal distributions

       (1) The mean value of p, the parameter which represents the subjective
                                                                                                  16


        rate of time      discounting, is    chosen       to be 0.33,    corresponding    to an

        annualsubjective discount rate of 1.0%. This in turn will lead to
        the mean value of 0.75 for — . The standard deviation for — is
                                           l+p                                          1-i-p
        arbitrarily set to 0.2 to allow sizable dispersion in time preferences.
 (2)    The mean value     of i,   the   parameter       which represents the subject's
        preference     of leisure in relation to other consumption goods, is

        set equal to 0.015 so that the average person's choice of leisure

       be.0.7    of   his available time. The standard deviation of T                 is set
       to be one-third of the mean.
(3) The choice of the mean value of a,                   the   parameter representing the
       relative preference for intergenerational wealth                   transfers, is

       made   to let the average amount of intergenerational wealth transfers
       to the next generation net of tax be approximately equal to the
       average amount individuals receive            from the previous generation.

       After some iterations, the value of 0.001                 is chosen. The standard
       deviation of a      is arbitrarily set to 0.0003.

(4)    The last taste parameter to be determined                 is   r. This pararnter
       reflects    an individual's subjective preference between the two

       channels of intergenerational wealth transfers; inter vivos gifts
       and bequests-at-death. Since the bequest--at-death is made one
       period after the     inter vivos     gift, the rate of interest or the
       subjective rate of time discount can be used as a guide to choose
       the mean value of fl. People might feel that inter vivos gifts are
       relatively more valuable      to their descendants in the             world of
       imperfect      capital markets. Hence the mean             value of r   is   set to 0.4,
       which is slightly smaller than                .     The standard deviation of

       is again arbitrarily set to 0.1.

A question ay arise as to the possible correlation between taste paramters
                                                                                                17.


 among themselves or between taste parameters, wage rates, or inherited wealth. Since
 Blinder (1974) has dealt with the problem already, I will stick to the case where
                                     17/
 no correlation exists between thorn.—
         It has been assumed that the human capital production function he strictly
 concave. In actuality, however, the existing data suggest that the function is
                             18/ As a
 rather linear or even convcx.—        compromise, a function with very small
 concavity is chosen. The human capital production function is assumed to be given


                                =                   +
                        g(m1)       -2.3m   5.3m1

This    function is chosen on the basis of NLS data mentioned earlier.

        Even though the present model is basically one of imperfect capital markets,

a single rate of interest is assumed         for borrowing and lending.    This is also used

for discounting future IflCOJSC       streams. Most of the estimates   of the long-term
real    rate of interest range from 3% to 8% per annum. But I feel they are rather

on the higher side. A rate of 3% per annum will be used in this            study. Hence
the   rate of interest for one       period (30 years compounded annually) is     assumed to
be 1'43%.

        Proportional   rates are    assumed for various taxes here for simplicity. Since
there is no conclusive evidence on the incidence of tax burdens under the present
U.S. tax system, the proportional rate of the personal income tax calculated from
the data in the 1979 edItion of Statistics of Income will be used as the rates of
the wag income tax (t1) and         the interest income tax (t2). The ratio of personal

income tax receipts to income subject to tax was 0.21 on 1976 returns.

       The proportional rate of tax on the bequest-at-death (14) is calculated from

the data of estate tax returns as reported in the 1979 edition of Statistics of

Income, which is found out to be 12%. The rate of tax on inter            vivos   gifts (t3),
however, cannot be, calculated in such a manner, since there is no exact real world

counterpart of such a tax. Due to many deductible items as well as loopholes
                                                                                                        18.


 involvll in such kinds of transfers, Lhe effective rate of tax is supposedly very
 low.     I assunie it to he 5%, which    is   much lower than t.

 III. I)iStributi000i Impact of Capital Market              Imperfection

         In this section, the   results   pf simulation exercises as        to   the   distributional

impacts of capllal market imperfection under various assumptions will be pre.s ented.
The alternative assumption which wil.l replace the standard ones                 are   summarized
in the following.
         (i) The shape of the uitlity of bequest (B) function.

             The cases of perfect substitutability and additive separability

             will be considered.

        (ii) Different income elasticities of leisure consumption.

             The standard case assumes that the value of             is equal to -that

             of a.

             The cases with a higher and a lower elasticity of marginal utility

             of leisure will be considered.

   (iii) Different distributions of inter vivos gifts
                                                                    (A0).
             As pointed out earlier, our information on this kind of transfer

             is almost non-existent. The standard case assumes that 6C1i of

             people receive positive inter vivos gifts while l0 of people receive
             more than 30 thousand dollars. The impact of more or less skewed

             initial   distributions of A0     will be studied.


The Stidard Case

        My starting   point is the case where each individual is able to borrow one-
tent1    of his current wage rate (i e     ,   q   = 0   1), the utility- if-bcqucst function

takes the intermediate form, and all the paraseters have the value stated in the

previous sections. The distribution of lifetime potential income (LPI) resulting

from the sirnulation is shom in Table 3. While the level of utility itself

should be the criterion by wacb one's economc 0311.-being i                 neasure'
                                                                                             19.


 inhcrentdifficulties involved in cardinelizat ion of utility makes it
 inevitable to substitute it with a eroxy variable in studying distributive
 prch1ms. Hence, lifetime potential incone which includes the irnnuted value
 of ccs.umed leisure is adopted as a measure of one s economic well-being in
 this study. More concretely, the lifetime potential income is defined as,
(l4 LpI       C1 +   T+                {c9   w912 +   (l_14)   A2}.
                                                                      20/

 The   first thing to note is that the lifetime income is        defined    by net
 consumption.    The other point is that one's own wage rate is used in

 calculating inputed value of leisure consumption. As shown in Table 3,

 the Gini ratio for LPI turns out to be 0.2543. And the average person

 spends 0.285 of his total time available (8.55 years) during the first

 period in human capital accumulation.

        When every individual is allowed to borrow freely against his           future   income,
 it is observed that the    average   human investment drastically increases from          0.285
 to   0.539. As the result, a majority of people now have higher wage rates for the

 second period. This      increase   in the relative importance of wage earnings reduces

the Cmi ratio from 0.2543 to 0.2452. The reduction in the Cmi ratio by 3.6%

does    not look very great, but the improvement in the distibution of lifetime
incomes, not short-run monetary incomes, of this magnitude is hardly insignificant.
The Gini ratio for the second period income (SPI) alone
                                                        is observed to decrease by
as much as 8.5% (from 0.2254 to 0.2O62). Note that this second period income is
the    closest counterpart of the annual monetary income which is the niost widely used

measure of economic well-being. In addition to contributing to the equalization of

income distribution, the increase in human investment          can possibly raise the
absolute   level of national income. The simulation results show that the gain in

national income, due to the increase in human investment amounts to 15,098 thousand

                                                                           22/
dollars, or 20.Ls of total income, when evaluated at the current wage rates.—

       As is well known, the comparison of two Cmi ratios is meaningful only if the
two   Lorenz curves lying behind them do not intersect each other.'
                                                                    Fortunately,
                                                                                            20.



the    two Lorenz curves, one with the capital market constraint and the other without
 it, do not intersect. (See Table t)


Alternative Assumptions on the Shape of theB Function
       The simulation results show that changes in the assumption about the shape of
the B function does not change the picture           much. It is expected that the
 equalization due to the elimination of capital market imperfections
 will     he less if       the substitutability between the two arguments of
the B function is    greater. This is because easier substitution of one type of
intergenerational transfer with the other type of tarnsfer could lessen the degree
to which the capital market constraint binds the subject. This expectation is
supported by simulation results only in part. That is, while the simulation results
in the    case of perfect substitutability turn out to be consistent with this
expectation,    those in case of additive separability show the opposite tendency.

The degree of    improvement in the   distribution of lifetime potential incorle (LPI)

when   the capital market constraint    is   eliminated falls from 3.6% of   the standard

case   to 3.2% if the two arguments of the B function are perfectly substitutable.
Contrary to the expectation, the      additive   separable case also leads to a slight
fall   in the degree of improvement, though the change is very small. It turns out

that the distribution of LPI improves by 3.5% when the B function is additively

separable, as compared to 3.6% in the standard case (see Table 5).

       0u   conclusion from the above discussion might be that the change in the

assumption about the shape of the B function does not modify the results of the

standard case very much. Iote, however, such a conclusion should be confined to the

case of single-generation experiment. When it        comes to the   experiment with multi-

generation, we might   reach a quite different conclusi.on' In view of the high
sensitivity of individuals behavior concerning bequest motives to differing
                                                                                               21.

  assuinstions on the relations between two kinds of interenepatonal wealth transfers
  arid the critical roles that such intergenerational wealth transfers play in
  individuals V lifetime allocaulon processes, it is very plausible that the dis-
  tributive pictures after several generations would be quite. different from each
 other dapending upon the specific assumption chosen.

 Different_Elasticities of tIie Marginal_Utility of Leisure
      The standard case assumes that the elasticity of the marginal utility of
 leisure, y, is equal to 1.5. However, the estimates of the income elasticity of
 labor    supply from which a value for the parameter       can be inferred are very much
 varied.    Therefore itwill be useful to try different values for y and see how
 the results differ from those of the standard case.
        It is shown in the Appendix how to transform an estimate of •he income
 elasticity of labor supply into a value for the parameter y. According to the
 formula, a value of 1.5 for is consistent with the income elasticity of labor
 supply   having a value of             Since most of the estimates     of income elasticity
for    male workers are concentrated in   the   region 0.00 to -0.16, both   higher   and
lower    values for y   should be tried. The two   values   chosen are 0.5 and 2.5.     When
y is set equal to 0.5 rather than 1.5, the elasticity of the marginal utility is
lower, so that people spend a larger portion of increased unearned income on leisure
than    they would do in the standard case. The opposite will hold true when

set equal to 2.5.
                                                                                      ' is
        I is expected that    lower the value for the parameter y is, the greater the
                              the

impact of the elimination of capital market imperfection. When y has a low value,
i.e.,   leisure has more of the characteristic of a luxury
                                                                good, there will be    a
large   variance in leisure consumption   among individuals. Sincethe rich are expected
to consume large amounts of leisure, they have little incentive to increase human
investment even though they are allowed to borrow without limit. On the other hand,
                                                                                        22.



the   poor will invest heavily in the formation of human capital stock which is to
be used intensively, if they are able to borrow without limit against future
earnings. This asymmetry, which gets larger as the value for y        becomes   lower, may
lead   to the difference stated above.

       As can be seen in Table 5, the simulation results support this expectation.

When the y is set cqial to 0.5, the      degree   of reduction in the Cmi ratio for LPI

when borrowing constraint is eliminated amounts to 5.0%, which is significantly

larger than 3.6% in the standard case. When y is set equal to 2.5, it falls to

2.9%. Note also that the distributions of SPI vary in consistence with our

expectation. One interesting observation is that the increase in human investment

gets greater as the value for y becomes lower.


Different Distributions of inter vivos Gifts

       The standard case assumes that 60% of individuals in the sample population

receive positive inter vivos gifts (A0) from their parents while 10% of people

receive 30 thousand dollars or more of such gifts. As mentioned before, these

figures come completely out of guesswork. If the initial distribution of A0 were

more skewed, then probably more people would he constrained by the borrowing limit,

and so the impact of the elimination of capital market imperfection would be

greater. The simulation results confirm this prediction. If           more skewed

distribution of A0 (45% above zero and 6% 30 thousand dollars or more) is taken,

the Cmi ratio of the distribution of LPI falls by 3.8% when the borrowing limit

is eli.inated as compared to 3.6% of the standard case. A less skewed

distribution of A0 (75% above zero and 15% 30 thousand dollars or more) is observed
                                                                                27/
to result in less reduction in the Cmi ratio than in the standard case.-— The

other simulation results are summarized in Table 5. Note that the elimination of

capital market imperfection could still be effective in improving income distribution
                                                                                 23.


 even   under a rather extreme assumption that three quarters of people
 receive positive inter vivos gifts.

 TV. Conclusions and Policy Implicat ions
      The analyses in previous sections suggest that at least a part of the
 existing inequality in income can be attributable to the imperfection in
 capital markets. This in turn suggests that the income distribution will
 become more equal if such imperfections are eliminated. The government
 can achieve a significant gain in its effort to equalize income distribution
 either by furnishing more generous loans for human investment purposes
directly or encouraging the private sector to take more liberal lending
policies toward this kind of loan requests.
        Easing the grip of the capital market constraint, as a redistr.ibutive

policy    rueasure, seems to have several advantages over other redistributive
measures, existing or proposed. The first one is that such a measure could
achieve   redistribution without hurting anyone in societ in absolute terms.

Those who have been constrained by the borrowing limit would he unambiguously

better off, while those who have not been would be at least as well off as
      28/
beforeT The nature of redistribution is not giving the money taken from

the rich to the poor,but making the poor relatively better off by allowing
them to exploit unused opportunities of human investment. Therefore, the
society   can enjoy a bigger economic pie as well as more equal shares.

      The second advantage is that one need not bother to sort out only those
 fr

who   deserve public help as other redistributive ñieasures require to do, since
everyone, who is willing to exploit the unused opportunities and is ready to
repay   in the next period is free to borrow under this system. And finally,

this measure would lead to greater intergenerational mobility by providing

children from poor families with the means to exploit the opportunities of

human investment to their fullest. This measure would let society
                                                                                   224.




 approach the principle of equal opportunity a little more   closely.
      Here one question might arise. If there actually exists such unexploited
 opportunities in the economy, then why has the private sector failed to exploit

 them? Or, in other words, what puts the government in a better position to do the

 job? Supposing that the private sector acts rationally, if such opportunities

actually existed, itwould make the best use of them, even without the government

intervention. Probably, one of the most important reasons for the existence of

the capital market imperfection is moral hazard. Bankers are reluctant to lend

money against future earnings, since the default risks involved in such lending

practices are too high for them. The difficulties bankers have in enforcing the

repayment of unsecured loans are related to high costs of legal actions, both in

terms of time and money, in case they are necessary. Loans of such a kind as

proposed in this study will give bankers more headaches than profits, since the

number of accounts they have to take care of is astronomical while the size of, and

therefore the profit from, each account is relatively small.

     Now the question is narrowed to this: Is the welfare gain from government

intervention large enough to offset the efficiency loss which might accompany such

government intervention? Even though a definite answer cannot be given on a priori

grounds, there seems to be good reasons to think that the answer is in the positive.

As pointed out in previous sections, the welfare gains cxpected from the elinilnation

of such imperfection are two-fold. First, the elimination of the distortioriary

factor in one's intertemporal optimization process will lead to an efficiency gain.

Second the distribution of income will be favorably affected by such a change.

It is very implausible that the possible efficiency loss due to the public

assumption of a role which could have been best served by the private sector

dominates the sum of the two. Moreover, such an efficiency loss can be minimized

if the government does not directly intervene in financial markets but just
                                                                                25.

provides appropriate environment for improved functioning of the markets. The
government's guarantee for such loans might be enough to persuade private hankers
into utilizing such unexploited opportunities.




    fr
                                                                                                    26.


    APPENDIX      1. Conversion of the Income Elasticity of Labor Supply into the
                      Elasticity of Marginal Utility of Leisure.

             Suppose that the observed value of the income elasticity of labor supply is
    consistent     with the          solution of the following instantaneous utility maximization
 problem.

    (A.l)             Max     u(c)     +   V(l)
                         where C: consumption (w(i-) +                             e)
                                      2: leisure

                                      e: unearned income

                                      w: wage rate


In the context of the present model, C includes intergonerational wealth transfers

as well as ordinary consumption. The first order condition for an optimum is,


(A.2)                        Vt        wUt     0



Totally differentiating Eq. (A.2), we have


A. 3
(                      d2.
                       de
                                 —     wU't
                                           2
                                                   -
                                                   —
                                                           U'    V
                                                                    1
                                     V"±wU"


The. income elasticity of labor supply ()                               is   given by,


         /                   -          e d9           -        e              1
     •
                                       1—I de -                 1-i     .U' V"
                                                                                   +   W

             fr

Since the function U and V are given by


                             1-ct
                                       andV=——
                                            1-y

we have


(A.5)                        v' =
                                                                                                    27.


and


(A.6)               =   _y-1-l

Dividing Eq. (A.5) by Eq. (A.6), we have,


               vi       -
               vu

or
                             vii




From Eqs. (A.Li) and (A.7), the following formula which                     relates   to y can be

derived.

                                                              e
                                   =
                                       -2-              --i--ry + w)
                                                   e
(A.8)                                  -                 +   w)
                                           b—
                                                             e
                                   =                               + 1)



Taking an average value of £ to be 0.3 and assuming that the ratio of unearned

income to the wage rate (!)                 to   be 0.1, we can simplify Eq. (A.6),


                                        0.3   0.1
                                       — —- ct(7—+ 1)
(A.8')                  -y
                               =




Remembring that we set                     equal to 1.5, we       can futher simp1i the formula,


(A.8u)                  I = - 0.O80                    - 0.5625
                                                                                                    28.




APPENDIX 2: Optimization Process When                     the   Returns from Human Investment
                    Are Uncertain.

        When   the returns from human investment are uncertain,                        an individual' s

lifetime      optimization process consists of two stages. First, he decides
how he shall determine the optimal C2, 22 and A2 once all exogenous variables,
first-period        variables, and the random variable, 0,                  are realized. This amounts
to expressing the optimal 2. 2 and A2 as functions of those variables. This

task    can be done by maximizing

                                           +   B(T, A2)

with   respect to C2, 2 and A2 subject to relevant constraints.                                The next

stage is to maximize the expected utility using the results obtained above.

         Maximize                                         ÷ BIT, A2())]
                             E[U{C1, C2(•),
          C1,M1,T

again    subject to relevant constraints.
                                                                        dm1
       The derivative which we are                most interested in, -a—-  , can be figured out
from   the first order conditions for the second stage optimization presented

below:


       E[U1
               +
                   (U2
                         -   E2)       -
                                           B1.±       -w1g(m1,         0)} I           0



          -
               B2)-—-
                         +
                             {u3
                                   -
                                       w1(m1,
                                                           -
                                                                w1B1
                                                                       +
                                                                           w1g1l
                                                                                   -             = 0;

We   have this very complicated expression for the response of human investment

       to an increase in the borrowing limit (q) under uncertainty:
                                                                         29.




         c1m1    =
                          (E[ {u11D +        B11U22U33
                                                         ÷



             • ((w1g)2U22 +                    -
                                U33)(B11B22        B12B21)}]

                 cwU2(B21-     (l±r)522)(w1gB2-h2U33))


                -E[ {g1B21U22(w1gB2-h2U33) - U111D1}]
                                                          -
                EE {w1((w1g)2U22 + U33)(B11B22                B12B21)


                     w1U22U33 (B11 -   (1-I-r)B12)}])

where jD and IF denote the determinants of endogenous matrices for the first and

the second stages of optimization process respectively. Both of them are positive
                            29/
under plausible assurnptionsT   Since every term in the expression is positive, we
                       dm1
can establish that —a-—       is unambiguously positive.
                                                                               30.




                                   Table 1

          Summary of Comparative Static Results--Interior Solutions
    cr Endogenous Variables and Binding Capital Market Constraints


                  dC1       dO2       dm1        dlj      dT
                                                                        dA2


                   -1-       +         —          +          -i-         +
           dA0

                   +         +         -          -i-        +           -f-




                   +         i-         ?         ?          +           -I-
           dw1


                   ?         ?          -         +          ?           ?



                   -         -          ?         ?          -
           dt1




                                                        :
                             ?         -i-        —          ?           ?
           dt2




           ::::              :                    :                     -H
Conditional on the assumption that {l-t-(l-t2)r}A0 +    +I         0.
                                                                              31.



                                    Table 2


            Summary_of_Comparative_Static Results--Interior Solutions
        for Endagenous Variables and Binding Capital Market Constaints




                         1dt




Conditiona1 on the assumption that {i +
                                          (1-t2)r}A0   +
                                                           A1
                                                                +   I   > 0

       fr
                                Table 3


Impact of the Elimination of Borrowing Constraint: Standard Case



                         With               Without    Percent
                      Constraint          Constraint   Change

ini Ratio for LPI       0.2543              0.2462      —3.6%

ini Ratio for SF1       0.2254             0.2062       —8.5%

Average Human
Investment              0.285               0.539      +89.1%

2nd Period Total
llncome (In
housand Dollars)        74173              89271       i-20.4%




                                     I
                                                                                       33.


                                     Table


                  Distribution of Incomes With and Without the
                      Borrowing Constraint: Standard Case



                                             Share in Total (%)
       .                  Lifetime Potential
                                     -—— Income              Second Period Income
Population    Group
                             With            Without             With        Without

Lowest 10%                    4.9              4.60              460           4.88

Second 10%                    5.84             5.92              6.08          6.31

Third 10%                     6.67             6.77              6.91          7.11

Fourth 10%                    7.57             7.68              7.88          8.28


Fifth 10%                                      8.87               8.9+         9.09


Sixth 10%                     9.45             9.50              9.80    —    10.01


Seventh 10%                 10.07             10.09          10.64            10.68


Eighth 10%            I     11.19             11.19              11.87        11.77


Ninth 10%                   12.98             13.07              13.95        13.70


Highest 10%                  23.07            22.31          19.33            18.17


(Top 2.5%)                  14.94             14.28               6.23         5.71


(Top 1%)                      5.17             4.82               2.80         2.51
                                                                                                       34.


                                             Table 5

                   Impact of the Elimination of Borrowing Constraint
                         Under Various Alternative Assumptions

                                                                                         Average Human
                     Gird Ratio for LPI                Gini Ratio for SPI    I
                                                                                          Investment
    Assumptions                         C,

                    With Without Chage           With Without        Chag With           Without Chaige
Standard Case      0.2543 0.2452      —3.6       0.2254 0.2062        —8.5       0.285    0.539   +89.1
Additive
Separability       0.2557   0.2'466   —3.5      0.2339 0.2141         —8.5       0.293   0.549    +87.4
Perfect                                            .
Substitutability   0.2549 0.2466      —3.2      0.2294     0.1945   —15.2        0.292   0.542    +85.6
y = 0.5            0.2482   0.2357    —5.0      0.2272 0.2050        —9.8        0.265   0.577    ll7.7
y = 2.5            0.2575 0.2501      -2.9      0.2321 0.2127        -8.3 0.288          0.524    +81.9
45% — 6%           0.2544   0.2449    -3.8      0.2262     0.2057    -9.1        0.276   0.542    +96.4

75% - 15%          0.2512   0.2430    -3.3      0.2230     0.2061    -7.6        0.297   0.536
                                                                                               35.


                                              FOOTNOTES



 1The    mirriage decision does riot enter this model. So when I uco the word
 "individual" or "agent", I refer to a family unit.
 2Almoct all of the life-cycle resource allocation models assume that the bequest

 at death is the only way of transferring        non-human wealth from generation to
 generation.       Only Ishikawa (197k) and Drazen (1978) deal with the model in which

 more   than one method of wealth transfers are      introduced.

 3The   imperfection in capital markets can take several forms whet) it         actually occurs.

 In this study, I limit my attention to only' one form       of such     imperfection --   limit
 to   one's borrowing ability.

 41n contrast, nothing has      been   assuiiied as to how w1 is related to the characteristics

 of the agent's parents. Though it is very probable that it is proportional to his

 parent's stock of human or non-human wealth or some other characteristics, it is

 assumed purely exogenous in this study.


 5The sign of           is.not posited here. It turns out that     its   si&ff does not

 matter in the determination of the sign of the derivative _!.            which we are
 most   interested in.

'6The condItion, in the context of the present model, is that g2 > 0           and g12.> 0.


7One    period   of an individual's economic life is assumed t? be of length of 30 years.

Therefope, assuming that      he   starts his economic life when he is 10 years of age,

what    we call the first period in this study means the time span till the, age of 40,
and the second period is thereafter until the age of 70. An individual who is 10

years old may     not   be mature enough to plan   his own economic life. But that age        is
                                                                                                36.




7(cont'd) selected to avoid the awkward case where an individual with more human

investment has a higher wage earnings even during the first period, contrary to

what the theoretical model implies. This can happen if the first period of the

model is set to include a later stage of one's calendar age because of the steep

wage urofile of high education receivers.


8Annual wage earnings are discounted by the rate of (r-g), where r and g denote
 real
thetinterest rate and the growth rate of the economy respectively. The reason

why (r-g), instead of r, is used as the rate of discount is that cross-section

data are used here. If all of the wage rates grew by the rate of g, discounting
                                                                                                 A
by the rate of (r-g) would be an appropriate procedure for cross-section data.

value of 1.5% per annum is chosen for the rate of discount assuming that r and g

are 3% and 1.5% respectively.

  Since economic age zero in this model corresponds to calendar age 10, the average

stock of initial human capital is assumed to be 5 years of schooling equivaleflS.


'0Consider a positive variate X such that Y =                 log   X is normally distributed with

                                                                     of the variate X are related
mean p and variance 2. The mean a and variance

to p and a2 in the following way.

           Ci)   a   =   e
                                           2        2
                 2                                  a
          (ii)               e
                                 2ii-I-G
                                               Ce       —1)

Since c and          are assumed to be 280 thousand and 11.7 thousand respectively, the

mean of a log-normal distribution, p, is set to 5.5572 while the standard deviation

0,   is   set to 0.3939.


liCre with Blinder's (l97) ratio of 0.258.
                                                                                               37.




 12For       discussion of the drawbacks of the data, see Blinder (l97, pp. 9l—93).

 13
      Due to inflation, a dollar in 1960, when the survey was taken, is worth only

 '8.8 in 1977.

 These percentages are slightly higher than what           the   original survey data show.

 I suspect there was a fairly substantial understatement of inheritances received

 among respondents.

 See, for example, Driffili. (1977).

 '6Most of the estimates of the income elasticity of labor supply, from which the

 income      elasticity of leisure consumpt ion can be derived, lie in the region 0.000
 and —0.160. See Killingswonth (1976). However, it does not seem that a consensus
 is reached about the issue.
 17
      This case corresponds to Blinder's (l97L1.) "Egalitarian Society't except for one
 thing         his   egalitarian   society assumes that the correlation between w0 and    I


 is zero while my case assumes it to be 0.12.
                                                                                 /
 '8See, for examole, Mincer (l97L).

 19
      The constant c is assumed to be distributed normally with the mean of 1,0 and
 the standard deviation of 0.2 to introduce some randomness in           the   determination
 of    w2.

20 The lifetime potential income defined as such is greater than the sum of labor
 earninis and capital income by th discounted sum of intergenerational
                                                                        transfers
 received. Also note that the imputed value of the government expenditures is not
 included in the definition. This omission would not pose a serious problem since
 the changes in tax rrvenues, and therefore the government expenditures, are not that
 great.
                                                                                           38.


2IThe second period income (SPI) is defined by the sum of labor earnings, that is,

w1.g(]-Q2), and interest income. The simulation results show that those who

increase human investment following the elimination of the borrowing limit, mostly
the lower    and middle   income classes, significantly decrease    leisure consumption

         while   the rich do not change their leisure consumption. This might be
responsible for such a      difference between the   degrees of improvement in the
distributions     of LPI and SPI. The other factor is      that, due to discounting, the
 increase                 in the second period labor income due to increased human

investment increases the lifetime potential income by a much smaller amount.

22Note that this figure is aii overestimation of the true increase in national

income for the following     two   reasons. First • such   a general increase in human
investment reduces labor supply by younger workers. Hence the value of reduced
labor    supply during the first period should be subtracted from the above figure

to reach a true increase in national income for the whole population. Second,

due to general equilibrium effects, such an increase in the aggregate labor

supply, measured in efficiency unit, would depress the overall wage rates

23Atkinson (1970), points out that, even though the condition that the Lorenz

curves do not intersect holds, the Gini ratio still embodies some specifie- social

welfare function.

21See Pryor (1973) for simulation of income distribution in a multi—generation

setting.

25Notethat this conversion also depends on the chosen value for ,            elasticity
of the marginal utility of consumption.
26
     The Gini ratio for A in this case is 0.86'4-5 as opposed to 0.8051 of the

standard case.

27
     The Cmi ratio for A in this case is 0.7197, the lowest of the three cases.
                         0
                                                                                 39




     should be noted, however, that this may not hold in a general equilibrium

setting.

29The assumptions are:

  (S.l)                             0
           U33g11h2.- w1B2(g1)2 >

  (S.2)    B11 - g1h2B12 < 0

  (S.3)    B12 - g1h2B22 > 0

 These conditions are assumed to hold everywhere, not necessarily in the

 neighborhood of equilibrium. For limit in space, I omit the discussion

  of their implications.
                                                                                       40.




                                           REFERENCES


 A.B. Atkinson, On the Measurement of Inequality," Journal of Economic Theory,
      September .1970, 2, pp. 244—263.

 ____________ "Captial Taxes, the Redistribution of Wealth and Individual Savings,"
      Review of Economic Studies, April 1971, 38, pp. 209-228.

 ____________    "The Distribution of Wealth and the      Individual Life-Cycle," Oxford
        Economic Papers, July 1971, 23, pp. 239-254.
 G.S. Becker, Human Capital, revised edition, New York: National Bureau of Economic
        Research, 1975.

__________ and N. Tomes, "An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income and
        Intergenerational Mobility," Journal of Political Economy, December 1979, 87,
        pp.   1153-1189.
A.S. Blinder, Toward an Economic Theory of       Income   Distribution, Cambridge, Mass.:
        MIT Press, 1974.
 _____ ____ "Intergenerational Transfers and Life Cycle Consumption," American Economi
        Review, May 1976, 66, pp.     87—93.

_______        and Y. Weiss, "Human    Capital
                                           and Labor Supply: A Synthesis," Journal of
        Political Economy, June 1976, 84, pp. 449-472.

G. Cooper, A Voluntary Tax? New Perspectives on Sophisticated Estate Tax Avoidance,
     Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1979.

A.    Drazen, "Government Debt, Human Capital and Bequests in a Life—Cycle Mode1,'
        Journal of Political Economy,    June 1978, 86, pp.   505-516.
E. Driffill, "Essays in Human Capital Accumulation and Labor Supply," Ph.D.
        dissertation, Princeton University, 1977.

J. Eaton and H.S. Rosen, "Taxation, Human Capital and Uncertainty," American Economic
     Review, Septemter 1980, 90, pp. 705—715.

J.S. Flemming, "The Utility of Wealth and the Utility of Windfalls," Review of
     Economic Studies, January 1969, 36, pp. 55-56.

J.J. Hckman, "A Life Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning and Consumption," Journal of
     Political Economy, August 1976, 84, pp. 511-544.

•T.   Ishikawa, "Imperfection in the Capital Market and the Institutional Arrangement
        of Inheritance," Review of Economic Studies, July 1974, 41, pp. 383-404.
14.R. Kiitlingsworth, "Neoclassical Labor Supply Models: A Survey of Recent Literature
     on Determinants of the Supply of Time to the Labor Market," mimeo, 1976.

E. Lazear, "Education: Consumption or Production?" Journal of Political_Economy,
     June 1977, 85, pp. 569—597.

D. Levhari and Y. Weiss, "The Effect of Risk on the Investment in Human Capital,"
     American Economic Review, December 1974, 64, pp. 950—963.
                                                                                   41.



J.   Mincer,   "Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution,' Journal
       of Political Economy, August,   1958, 66, pp. 281-302.

     _____     Schooling, Experienci and Earnings, New York: National Bureau of
       Economic   Research, 1974.
G. Orcutt and et.al. Policy Exploration through Microanalytic Simulation, Washington,
     D.C.: Urban Institute, 1976.

J.A. Pechman and B.A. Okner, Who    Bears the Tax Burden? Washington, D.C.: Brookings
     Institution, l974.

F.L. Pryor, "Simulation of the Impact of Social and Economic Institutions on the
     Size Distribution of Income and Wealth," American Economic Review, March 1973,
     63, pp. 50-72.

G.S. Sahota, "Theories of Personal Income Distribution: A Survey," Journal of Economic
     Literature, March 1978, 16, pp. 1—55.

P.A. Samuelson, "An Exact Consumption-Loan MoDel of Interest with or without the
     Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy, December 1958,
     66, pp. 462—487.

N.E. Yaari, "On the Consumer's Lifetime Allocation Process," International Economic
     Review, September 1964, 5, pp. 304-317.




       fr
