                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   PROFITABILITY AND STABILITY
                IN INTERNATIONAL CURRENCY MARKETS


                        John F. 0. Bilson


                      Working Paper No. 66)4




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          April 1981




This research is a part of the NBER Program in International
Studies and has been partly funded by the National Science
Foundation through Grant No. SES—8009)458. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #664
                                                            April 1981




           Profitability and Stability in International Currency Markets



                                     ABSTRACT



       A number of recent empirical studies have rejected the hypothesis

that forward exchange rates are unbiased forecasts of future spot exchange

rates. This result implies that there have been opportunities for spec-

ulative profit during the post Bretton Woods period. Observers of the

floating rate system have also noted that exchange rates have been more

volatile than they were anticipated to be in the 1960's. In this paper,

the link between the volatility of exchange rates and the existence of

opportunities for speculative profit is explored. The question answered

in the paper is the following: if there were no opportunities for spec-
ulative profit, would exchange rates have been more stable? The answer
is yes. This answer implies that speculation (intervention) based upon
the forecasting equation described in the paper would be both profitable
and   stabilizing.



                                         John F. 0. Bilson
                                         Hoover Institution
                                         Stanford, California 94305

                                         (415) 497—3285
        Since the demolition of the Bretton Woods system in the early

seventies, international monetary economists have labored at the task

of explaining the volatility of exchange rates in a way that is consis-

tent with the presumption that international asset markets are efficient.

In terms of theoretical contributions, this has been productive work:

there are now a number of international macroeconomic models in which

asset prices are well arbitraged and expectations are rationally formed

which yield the prediction that exchange rates will be volatile relative

to economic fundamentals. This literature, which has become known under

the title of the 'asset market' approach, views the exchange rate as the

relative price of national currencies rather than as the relative price

of goods and services. Variants of the asset market approach include

the monetary models of Frenkel (1976) and Mussa (1976), the Keynesian

'sticky price' model of Dornbusch (1978), and the models of current account

dynamics introduced by Kouri (1976) and Calvo and Rodriguez (1979). All

of these models, and most of those that followed them, assume that interest

rates are arbitraged across currencies according to the interest rate

parity condition and that forward rates are unbiased forecasts of future

spot rates.

        Although these assumptions are valid simplifications in an

abstract theoretical model, recent empirical evidence has generally rejected

the hypothesis that the forward rate is an unbiased and efficient forecast

of the future spot rate.   (See, for example, Hansen and Hodrick (1980) and

Bilson (1981)) Specifically, it appears to be possible to construct simple

alternative forecasts, based upon publicly available information, which

generate predictable profits from foreign exchange speculation. In addition,
                                        —2--

 Levich (1980) has presented evidence that commercial foreign exchange fore-

 casting services have track records which, in some cases, are significantly

 superior to the forward rate at high marginal significance levels.

           These predictable speculative profits need not be due to market

 inefficiency since, as Hansen and Hodrick have stressed, the substantial

risk involved in currency speculation may result in a time varying risk

premium. Although my own results suggest that the risk/return tradeoff

is too favorable to be attributed to this source, it is not the purpose of

this paper to attempt to resolve this issue. Instead, the paper explores

the relationship between the bias in the forward rate as a forecast of the

future spot rate and the volatility of the exchange rate. The purpose of

the paper is to answer the question: if the forward rate had been an un-

biased forecast of the future spot rate during the seventies, would the

spot exchange rate have been more or less volatile?

           In the next section of the paper, a simple theoretical model will

be presented which provides an answer to this question. In the following

section, the parameters of the model will be estimated and the question

will be answered empirically.

I. The Theoretical Model

           The theoretical model begins with a specification of the foreign

exchange market equilibrium condition

                       st =   z+£                                      (1)


where S iS the log of the spot exchange rate, x is the forward premium

(+) or discount (—), and z is defined as the value of       when x is equal
to zero.    In order to avoid controversy, the determinants of z will not

be explicitly discussed; at the present time there are many specifications
                                              —3--
 of z which are all equally consistent with the available empirical evidence.

 Following   Kholhagen   (1979), we may refer to z as the 'non—speculative'

 influence on the uxchange rate and to s x as the 'speculative influence.'

 This decomposition is based upon the presumption that the forward premium

 reflects market expectations about the future value of the currency rather

 than a time varying risk premium. Primarily for purposes of exposition,

 this presumption is maintained in the following discussion.

          In contrast to most previous work, however, the rational expectations

assumption that the forward premium is the actual            conditional   expectation of

the future change in the spot exchange rate is not made.             Instead, the actual

forecast and the forward premium are linked through the relationship described

in equation (2).

                         s
                             t+l
                                   —st ax t                                       (2)


In   equation (2),           is the expected value of s1 conditional upon the

information set available at t.           If the   a parameter is equal to unity, the

model described in equations (1) and (2) reduces to the simple rational

expectations model studied by         Mussa (1976)   and others.   If a is greater

than unity, the forward premium is a damped predictor of the actual rate

of appreciation. This situation corresponds to the case of 'insufficient

speculation' described by NcKinnon (1976, p. 83):

         'The ...    hypothesis     .. . is
                                    that the supply of private capital for
         taking net positions in either the forward or spot markets is
         currently inadequate. Exchange rates then move sharply in response
         to random variations in the day—to—day excess demand by merchants
         for foreign exchange. Once a rate starts to move because of some
         temporary perturbation, no prospective speculator is willing to
         hold an open position for a significant time interval in order to
         bet on a reversal —— when the large daily and monthly movements in
         the foreign exchanges and the high bid—ask spreads.'

Pithin this interpretation, more active speculation would lead to a greater
                                         —4—
 covariance between fo±ecasted future rates of depreciation and the forward

 premium. Given the presumption that the z series is negatively correlated,

high covariance would stabilize the spot rate.

         The alternative interpretation is the old 'destabilizing speculation'

argument associated with Nurkse (1944). In this case, the speculators are

too willing to 'jump on the bandwagon' behind an anticipated appreciation or

depreciation of a currency so that the forward premium is too volatile relative

to the rational expectations forecast. Within the terms of equation (2), this

case corresponds to a situation in which a is less than unity.       In the

exposition of this model by Friedman (1953) and Telser (1959), the non—

speculative rate is assumed to be stable and positively correlated, so that

the 'bandwagon' effect destabilizes the spot rate.        To complement McKinnon's

analysis, the case in which a is less than unity will be described as a

case of 'excessive' speculation.

        If there is either insufficient or excessive speculation in the

market, it is possible to enter the market as a marginal speculator and

make predictable profits. However as should be clear from the preceding

discussion, it   is   not possible to establish a direct relationship between

profitabil-ity and stability in this model without describing the process

generating the non—speculative rate. In McKinnon's case, insufficient

speculation is destabilizing because the non—speculative rate is negatively

correlated. In Nurkse's case, excessive speculation is destabilizing

because the non—speculative rate is positively correlated. In addition,

however, there are two other cases —    insufficient   and positive correlation;

excessive and negative correlation —    in   which the entrance of additional

profit maximizing speculators would destabilize the market.

       This point can be established more formally by specifying the
                                            —5—
 time series process generating the non—speculative rate. As in my previous

papers (1978, 1979), z is assumed to be generated by a first order auto-

regressive process in the first difference of the series.


                                  £zt_1 +


The    parameter may fall within the range of minus unity to plus unity.

Negative autocorrelation in the z series is a characteristic of 'over-

shooting' models of exchange rate determination. However, the pattern

of negative autocorrelation in these models is generally more complicated

than the simple AR1 process described in equation (3). Positive

auto—correlation is a characteristic of the pure monetary models of

Mussa (1976) and Bilson (1979) in which volatility is induced by the

positive correlation between today's innovation, u, and the anticipated

future growth of
                      z.
           To solve the model, substitute (2) into (1) to obtain the forward

difference equation

                           s (1—')      + )'
                                               st+l                             (4)


where )'   is   defined as [(c/a)/l+(E/c)} < 1.       Equation (4) defines the current

spot rate to be a weighted average of the current non—speculative rate,
                                                                                      z,
and the expected spot rate in the next period,                As e increases,
                                                       +a
implying a move from excessive to insufficient speculation, the weight given

z increases and the weight given to               declines.

           The full solution to equation (4) requires that the model be solved

for the future expected values of the exchange rate and that the forecasting

equation, equation (3), be substituted into the resulting solution in order

to obtain the final reduced form. Since these procedures are now well known,

only the final reduced form will be presented here. This equation is
                                         —6—
                        =
                            z+                                               (5)


                                                            specifies the under-
In contrast to equation (4), equation (5) directly

                                         that are responsible for the market
lying forces (specifically

anticipation of appreciation or depreciation.

        Having obtained a solution for the exchange rate, a measure of

volatility must now be introduced. Of the numerous alternatives, I have

chosen to defined volatility as the mean squared error of the forward

premium as a forecast of the rate of depreciation.           Formally, this measure


is defined as

                                                                  —
                            -
                                 x1)2 = E(s
                                                -       +
                                                                      x1)2          (6)



The first term in this equation represents the variance of the unanticipated

change in the exchange rate while the second term represents the squared

forward rate bias. This measure of volatility appears to be close to the

one that is implicit in popular discussions and it is preferable to the

pure forecast error in that it does not require a specification of the

true forecast of the rate of depreciation.          It is also important to notice

that the measure is defined upon the rate of depreciation — a stationary

series —    rather   than the non—stationary level of the exchange rate.

        Using equation (5), the variance of the forecast error may be found

tobe
                             —    —2 =     1 22
                                              0                               C/)



where o2 is the variance of the innovation, u, introduced in equation (3).

The question at issue is the effect of departures from speculative efficiency
                                                  defined in this equation.
 (c =    1) on the variance of the forecast error
                                      —7—
 Remember that ' decreases with a so that as speculation moves from being

 excessive to insufficient, the weight given to anticipated future develop-

ments declines and the weight given to current market conditions increases.

Equation (7) is stating that the effect of this transition on the volatility

of the exchange rate depends upon the value of ,        the   parameter measuring

the degree of serial correlation in the forcing variable z.         If     is

negative — as in McKinnon's J—curve analysis or Dornbusch's overshooting

model — the absence of sufficient speculation is a source of volatility.

Within the terms of the equation, a lower value of a (more speculative

response) leads to a higher value of ' and to a smaller value for the

term l/l—. Essentially, this presentationmerely repeats McKinnon's

analysis within the framework of a specific model. However, it does

point out that that analysis is crucially dependent upon negative auto—

correlation in the underlying forcing series.

     Consider, in contrast, the case in which the z series exhibits

positive autocorrelation. If       is positive, higher values of         increase

the variance of the forecast error defined in equation (7). Positive

autocorrelation in the forcing series generally arises when market

participants have extrapolative expectations concerning the money supply

growth rate and other series. In this case, excessive speculation leads

to spot rate volatility because the current innovation in z creates

anticipations of further changes in the same direction. Consequently

interest rates rise, the currency sells at a discount, and the spot rate

must fall to clear the market.

     Within the terms of the model, then, the relationship between the

degree of speculative activity and the volatility of the exchange rate
                                  —8—
forecast error cannot be described without some knowledge of the sign of

the serial correlation in the forcing series. The model does predict,

however, that economists who believe that the forcing series is negatively

correlated will encourage speculative activity as a means to exchange rate

stability while those who believe in positive serial correlation will tend

to discourage speculative activity. Government officials, who are well

aware of the positive correlation in the growth rates of their own policy

variables, are prominent members of the latter group.

     We now turn to the second term in equation (6): the squared bias in

the forward rate forecast. This variable can be shown to be defined by


                  E[s - x 2 [8(la)(1))2 c.                              (8)
                     t   t-l
                                   (l_)2(l_2)
From the numerator of the coefficient on the right hand side of this

equation, two sufficient conditions for lack of bias can be derived.

The first,   equal to unity, simply states that if speculation is

sufficient but not excessive, the forward premium will be an unbiased

forecast of the future rate of depreciation. The second, )'     equal   to

unity, may arise for two reasons. The first arises in a situation.

where the two currencies are perfect substitutes as transactions media

and in which money holders are able to costlessly switch from one

currency to the other. In this case, the perfect currency substitution

case, both the expected rate of depreciation and the forward discount

will be zero. The second case occurs when speculation becomes very

excessive, so that a is close to zero and )'   is   close to unity. In this

situation, too much of the future information is discounted into the

current spot price so that the variance of the anticipated change in the

exchange rate is very small.

     More generally, however, it is not possible to specify the sign on
                                                —9—
the derivative linking the squared forecast bias to the y parameter

because two conflicting forces are at work. As mentioned above, higher

)'   values   lead to more immediate discounting of future changes and hence

reduce the variance of the anticipated change in the exchange rate. On

the other hand, higher )'              values increase the variance of the forward

premium or discount. Since both of these variables should be of comparable

dimensions, it is possible to argue that the aggregate effect could go

in either direction.

       To sum up the results of this section, we have seen that it is not

possible to specify the relationship between profitability and volatility

on purely theoretical grounds. The end result requires that the analyst

know both the relationship between forward rates and future spot rates

and the nature of the serial correlation in the forcing series. These

issues are the subject of the following empirical investigation.

II. The Empirical Model

       In this section, estimates of the main parameters will be provided

for five major currencies: the Canadian dollar, the Pound Sterling, the

Deutsche Mark, the French Franc and the Japanese Yen. The results are

based upon 77 four—weekly observations running from January 17, 1975 to

November 14, 1980 and the one month maturity is taken as an approximation

for the four week maturity. For purposes of estimation, the model may

is re—stated in the following equations.

                      s
                          nt
                               =   z
                                    nt
                                         + xnt                                 (9)



                          nt
                                   Xn +z   +u nt;—1<<l
                                       n nt—i                                  (10)


                     E(u
                       nt )=E(unt
                                ,unt-i
                     E(u
                       nt ,u
                           n't
                               )=c2,
                                  nn
                                                       — 10 —


                      s
                         nt
                               —snt =a nxnt                             (ii)


The only major differences between this version of the model and the one

presented above are that an 'n' subscript has been added to signify the

currencies in the model, a trend term has been added to the autoregressive

specification of the forcing series, and the innovations in the forcing

series are assumed to be contemporaneously correlated. With the trend

term, the solution for the level of the exchange rate may be found to be -


                               -
                      5nt —           nt +   (l)(l-) (l-B) Znt•          12


Using this result in conjunction with equation (10), the rate of change

in the exchange rate may be written as

                                  =   ___    (-t)     __                /i3
                                      (l—) + (l) z1 +    u.
Since the first two terms represent the expected change in the exchange

rate based upon the information set in the previous period, equation (11)

may be used to eliminate the unobservable Lz
                                            nt-i


                          nt
                                  =axnt—i (1—')unt
                                              -I-
                                                                        (14)


Equation (.14)   makes the obvious point that the a parameter may be estimated.

from a regression of the actual rate of change in the exchange rate in

period t on the forward premium in the previous period.

         More importantly, however, the two equations also yield a solution

for the forward premium or discount. Setting (13) equal to (14), the

solution for the forward premium may be found to be


                              —        A
                     x        —              +      ________             15
                      nt           a(l—B')          a(l—')      nt .
In   equation (15), the unobservable variable is eliminated by substituting
                                          — 11 —


for        from equation (9) and by then substituting in a lagged version of

equation (15) for iz1. The resulting expression is

                           = X   f(B,1,a) +                               (16).
                                              xnt_l          Unt

where the function f( )     is   a tedious combination of 6, 1 and a. Equation

(16) demonstrates that the degree of autocorrelation in the forcing series

may be estimated from running a regression of the forward premium on its

own   lagged   value. In addition, the equation demonstrates that the residuals

from estimating equation (16) will be correlated (in theory perfectly correlated)

with the residuals from equation (14). Given the simplicity of the model,

however, one would expect less than perfect correlation in the residuals

from the two equations.

         The most important result derived from this analysis is that the

key parameters determining the relationship between profitability and

volatility, a and B, may be estimated from the regression equations

specified in equations (14) and (16). The 10 equations were estimated

using Zeilner's seemingly unrelated regression procedure in order to

take account of the contemporaneous covariance in the residuals. In

addition to the standard estimates, the parameters a and B were also

constrained to be the same for all of the countries in the sample, which

leads    to more efficient estimates in this case.

         The estimates presented in Table 1 support the view that a)

currency speculation has been excessive and b) that the forcing series

is positively correlated. In general, the first order autocorrelation

coefficient lies within the range from .64 to .84, and the pooled estimate
                                  — 12 —


             TABLE 1: ESTIMATES OF THE KEY PARAMETERS

CURRENCY             CONSTANT                a


Canadian $            —.22E—03             —0.05               0.77
                      (.1OE—03)            (0.66)             (0.04)

Pound Sterling        —. 71E—03             0.44               0.78
                       (.25E—03)           (0.54)             (0.05)

French •Franc         —.57E—03              0.39*              0.64
                      (.32E—03)            (0.31)             (0.07)

Deutsche Mark           .51E—03             0.63               0.84
                       (.16E—03)           (0.49)             (0.04)

Japanese Yen            .44E—03            _0.81*              0.70
                       (.20E—03)           (0.71)             (0.05)

Pooled                                      0.38*              0.77
                                           (0.21)             (0.03)


Notes: In the pooled regressions, the constant terms are allowed to
       vary across countries, but the a and   parameters are con-
       strained to be equal.

         Standard errors are given in brackets beneath the estimated
         coefficients. An asterisk indicates that the hypothesis that
         the true a is zero can be rejected at the 5 per cent level.
                                      — 13 —

is   0.77. This figure is consistent with the observed correlation in possible

candidates for the forcing series, including money supplies, real outputs,

current account deficits, and the like. While the a coefficients are not

as precisely estimated, it is noticeable that all of the estimates are below

unity and that the constrained estimate is significantly below unity. In

addition, it is never possible to reject the hypothesis that the true value

of the a coefficient is zero. In other words, the data is more consistent

with the hypothesis that the actual change in the exchange rate is unrelated

to the forward premium than it is with the hypothesis that the forward premium

is an unbiased forecast of the rate of change in the exchange rate.

         In the preceding discussion, it was demonstrated that the combination

of positive autocorrelation in the forcing series with excessive speculation

lead to greater variance in the exchange rate than would be the case if the

forward premium was set equal to the expected change in the spot rate. The

underlying scenario views speculators as overreacting to market fundamentals:

in response to a positive innovation, for example, speculators set the currency

at an unwarranted premium and the spot exchange rate must appreciate in

response to both forces. Hence it appreciates by more than it would if

speculators were more modest in their assessment of their ability to

forecast exchange rate developments. This interpretation relies, of course,

on the assumption that the forward premium or discount solely reflects

speculative expectations. If the premium also included a random risk premium,

for example, the regression results could be equally well explained in terms

of an errors in variables approach.
                                                  — 14 —

          Has this form of 'destabilizing speculation' been an important

source of exchange rate volatility during the post Bretton Woods period?

One answer to this question may be given on the basis of the ratio of

the actual mean squared error of the forward premium relative to that

which would have occured if the forward premium was unbiased (i.e. if

a was equal to unity. The answer to this question depends upon the

value of £,     the   parameter relating the spot exchange rate to the forward

premium. Although this parameter could be estimated from the covariance

matrix of the residuals from the two regressions, this procedure led

to implausible values which suggested that the structure of the model

was not strong enough to support inferences about the value of this.

parameter. As an alternative, the following calculations are based upon

a presumed value of 10 for the semi—elasticity. Within the terms of

the money demand literature, this value implies an interest elasticity of

the demand for money of .1 if the monthly rate of interest is 1 per cent.

This values also implies that the current spot rate is equal to a weighted

average of the non—speculative rate, z, and the one month forward rate

with ninety per cent of the weight being given to the forward rate.

          The values of the mean squared error ratio are given below for the

five countries and the pooled sample.

                       CURRENCY                     MSE Ratio

                       Canadian $                        1.84

                       Pound Sterling                    1.32

                       French Franc                      1.21

                       Deutsche Mark                     1.34

                       Japanese Yen                      2.40

                       Pooled                            1.38
                                     — 15 —

The   MSE ratios suggest that the existence of profit opportunities in the

forward market has been a substantial source of volatility in exchange

rates. At the bottom of the scale, the MSE for the French Franc would have

only been twenty per cent less if the forward premium had been unbiased.

At the other extreme, the MSE for the Japanese Yen was 2.4 times the value

that it would have been if the forward premium had been unbiased: the

actual one month standard deviation for the Yen is around three per cent,

these results suggest that it would have been around two per cent with

unbiased forecasting. And while the results for the other countries are

not as dramatic, it is clear that the excessive volatility in the forward

premium has been an important source of volatility in the exchange rate

in the cases studied.—

III. Conclusion

        Most studies of the time series behavior of the exchange rate have

concluded that the exchange rate, like many other asset prices, follows a

random walk. At the same time, major currencies have consistently stood

at substantial premia or discounts against the dollar.   If the random

walk model is correct, then a speculator could profit by selling currencies

that are at a premium (and buying currencies that are at a discount) in

the forward market. The results of this paper demonstrate that this

activity would not only be profitable, it would also result in more stable

exchange rates. In a world in which such profit opportunities are eliminated,

forward premia or discounts would typically be closed to zero, thus also

leading to greater stability in international interest rate differentials.

        There is, of course, no reason why private speculators should not

enter the market and take advantage of the apparent profit opportunity.

However, given that private speculation is likely to be a cause of the
                                     — 16 —

excessive volatility in the forward premium, these results could be used to

justify an active intervention strategy by central banks. This strategy,

which would be a variant of the 'leaning against the wind' model, would

typically put the central bank in the position of buying weak currencies

and selling strong currencies.

        The model presented in this paper is not intended to provide the

foundations for such an intervention strategy: its purpose was to explore

the issue at a very simplified level. Consequently, only one form of

forecast bias was considered and the model was not subject to any post—

sample tests of the stability of the coefficients. This is a very

important consideration, since market forces are likely to drive the

a coefficient towards unity over time. However, the general methodology

may be extended to include more sophisticated models of forecast bias and

empirical methods may be used to estimate the extent an4 direction of

the parameter drift.
                                        - 17   -


FOOTNOTES


For a          suey of these developments, see Bilson (1979).

'Frenkel (1976), Nussa (1976).

Fin the Dornbusch (1976) model, for example, the exchange rate is generated

  by an ARIMA (1,1,1) process. In words, the log first difference of the

  exchange rate contains both an autoregressive and a moving average

  component.

4/ See
—          .
       Bilson (l79).


  In order to simplify the notation, the country subscripts on the

  coefficients will be omitted in these derivations.

 6/
      If       is defined as the covariance of the errors of the two equations

 divided by the variance of the forward premium equation, then the

 model suggests an estimate of c of SB—a. Two considerations suggested

 that this was not a useful estimate: first, the model predicted that

 the correlation coefficient between the forecast errors should be unity,

 when in fact the estimated correlation coefficients were low, and

 second, the estimated         terms were negative, when they should be of the

 same sign as the B coefficient.


L'in every case, the fraction of the MSE due to bias was less than one

 per cent. There is consequently very little difference between the use

 of the MSE and the variance as estimates of volatility.
                                   —18 —
REFERENCES


Bilson, John F. 0., "Recent Developments in Monetary Models of Exchange

     Rate Determination," IMF Staff Papers 26:2 (June 1979):20l—223.

_____   "The 'Speculative Efficiency' Hypothesis," forthcoming, Journal

     of Business (July 1981)

Calvo, Cuillermo A., and Carlos A. Rodriguez, "A Model of Exchange Rate

     Determination under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations,"

     Journal of Political Economy (June 1977) 85:617—25.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal

     of Political Economy (December 1976) 84:537—75.

Frenkel, Jacob A., "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal

     Aspects and Empirical Evidence," Scandinavian Journal of Economics

     (1976)   78:200—24.

Friedman Milton, "The Case for FlexibleExchange Rates," in his

     Essays in Positive Economics, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

     1953).

Hansen, Lars Peter and Robert J. Rodrick, "Forward Exchange Rates as

     Optimal Predictors of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis,"

     Journal of Political_Eco (October 1980) 88:829—853.

Kouri, Pentti J. K., "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in

     the Short Run and the Long Run: A Monetary Approach," Scandinavian

     Journal of Economics (1976) 78:280—304.

Levich, Richard M., "Analyzing the Accuracy of Foreign Exchange Advisory

     Services: Theory and Evidence," Chapter 5 in Levich and Whilbourg (eds.)

    ExchagRisk_and Exposure (New York: D. C. Heath, 1980)
                                  —19 —
REFERENCES -   2.

Kbolhagen, Steven "The Identification of Destabilizing Speculation,"

     Journal of International Economics (1980)

McKinnon, Ronald I., "Floating Exchange Rates 1973—74: The Emperor's

     New Clothes," in Karl Brunner and A. H. Meltzer (eds.) Carnegie—

     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol 3., 1976.

Mussa, Michael, "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and Monetary

     and Fiscal Policy Under a Regime of Controlled Floating," Scandinavian

     Journal of Economics (1976) 78:229—48.

Nurkse, Ragnar International Currency Experience (1944: League of Nations).

Telser. Lester "A Theory of Speculation Relating Profitability and

     Stability," Review of Economics   and Statistics   (1959) XLI—3:295—301.
