                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  BUSINESS CYCLES AND GROWTH:
                 SOME REFLECTIONS AND MEASURES


                       Victor Zarnowitz


                     Working Paper No. 665




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          April 1981




This paper is part of the NBER's research program in Economic
Fluctuations. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation and aid of the Graduate School of Business of the
University of Chicago and NBER are gratefully acknowledged. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper II 665
                                                                    April 1981


           Business eycles and Growth: Some Reflections and Measures


                                   ABSTRACT


     No simple and stable relationship can be expected to exist between long-
term economic growth and cyclical variability; they interact and depend on
various factors, partly common and partly different. However, measures re-
lating to the annual growth rates in real GNP since 1882 suggest that growth
was generally higher during those multi-cycle periods when stability was
greater.

     The mildness of economic fluctuations in the 1950's and 1960's led to an
international revival of interest in growth cycles, i.e., cyclical movements
in trend-adjusted indicators.    Measures of several important aspects of growth
cycles, such as duration of phases and timing of the indicators, show much
greater symmetry and more uniformity than their counterparts for business cycles.
For several of the recent growth cycles, the degree of international diffusion
is high.

     The expansions and contractions of the early business cycles in the NBER
chronology tend to be of nearly equal length, much like the phases of growth
cycles and very unlike those of the more recent business cycles.       However, the
identification of these movements relied to a considerable extent on business
annals and trend-adjusted indexes of business conditions, which information
is not capable of efficient ftiscrimination between mild declines and pronounced
retardations in economic activity.    A re-examination of the evidence and lit-
erature indicates that some of the episodes in the 150 years of U.S. economic
history may represent phases of below-average growth rather than genuine con-
tractions.    If this were the case, even only in the few most doubtful instances
which are limited to the 19th century, it would imply an underestimation of
"expansions relative to contractions in the cycles of the first half of the
chronology.    The contrast between the early and the recent cycle, however,
would only be reduced, not eliminated.


                                                 Victor Zarnowitz
                                                 Graduate School of Business
                                                 The University of Chicago
                                                 Chicago, Illinois 60637

                                                 (312) 753-3615
                            BUSINESS CYCLES AND GROWTH:
                            Some Reflections and Measures



                                           I


      Is the long-term trend of the economy -- growth         ~-    substantially in-.

fluenced by the short-term movements -- business cycles                and, if so, how?

Are business cycles subject to major secular changes?              Are these fluctua-

tions the natural way growth takes in private enterprise economies or are

they mainly due to some outside shocks that could be avoided or reduced?

Should their analysis be based on trend-unadjusted or on trend-adjusted

time series data?

      These are major questions that have received considerable attention in

economic literature, but they are difficult and still debated.                I cannot

hope to resolve any of them in this paper, of course, but I shall attempt

to   contr~bute   to the discussion of some aspects of how business cycles and

growth are related.

      The subject seems highly suitable for a volume commemorating my esteemed

teacher, Erich Preiser, who throughout         his life devoted much fruitful effort

to the study of business cycles and economic growth. ,Preiser stressed the

activities of saving and investment or, to use one overall concept, the

p~cess    of capital accumulation, as central to the understanding of both the

lcmg trend and the short fluctuations of the economy. 1 However, while thus


      1               . ,          '..                    "                ..••
       Preiser's fi.rst book, Grundzuge der Konjunkturtheorie, Tiibingen, 1933,
contains a characteristically concise and lucid analysis of that process. See
also "Zur nichtmonetaren Uberinvestitionstheorie," Kyklos 5 (1951), pp. 96-98.
For other essays by Preiser dealing with growth, business cycles, and their
interface, see NationalSkonomie Heute, Munchen, 1959, and Bildung und Verteilung
des VolkseinkODDnens, 2, Aufl., GOttingen, 1961.
                                         -2-



perceiving an important linkage between the two sets of phenomena, he viewed

them as at least empirically separable.        This can be seen in the following

quotation, which accepts the measurement of business cycles as fluctuations

around the long-term trend;      For "the trade cycle policy maker of the old

school there were upswings and downswings, peaks and troughs, and the sta-

tistician measured the amplitude of fluctuations as the distance from a hor-

izontal datum line.      Nowadays the very terminology makes it clear that the

trade cycle is regarded as the motion pattern of a growing economy.,,2

        It is generally agreed that the process of long-term economic growth is

"real" in nature; driven by increases in the quantity and productivity of

human and physical resources (capital in the most· general sense) and measured

by the advances in output and wealth per capita.        Business cycle theories,

on the other hand, disagree on the relative roles of real and monetary fac-

tors.    Those who emphasize the latter (changes in money supply, bank reserves

and credits, the price level and interest rates) have logically good reasons

to assert that secular growth is not much affected by short-run fluctuations

in nominal demand.      Hence, they raise no objections in principle to the idea

that trends and cycles are separable.

        In practice, this conception leads to the measurement and analysis of

"growth cycles" -      movements in aggregate economic activity defined by the

consensus of fluctuations in comprehensive indicators adjusted for their

~ODg-term    trends.   As Preiser's statement, cited above, reminds us, this
~ew     of business cycles as movements in the deviations from trend has a long



     2 Erich Preiser, "Economic Growth as a Fetish and a Necessity," German
Economic Review, 1967, no. 4. This is a translation .of his last public lec-
turegiven in Pforzheim on April 24, 1967 and published in Wirtschaftspolitik
Heute, MUnchen, 1967.
                                      -3-


history.   However, the approach did not escape considerable difficulties and

criticism in the past.    Recently, growth cycles have come to enjoy a new

popularity.   This paper looks at this development from a historical perspec-

tive and examines its sources and chances to endure.



                                       II


     The trend-cycle interactions are varied and in part subtle.     Measures

of secular growth are most meaningful for the longest periods over which

some reasonable, stable trend fits the data well, and they must be calculated

to avoid cyclical bias.    For example, measuring the trend from a business

cycle trough year to a peak year results in overestimation of the average

growth rate; from a peak to a trough year, in underestimation.     The selected

initial and terminal years should therefore be in the same cyclical phase

or have similar cyclical characteristics, e.g., about the same unemployment

or capacity utilization rates.    This severely restricts the range of appro-
                      3
priate comparisons.

     Over long intervals measured in decades, t:rends dominate the business
cycle, so here the cyclical bias, though often nonnegligible, matters less.



     3                       .
       See u.S. Department of COIIIIIlerce, Bureau of the Census, Long Term Econom.ic
Growth 1860-1965, Washington, D.C., October 1966. This publication (part V)
presents real GNP growth rates for all possible combinations of initial and
terminal years between 1890 and 1964 (the unemployment-rate estimates are not
available before 1890). This amounts to 2,850 calculated growth rates for
U.S. output. Out of these, only 360 (13%) refer to periods for which the
unemployment rates (u) differ by less than 0.025 percentage point~ per year
(i.e., lUI - uTI/n < 0.025, where the subscripts denote the initial and ter-
minal years and n is the number of years covered). For a more relaxed defi-
nition of "similar" u rates (difference of less than 0.1 point/year), the
number of periods is 993 (34%). The number of all periods bound by business
cycle peak years between 1890 and 1964 is 190, out of which 36 (19%) would
refer to similar unemployment rates on the first definition and 101 (53%)
on the second.
                                          -4-


Growth has been historically pervasive and persistent in the modern era, as

illustrated by the following facts:       Nearly every business expansion in the

United States has carried total output and employment beyond the levels reached
                                      4
at the peak of the preceding cycle.        The recoveries in these variables have

usually been faster after severe depressions than after mild declines (des-

pite this, however, the recovery to the previous peak level has as a rule
                                                                  5
taken longer when the preceding contraction had been severe).

     Over short intervals measured in years, the business. cycle effects are

typically preponderant.   Therefore serious errors are likely to result from the

(unfortunately frequent) practice of evaluating and projecting growth rates

on the basis of comparisons between arbitrary short unit periods that are

relatively close to each other in time. 6

    The cyclical movements vary greatly in amplitude and duration.        Severe

depressions such as those of 1873-79, 1893-97 (interrupted only by a brief

and incomplete recovery in 1894-95), 1907-08, 1920-21, 1929-33, and 1937-38


     4                      .
       The one conspicuous exception is the expansion of 1933-37, which fol-
lowed the Great Contraction of 1929-33. Although among the longest and larg-
est on record, it started from an unprecedentedly low level and was incomplete
in the sense that even at its end unemployment was very high and per capita
output lower than at the preceding peak.
     5
       For an interpretation of these findings and evidence, see Geoffrey H.
Hoore, "Leading and Confirming Indicators of General Business Changes," in
G.B. MOore, editor, Business Cycle Indicators, National Bureau-of Economic
Research (NBER), New York,1961, volume I, Chapter 3, esp. pp. 86-109.
     6     . . .                                                             .
  .    The minimum distance should logically be at least one complete business
cycle (measured from peak to peak, trough to trough, or between centered cycle
.eraaea). ht bU8ineaa cycles .aryareatly in duration and -.ny are relatively
abort .C.eetext below).
                                         -5-



reduced growth strongly for some considerable time.     Vigorous expansions

such as those of 1879-82, 1897-99, 1908-10, 1921-23, 1938-45, 1949-53, and

1961-69 (the last three in wartime periods) raised the growth rates corres-

ponding1y.   However, no less than thirty-three complete business cycles

occurred in the United States between 1834 and 1975, and most of them have

been mild.   Short cycles make up a larger majority yet.    Only nine of the

expansions have lasted longer than three years, and five of these were asso-

ciated with major wars; about half (17) lasted two years or less.      Contrac-

tions have been typically shorter than expansions: twenty-five (85%) did not

exceed two years and eleven (33%) did not exceed one year.      It is a histor-

ica1 fact that few peacetime cycles resulted in major disruptions of the

secular growth trend of U.S. economy.

     This does not mean at all, however, that growth has been uniform or that

no connection exists between cyclical variability and growth.      In a century

of U.S. progress, it is possible to identify several periods characterized

by relatively high economic stability and several others during which sta-

bi1ity was comparatively low.      Table 1 shows that the average annual rates

of growth in the economy's output (or real income) were generally higher

in the former than in the latter segments.

     The selection of the periods in both categories was guided by close

inspection of charts for the available long time series on aggregate economic

activity as well as by accounts in the literature on economic trends and
                7
fluctuations.       Each of the chosen segments comprises a number of complete


     7
       Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960, Princeton for NBER, 1963, p. 677, write: '~e have char-
acterized four segments of the 93 years as displaying a relatively high degree
of economic stability: 1882-92, 1903-13, 1923-2~ 1948-60. Each has also
                                         -6-


 business cycles measured from peak to peak (three contain 2 cycles each, four

 3 cycles, and one 4 cycles).     The four periods of "high" stability add up to

 47 years, and so do the four periods of "low" stability (Table 1, column 2).

 Taken together, the comparisons refer to 94 years out of the total of 98

. years covered (1882-1980).    The data are most trustworthy for the 35 years

 after World War II, least trustworthy for the 32 years before World War I.

       It is noteworthy that the effects of large business contractions out-

 weigh those of major wartime expansions in two periods, 1913-23 and 1929-48.

 These segments belong to the low stability, low-growth group B (lines 6 and

 7).   The 1948-69 period, which includes the Korean War and most of the Vietnam

 War, is classified in the high stability, high growth group A (line 4).       The

 years 1969-80 witnessed the winding up of the Vietnam War and inherited little

 of its expansionary but most of its delayed inflationary effects.     This period

 belongs in group B (line 8).     Contemporaries have little doubt about the

. much discussed contrast between the turbulent 1970's, dominated by seemingly

 uncontrollable inflation, recessions, and energy·problems, and the economically

 much more placid and prosperous decades of the 1950's and 1960's.

       After the selection of the periods, standard deviations (s) of the annual

 growth rates within each of them were computed from historical statistics on


  displayed a high degree of stability of the year-to-year change in the stock
. of money; the remaining periods have shown appreciably greater instability
  of theyear-to-year change in both money and income." Table 1 uses the first
  three periods unchanged but eXtends the last one to 1948-69, to include the
  long expansion of the 1960's. My choice of the relatively unstable periods
  also agrees broadly with several characterizations by Friedman and Schwartz
  who refer to "the disturbed years from 1891 to 1897" (p. 104) and "the years
  of economic· turmoil" 1914-21 (p. 189). The 1930's, of course, witnessed the
  most severe contraction of modern times in 1929-33,· then" an "erratic and
  uneven"revival and another "unusually deep" contraction 1937-38, which "pro-
  ceeded at anextr~ely rapid rate" (p. 493). The large changes in the years
  of World War II and its immediate aftermath were due to the preparation for
  and conduct of wartime activities, inflation, and finally demobilization
  accompanied by a recession.
                                                 -7-

                                                Table 1
           Growth Rates in Selected Periods of Relatively High and Low
    Economic Stability, Gross National Product in Constant Dollars, 1882-1980
                                                              Growth Rates in'Real GNP (Eercent)
                                 Number of Business    b
                  Years a        Cycles (Years)Covered       Average C      Standard Deviationd
                   (1)                    (2)                   (3)                  (4)

                             A.    Periods of Relatively High Economic Stability e

                 1882-1892                                           f                    f
      1                                3(10)                   5.3                  6.7
      2          1903-1913             3(10)                   3.4                  6.1
      3          1923-1929             2(6)                    3.5                  3.8
      4          1948-1969             4(21)                   3.9                  2.6
                             B.    Periods of Relatively Low Economic Stability e

      5          1892-1899             2(7)                    3.1                  6.8
      6          1913-1923             3(10)                   2.4                  8.6
      7          1929-1948             3(19)                   2.5                  9.4
      8          1969-1980             2(11)                   2.7                  3.1

                             C.     Summary g
                                                                          h                    h
      9"High" Stability               12(47)                   4.0(3.7)             4.4(3.7)
           Periods
    10 "Low" Stability                10(47)                   2.6                  7.4
           Periods


         a For each period listed in this column, the initial and terminal dates
    are business cycle peak years according to the NBER reference Chronology for
    the United States.

            b Number of complete peak-to-peak cycles fro~ the initial to the terminal
    year.     The number of years covered is shown in parentheses.

         c Average annual growth rate between the initial and the terminal year, in
    percent, computed by the compound interest rate formula.
         d Based on the annual growth rates for all years in the given period, as
    identified in columns 1-2.
            e See text.

         f Industrial production (RBER, Nutter) estimates are used for the years
    1882-88, real GNP (Kendrick) estimates for the years 1889-92 (the annual
    KeDdrick figures begin in 1889). It cOllParison of the corresponding figures
    that are available for both'series (decade averages for 1869-79 and 1879-88
    and annual data for 1889-92) suggests enough st.ilarity of relative change
    to permit the coabincd use of theoc e.tiaates (e.g. the averagc annual grouth
    ~.tea J.ued OIl tile dacUe ••erqa.are              '.0
                                                perceot for 1Dclustrial prodl&Ction,
    6.3 percent for real CNI'). If industrial pTodueden fisures mtl, were used for
    1882-92, the entries in line I, columns 3 and 4, would have been 5.0 and 6.6
    (percent) ,respectively.

         gEntries h line 9 refer to the periods in part A (lines 1-4); entries in
J   line 10 refer to the periods in part B (lines 5-8). The entries in column 2 are
    totals, those in columns 3 and 4 are averages weighted by the number of years in
    each period.
            h                .
          The first nUlllber covers all four periods, in lines 1-4; the number in paren-
    tbee_ excludes the period 1882-92, that iii. it covers the three periods in lines
    2-4.
    !2!!!:5!.:    John W. Kendrick. Productivity Trends in the United States. Princeton for
    BIER, 1961 (GNP in 1929 dollars, 1879-1908); U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau
    of Economic Analysis (GNP in 1958 dollars and in 1972 dollars, 1909-1980); G.
    Warren Hutter. Growth of Industrial Production in the Soviet Union, Princeton for
    HER. '1962 (cc.bines U.S. estimates by Edwin Frickev, Solomon Fabricant, Warrcn'
    PersolUl. ADd others). Most of the historical data and aeaoures are taken from
    UJ,S. o."lI1"t1IIent of CCII!IIIIftce, Burellu of the C-U8, Long-tern Be_Ollie Growth
    le6o-l965, Washington, D.C., October 1966.
                                       -8-



real GNP (see Table 1 for sources).     These measures, shown in column 4, are con-

sistent with the classification of the periods into the two categories: in

terms of weighted averages, for example, s is 4.4 for group A and 7.4 for

group B (lines 9 and 10).     The average annual rates of growth   in real GNP

(g), calculated by the compound interest formula between the initial and ter-

mina1 years of each period, are listed in column 3.     They are throughout

higher for the relatively more stable than for the less stable segments.         On

the average, g is 4.0 percent for group A, 2.6 percent for group B.

     Table 1 is interesting and suggestive but far from conclusive.      It is

difficult to apply standard tests of statistical significance to results of this

kind, since inevitably the data are uncertain, the sets of measures small,

and the usual assumptions for inference from samples of independent, iden-

tica11y distributed observations appear to be of dubious validity.      If all

this is disregarded, test statistics are obtained which cannot reject the

null hypothesis that the difference between the mean growth rates for groups

A and B is due to chance. 8

     Moreover, there is no good general reason to expect any definite and

uniform relationship between long-term growth and cyclical variability.       It

is possible for strong growth on the supply side to reduce the depth and

duration of recessions (viewed primarily as declines   i~   aggregate demand).



····8                                             .
  .     The ratio of the (unbiased) variance estimates is 2.8, which according
to the F-distribution with parameters (46,46) is significant at both the 5
percent and the 1 percent levels; hence, the hypothesis of equal variances
for the two groups would be rejected. However, an analysis of variance in-
dicatas that the within-group dispersion of the growth rates dwarfs the be-
tween-groups dispersion. This applies to both sets A and B as well as to
the combination of the two. (The grand mean of the growth rates for all the
individual years is 3.5 percent, the corresponding standard deviation is 6.2
percent.) On these tests, the "true" (population) means in the two sets A
aDd B . .ynot be different after all.
                                          -9-


But the opposite causal chain is no less plausible, that is, a more stable

expansion of demand may generate more rapid growth.      Strong   recur~ent   spurts

in demand (caused, e.g., by monetary accelerations) or in supply (caused,

e.g., by uneven flows of technological innovation and business investment)

can result in both more instability and more growth.      Pronounced business

cycles have certainly been a feature of many nations in the stage of rapid

industrialization, while backward countries stagnated with relatively little

economic instability but also little economic growth.       In sum, one cannot

help being agnostic here:    different arguments and models can be made readily

but there are few solid generalizations.

     Still, one important proposition finds considerable support in experience

as well as theory, namely that both protracted high unemployment and pro-

tracted high inflation impede growth.       Underutilization of productive capac-

ities tends to reduce investment and tilt downward the potential (full employ-

ment) output curve.   Uneven and largely unanticipated inflation (the usual

type) impairs the signaling function of relative prices and acts as a bad

tax, distorting resource    al~ocation,   hindering saving and productive invest-

ment, and fostering speculative activities.



                                          III


     In periods of substantial stability and satisfactory growth, the always

attractive idea that the business cycle may have been conquered or rendered

obsolete gains considerable publicity and acceptance.       This often reflects

a high confidence in government institutions and actions.         In the 1920's,

it was the Federal Reserve monetary policies that many hoped would maintain

prosperity.   In the 1960's, it was the tax cuts and fiscal fine tuning generally.
                                        -10-



Unfortunately, the "return" of the business cycle has repeatedly proved such

ideas to be pipe dreams or at least quite premature.

      In the quarter-century after World War II, however, business cycles

have indeed been mild by historical standards.      In Western Europe and Japan,

sustained declines in the levels of output, employment, and real income and

spending occurred only sporadically.      Instead, alternations of above-average

and below-average growth in these indicators of aggregate economic activity

were,observed recurrently, and the involved slowdowns soon came to be treated

much as the mild recessions, partly because they had similar adverse effects

on business and labor-market conditions and partly because of heightened

public sensitivity to any lapse from the high-growth path that lasted iong

enough to be widely recognized and decried.

      The   ~in   reason for the apparent temporary suspension in these countries

of the "classical" business cycle was clearly the extraordinary outburst of

rapid growth from the nadir of the enormous destruction and deprivation of

the mid-1940's.     The economic legacy of World War II was here not only de-

vastation of industry but also huge backlogs of unuti1ized, highly skilled

resources and unsatisfied demand.     Once reasonably sound currencies and free

markets were restored, and international trade and capital flows revitalized,

an era of great reconstruction, new investment and technological progress

set in to last a generation.     As long as this favorable climate lasted, employ-

~nt   and output had steep upward trends and cyclical setbacks assumed the form

of retardations of growth rather than absolute declines.      Thus it was not

until 1966-67 that    ~st   Germany experienced its first post-war recession

with an actual decline (which was still quite moderate) in real GNP, indus-

trial production, and related measures of overall economic activity.
                                        -11-



        In the United States and Canada, there was no wartime destruction, hence

no stimulus of domestic reconstruction, but the backlog of demand after the

war shortages was massive and the incentives and resources for rapid growth

were on hand, too.     The widely expected postwar depression never material-

ized.     The worldwide expansion of industry and trade obviously benefitted

the North American countries greatly.      It is generally recognized that four

business contractions as defined traditionally by the National Bureau      (i.e.,

cumulative and widely diffused declines in activity) have occurred in the

United States between 1948 and 1961, but all of them were mild.      Then came

the long economic expansion in the 1960's, which persisted beyond the expec-

tations of most economists, although not without being modified by two mild

slowdowns and presumably prolonged, first by a major tax reduction and later

by the intensification of the war in Vietnam.     At this point, the substantial

moderation of the U.S. business cycle when compared with the pre-World War II

patterns became quite apparent, and the important question was what accounts

for that change and how lasting it would be. 9

        Of the domestic factors, one that is well documented and most probably

important is the shift in the industrial composition of employment from cycli-

cally highly sensitive sectors such as manufacturing, mining, and construction




      9 To some, the events suggested that the business cycle in its tra-
 ditional sense was, if not dead, too mild and sporadic to merit much in-
 terest. There was also rising interest in the "political cycle" -- theories
 of how errors in macroeconomic stabilization policies or election-year poli-
 ties ean generate eyelieal instability. But these interpretations did not
 t~rn out to have much long-term significance.   See Eric L11Ddberg, Instability
"and Economic Growth, Yale, New Haven and London, 1968; Martin Bronfenbrenner,
 ed., Is the Business Cycle Obsolete?, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1969;
 Victor Zarnowitz, "The Business Cycle Today: An Introduction" in Zarnowitz,
 ed., The Business Cycle Today, lIBER, Hew York, 1972.




                                    /
                                        -12-


to relatively recession-proof sectors such as trade, services, and finance. lO

Before the onset of the Great Inflation of the 1970's, most of the explana-

tions of the relative shortness and mildness of recent recessions have also

given much credit to institutional changes, notably the "built-in stabilizers"

and bank 'deposit insurance.   Discretionary fiscal and monetary policies had a
                                                           11
mixed record but not without some relative successes.

     The loose term "stagflation" often used to describe the developments since

about 1969 evokes the image of a     slow-~oving   economy with sharply rising prices

but this is not exactly accurate.      The cyclical fluctuations in this decade

were relatively frequent and sharp, not only in real activity, but also in

the rate of inflation.    The recessions became international in scope and more

severe, but they were still short, even including the one in 1974-1975, by

historical comparisons.    However, the average growth rates did decline con-

siderably and tendencies developed for both inflation and unemployment to

drift upward (apart from their shorter cyclical movements).        It was increas-

ingly recognized that the expansion of the government's share and role in

the economy has   destabiliz~ng   and growth-inhibiting effects.   Macroeconomic

policies in this period oscillated between attempts to combat inflation and

attempts to combat unemployment, with poor Uming and for the most part indif-

ferent or perverse results.

     The decrease in the frequency, duration, and amplitude of business reces-

sions has been accompanied by other changes such as a reduction in the sensi-


     10 Geoffrey H. Moore, 'tsome Secular Changes in Business Cycles,'" chapter 4
in Business Cycles, Inflation, and For~sting, Ballinger for NBER, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 1980; Victor zarnowitz and Geoffrey H. Moore, '7he Recession
and Recovery of 1973-1976," Explorations in Economic Research, Vol. 4, no. 4
(Fall 1977).
     11
        For further discussion and references, see Zarnowitz in The Business
Cycle Today, as cited.
                                    -13-



tivity of industrial prices to declines in final demand and an increase in

the cyclical responsiveness of interest rates. 12   That business cycles have

changed significantly in various respects since the cataclysms of 1929-45 is

hardly surprising when one considers the nature and scope of the concurrent

changes in the economies, societies, and political systems involved.   The

changes in the cyclical behavior have been labeled "secular", but here caution

is indicated if the term is meant to convey irreversible alterations or trends

that can be projected.   There is much evidence of, and good economic reasons

for, the long-term shift in the composition of employment, from goods-producing

to service-producing industries, but it is not impossible to envisage technolog-

ical change and organized efforts that would halt and even reverse that shift.

Drastically different economic policies could alter the cyclical sensitivity

of prices and interest rates.

     In this respect, it is interesting to note that studies of business cycles

in the pre-World War II era have not been able to document any strong secular

or discontinuous changes in cyclical behavior. 13 Many industries undergo sim~

ilar "life cycles" -- phases of initially slow, then rapid, and finally again

slow growth or possibly decay -- as they introduce new products and techniques

which flourish for some time but eventually· encounter increasingly effective

competition from newer and still better endowed industries.    However, the



     12 Phillip Cagan, "Changes in the Recession Behavior of Wholesale Prices
in the 1920's and Post-World War II," Explorations in Economic Research, vol. 2,
no. l(Winter 1975); and Phillip Cagan, Changes in the Cyclical Behavior of In-
terest Rates, NBER, New York, 1966.
     13                            .
        See Arthur F. Bt.rns and Wesley C. Mitchell, Measuring Business Cycles,
DER, New York, 1946, Chapter 10, where several tests are reported to have
shown that the effects of secular changes on the following have been absent or
slight: (1) the duration and amplitude of specific and business cycles; (2)
business cycles and economic stages (Mills'hypothesis that the cycles tend to
get shorter in the stage of rapid growth receives little support from the data);
(3) business cycles before and after 1914.
                                        -14-



economy comprises at any time all industries, at all their various life-cycle

stages, so the industry growth patterns "wash out" in the aggregation and the

overall growth rates show no particular long-term evolution. 14

     With regard to cyclical changes in cyclical behavior, that is, the exis-

tence and nature of any patterns of long fluctuations, the results are mixed and

in large part inconclusive.      The Kondratieff swings of 50-60 years are hardly

general as posited, for they show up mainly in prices, not production, and con-

sist of too few episodes to be testable.       Favorable evidence is cited for the

notion that business cycle expansions have tended to be longer and contractions

shorter during the upward phases of the long waves in prices than during the
                   15
downward phases.        However, history also shows that growth and deflation have

not been incompatible, e.g., over the decade 1869-79 as a whole, the price level
                                                                                   16
declined strongly and almost continuously,     wh~le   real income rose greatly.
There is much more evidence in support of the "Kuznets cycles," usually of some

15 to 25 years' duration, which have been traced back at least to the first

half of the 19th century and are associated mainly with fluctuations in the

growth of population, labor-force, net immigration, building construction, and




     14
        Indeed, none of the onee popular theories of unidirectional trends in
economic growth and instability such as Marx's projections of increasing pau-
perization and crises or Hansen's secular stagnation have been validated by
tests of historical data.
     15
          See Burns and Mitchell, op.cit., pp. 431 - 440; also, Geoffrey H. Moore,
"A Long-run Look at the Business,. Cycle, " in The Business Cycle and Public Policy,
1929-80: A Compendium of Papers 'ubmitted to the Joint Economic Committee, Congress
of the United States, Joint Committee Print, 96th Cong., 2nd Session, November
28, 1980, Washington, U.S. Govt. Printing Office, 1980, pp. 31-32.
     16
          See rriedaan and Schwartz, op.cit., pp. 29-44.
                                          -15-


business formation. 17       But these movements, too, are much less general than the

shorter business cycles, and much less is known about them.

        In sum, the only types of movement that can be counted on to persist and

matter for the economy as a whole are still only the two that are plainly visi-

ble in the comprehensive measures of economic activity and performance -- the

long-term growth and the business cycle.         Both vary over time but retain their

essential characteristics so that one can say about either that "plus eta change, plus
c'est      la m~me chose."     Some of the changes in trends and cycles are signifi-

cant and (at least partly and ex post) explainable but all elude any strict

categorization and prediction.       All of this applies to any of the developed

economies with large private enterprise sectors, despite the many differences

among them.



                                           IV

        The period of post-World War II reconstruction and international expansion

of industry and trade may have been unique for the length of time during which

growth in so many countries persisted at rates so .high as to make business

recessions rare and mild.       Under more ordinary circumstances, such periods

seem unlikely to last very long; and surely one lesson of recent history is

that attempts to perpetuate them by inflationary policies are both ill-advised

and ill-fated.




     17 See A. F. Burns, Production Trends :en the United States aince 1870,
NBER, New York, 1934; Simon Kuznets, Capital in the American Economy: Its For-
mation and Financing, Princeton for NBER, 1961; Moses Abramovitz, Evidences of
Long Swings in Aggregate ,Construction since the Civil War, NBER, New York, 1964;
Richard A. Easterlin, Population. Labor Force, and Long Swings in Economic Growth,
NBER, New York, 1968.                .
                                       -16-



       It was not accidental that the interest in growth cycles increased greatly

on a world-wide scale as the good times with few recessions seemed to have no

end.   The many resulting studies, covering several countries, started appearing

during the 1960's and continued into the next decade. 18

       However, the idea of growth cycles, far from being new, has a rather long

and interesting history.     Methods of adjusting time series for seasonal varia-

tions and secular trends were applied early and frequently in statistical

studies of business cycles.     They resulted in several widely used indexes of

general business conditions and trade for .the United States, Germany, and Great

Britain, all published between 1919 and 1925 in the form of seasonally adjusted

series of percentage deviations from estimated trend (sometimes called "normal")
          19
curves.

       In his 1927 volume, Wesley Mitchell reviewed at length without basic dis-

agreement the contemporary statistical techniques of time series analysis and
         "
trend a dJustment. 20   He did raise several "particularly insistent" questions

       18                        .
          lIse Mintz, Dating Postwar Business Cycles: Methods and Their Application
 to Western Germany, 1950-67, NBER, New York, 1969; Miyohei Shinohara, "Postwar
 Business Cycles in Japan," in Bronfenbrenner, ed., ·op.cit. (1969), p.76; R.C.O.
 Matthe"1s~ "Postwar Business Cycles in the United Kingdom, ibid., p.lOl; A.M.C.
 Waterman, "The Timing of Economic Fluctuations in Australia, January 1948 to
.December 1964," Australian Economic Papers, June 1967; Sachverstandigenrat zur
 Begutachtung dergesamtwirtschaft1ichenEntwicklung, Alternativen aussenwirt-
 schaftlicher Anpassung, Jahresgutachten 1968/69, p.lOO ff., Stuttgart -Mainz, 1968;
Gunther J. Tichy, Indikatoren der osterreichischen Konjunktur 1950-1970, Oster-
 reichisches Institut fur Wirtschaftsforschung, Wien, 1972, p.37 ff.; lIse Mintz,
 "~ating U.S. Growth Cycles," Explorations in Economic Research, vol.I, no.l, SUDDIler 1974.
       U                                                                ..       .
          The U.S. indexes include those constructed by Warren Persons of Harvard
 University in 1919 and 1923; the statistical division of the
 American Telephone and Telegraph Company in 1922; Carl Snyder of ~he Federal
 Reserve Bank in New York in 1923 and 1924; and Edwin Fr~ey of Harvard in 1925.
 The work of Persons was particularly influential. Similar indexes were also
 prepared for Germany by E.W. Axe and H.M.Flinn in 1925, and for Great Britain
 by Dorothy Thomas in 1926.
     20 Wesley C. Mitchell, Business Cycles: The Problem and Its Setting, NBER,
New York, 1927, Chapter III, Section III,pp. 202-261; see also Section VI, pp.
290-357, for ac~reheoaive ii.cua.ion of the indexes identified in the pre-
ceding footnote.
                                      -17-


about the existence and direction of any causal relation between the trends

and the cyclical fluctuations, but only to note that they await answers which

will require much further investigation (p. 233).      In 1946, however, Burns and

Mitchell argued against the sole reliance on trend-adjusted data in business

cycle analysis on the ground that "Cyclical fluctuations are so closely inter-

woven with ••• secular changes in economic life that important clues to the

understanding of the former may be lost by mechanically eliminating the latter.,,2l

They favored conversion of the data into "cycle relatives," that is, percentages

of the average value of the series during each completed cycle.        This method

eliminates in a stepwise manner the "intercycle" trends but retains the "intra-

cycle" trends.

     Full trend adjustment does suppress some part of the change that occurs

during business cycles, which is a disadvantage insofar as the growth effects
                                                        22
that are thus missed are of interest to the analyst.         On the other hand,
working with deviations from trend should result in greater uniformities of the

cyclical measures because the variance due to the secular change is eliminated

or reduced.   Isolating such, uniformities can be instructive, and they turn out
                                                                       23
to be indeed much stronger after than before      trend adjustments.        Thus a case
can be made for a dual analysis addressed to both the classical business cycle



     21
     . aurna     aDd Mitchell, op.cit., p. 270.

     22 Consider, e.g., the industry life-cycles noted earlier in the text.
As Mitchell put it: "The inclusion of intracycle trends in cycle relatives
helps to reveal and to explain what happens during business cycles. Rapidly
&rowing industties affect business cycles otherwise than do industries barely
holding their own or shrinking." See his What Happens During Business Cycles:
A Progress Report, NBER, New York, 1951, p. 13•
    . 23 For an early account on how cyclical measures tend to be more alike
for trend-adjusted then for unadjusted data, both among and within series, see
Burns and Mitchell, op.cit., Chapter 7. On some confirming evidence from re-
cent Irowth cycle studies, see text below.
                                     -18-



and the growth cycle: useful lessons, which moreover should be largely comple-

mentary, can be drawn from cyclical measures based on both trend-Unadjusted and

trend-adjusted time series. 24

     An old and difficult practical problem in growth cycle analysis is that

its results depend significantly on how and over what period the trend is fitted

and whether and how it is extrapolated.     Trends vary greatly and can be mea-

sured in many different ways each of which has its particular strengths and

limitations.   Mathematical formulas (e.g., linear, quadratic, exponential,

and logistic functions of time) often produce good approximations over limited

historical periods only and lack the flexibility required
                                                  ,       to reflect the vari-

ations over time displayed by long-term movements in many economic time series.

If moving averages are used to estimate such movements, they must be based

on periods longer than the average duration of the cycles so as to yield

smooth curves that cut through, and contain no significant elements of, the

short-term fluctuations in the series.      But when the moving-average period is

too long, the advantage of greater flexibility is lost again; and even a

reasonable choice of the period may not insure that the trend is free of all

traces of the cycle.   Furthermore, the moving average must be centered, which

implies the need for extrapolation at the beginning and end of the series

over periods equal to half the number of months incorporated in the moving

average.

     In the DEB. approach, which has been gradually improved over the pas t

decade and is now widely applied in international studies, a flexible, smooth,



     24
        Mitchell, op.cit., p.14, recognizes that such double analyses would
"add to our knowledge," but notes that they "would be so expensive as to re-
duce greatly the number of series we could cover." Present computational tech-
niquesremove this problem.
                                      -19-


nonlinear and not necessarily monotonic trend is estimated by interpolation

between segments of the series determined with the aid of long-term (75-month

or 25-quarter) moving averages.   Although no single ideal method of trend esti-

mation exists, this procedure has been tested on many series and shown to

have considerable merit for the purpose on hand.   Its great advantage, moreover,

is that it has been consistently applied to the main cyclical indicators for

all large and many small industrialized, market-oriented economies.    This work,

a-part of a large collaborative effort supported by several international and
                                                                 25
national organizations, was initiated in 1973 by Geoffrey Moore.

     The more technical detail on the adopted technique, and a graphic illus-

tration of how it works, can be found in the literature. 25a   It should be

noted that the specific cycles in the resulting deviation-from-trend series

are identified in the same way as those in the trend-unadjusted series.

     The reference chronology of growth cycles is established by a close ex-

amination of the so processed data for a country's main comprehensive indicators

of economic activity (such as the series on total output, yeal income and sales,

industrial production, employment).  The criteria and procedures are practically
                                                                                26
the same as those employed in the NBER reference chronology of business cycles.

The difference is that growth cycle dates are derived from the observed con-

sensus of the corresponding turning points in the deviations from trend, whereas

business cycle dates are derived from the consensus of the turning points in

the levels of the same indicators.



    -25 See his "The Current State of the International Business Cycle: A New
Measurement System," Chapter 5 in Business Cycles. Inflation. and Forecasting,
as cited.
     25a See Charlotte Boscham
                             ./ and Walter W. Ebanks, "The Phase-Average Trend:
A New Way of Measuring Growth," 1978 Proceedings of the Business and Economic
Statistics Section, American Statistical Association, Washington, D.C., pp.332-335.
     26
        On the identification of peaks and troughs of business cycles and growth
cycles, see the brief statement and references in G.H. Moore, '~at is a Reces-
sion?", op.cit., Chapter 1.
                                         -20-



     The schematic diagram for the United States in Chart 1 (first panel)

shows that a growth-cycle downturn preceded each of the seven business-cycle

peaks of the 1948-80 period.       In the last three cycles (since 1969), the low-

growth phases lasted as long as 8 to 13 months before deteriorating into ab-

solute declines.     Thus here retardations gave early and repeated (though ad-

mittedly still uncertain) signals of recession.       On the four earlier occasions,

in 1948-60, the leads of the decline in growth at peaks were much shorter,

from 2 to 6 months.     This shift may in part be attributable to the increased

role of services: the rise in their output helped to offset the decline in out-

put of goods and structures, and did so more efficiently in recent times.

Also, the economy may have been propped up temporarily in the late stages of

the recent expansions by buying and speculative activities associated with

inflationary expectations and low real interest rates, which discouraged saving.

     In sharp contrast to the early timing of the peaks, the troughs of the

growth cycles coincided with those of the business cycles in each case except

one (there was a short lag in 1954).       On three occasions -- .in 1951-52, 1962-

64, and 1966-67 --    low-grow~h   phases interrupted business expansions but did

not terminate them (that is, here the slowdowns ended in a resumed high growth,

not in a decline).    Thus, as would be expected, growth cycles are more frequent

than business cycles, e.g., there were ten growth cycle downturns in the 1948-
                                                          27
80 period for the United States but seven recessions.

    .Growthcycles, then, tend to be relatively symmetrical: the. U.S. record

.iDce 1948 yields average durations of 22 and 18 months for the high-growth and


     27 In Chart 1, .the latest U.S. 'recession is assumed to have ended in
August, 1980, which is also taken to mark the end of the latest low-growth
phase. This date is tentative and still uncertain, although it accords with the
evldenceavailable at the time of this writing, February, 1981. See V. Zarnowitz
and G.B. Moore, "The Timing and Severity of the Recession of 1980," NBER Reporter,
Spring 1981.
                                                                                             Chart 1                                                                                                              -21-
                                                  TIMING OF BUSINESS CYCLES IN THE UNITED STATES AND OF GROWTH CYCLES IN SIX   CO~IES,   1948-1980


       United                                                                                                                                                                                                  United
       State.                                                                                                                                                                                                  Statea
                                                                                        aI',
                                                                                                                                                                               ,

       Canada
                    I: . ~~~6~ZS~ltz'::                                                                                                                                                                   I    Caaada




       United
       K1nad oa     I: : 3z~;:=~sLs=T:   It's!.                              'V,,                "'~                  ~Ih                    2"'1.,      I           1I/lt",   i'   .
                                                                                                                                                                                             :.: ]
                                                                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                United
                                                                                                                                                                                                              . Kingdom




,.!,
N
 I
        West
       Gel'lDllny   I : :          ~:Z:SZ~~~:=3-n<:I::':
                                                      ~'f                       ~""              2{,~                  ~1          ~~In·:·
                                                                                                                                       !.. I
                                                                                                                                                                                    ..        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                      :
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ·1
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               West
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Gerasny




                                                                                                                                                                           I::: [': I
                                                                                                                                                                               I         "        '


        France
                    I : : : : : : : : :~~/>:sts:.ZS.=q~:                                                                                                                       I         .,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               France




         Japan
                    I : : : : : :S:ZS~.~.:·~S:<:Ii          '1<>              VS'                ,/,~           .",                          'I.~   :.
                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                             . ¥r.         '
                                                                                                                                                                           .I
                                                                                                                                                                                    ::: : I                   Japan



                    NOTE:  In each schematic diagram. the drawn-out lines connect the dates of the consecutive peaks and troughs in growth               i                 'i
                           cycles for the given country. The peak dates are listed above and the trough dates below the diagram.
                           In the diagram for the United States, the broken lines connect the dates of the consecutive peaks and troughs
                           in busineas cycles. The peak dates are listed above .and the trough dates below the diagram, except where they
                           coincide with the corresponding growth cycle dates.                                                   .
                    SOURCE: For the U.S. business cycle and growth cycle chronologies -- Nstiona1 Buresu of Economic Research, Inc.
                             For the growth cycle chronologies of Cansda, U.K., West Germany, France, and Japan -- Center for International:
                             Business Cycle Research, Rutgers University.
                    t Tentative.
                                       -22-



low-growth phases, respectively.     In contrast, business cycles in the same period

show    a strong asymmetry: the expansions lasted on the average 49 months, the

contractions 10 months.     The expansions have varied in duration much more than

the high-growth phases did (the respective standard deviations are 27 and 11

months).   Other important measures for growth cycles also show greater uni-

formity than their counterparts for business cycles.       In particular, leading

indicators, which are sensitive to all kinds of disturbances, tend to turn

down in anticipation of business slowdowns as well as contractions.       Hence,

they have a better record of forecasting growth cycles than of forecasting

business cycles (the slowdown predictions are treated as "extra turns" when

attention is focused exclusively on the recessions).

       The U.S. chronologies are more complete and better documented than those

for most other countries, and the latter are in recent times predominantly

limited to growth cycles.    However, I have little doubt that many of the U.S.

results (e.g., those concerning the greater frequency, symmetry, and relative

predictability of growth cycles compared with business cycles) apply about

equally to other developed   ~rket-oriented   economies.   Studies by Mintz,and

Moore and his associates, as well as others abroad, indicate that "Leading,

coincident, and lagging indicators behave in.much the same way in relation to
                                                           .                  28
growth cycles in other industrial countries as they do in the United States."




       28
       . Moore, op.cit., p.24.
                                       -23-



       Chart 1 suggests that most of the recent growth cycles have been inter-

national in scope, including those slowdowns that did not become recessions

 in the United States.    That is, the low-growth phases of 1951-52, 1962-64, and

1966-67 had counterparts in Europe (indeed, as noted earlier, the first German

 recession after World War II occurred in 1966-67, overlapping the last of

 these episodes).    The 1953-54 recession in the U.S. had but weak and spotty

 repercussions abroad (virtually limited to Canada and Japan).    The recessions

of 1957-58 and 1969-70 had more visible counterparts, although most of these
                                                                    29
took the form of growth retardations rather than absolute declines.    It is

clear that the most serious recessions in the post-World War II period occurred

in 1974-75 in all the countries covered and elsewhere in the trading world;

most of these declines were preceded by slowdowns in 1973.    The expansions

that followed were soon, in 1976-77, interrupted by another cluster of low-

growth phases, but not in the United States,where the next slowdown occurred

only in 1979, followed by a brief but substantial decline in 1980.     This last

recession, too, spread internationally.

       Chart 1 confirms what has long been observed and understood: business

fluctuations tend to spread among countries linked by trade and financial trans-

actions which reflect the international movements of goods, services, and capi-

tal.    Expansions stimulate foreign trade and investments, slowdowns and   re~

cessions discourage them.    The cyclical pattern of the United States economy

~resses      itself strongly upon a close partner of a relatively small size such as

·1:imada.   The diagrams for West Germany and the United Kingdom exemplify another



     191n particular, in West Germany these were just mild slowdowns. France
seems to have had more of a decline in 1958 only. The United Kingdom had lengthy
retardations of a more pronounced variety and much less growth generally, but
here too outright declines were rare and short. Japan, with the highest growth
rates, also' had the most frequent recessions outside of U.S. and Canada, notably
a sizable one in 1957-58.
                                       -24-



close timing relationship.   To be sure, there are also deviations, but the

common rhythm is unmistakable for all the countries covered (and it extends

to many others).   It is often suspected that the chain of influence runs mainly

from the biggest country to the others (with the United States exporting its

prosperity and its recessions), but this need not always be so: the propermodel

is one of multilateral interactions.     In any event, the leads   an~   lags disclosed

by the chronologies vary greatly and cannot tell us much about the direction of

the forces involved in the international transmission of cyclical movements.



                                        v

     According to the NBER chronology of U.S. business cycles, which reaches

back almost 150 years, expansions have grown longer and contractions shorter.

Table 2 demonstrates these tendencies by comparing the summary statistics on

the durations of cycle phases for several periods, before and after such di-

viding years as 1855, 1919, and 1945.       Wartime expansions have lasted longer

than most of the others, but their exclusion does not alter the above finding

(cf. part A, columns 3 and ·4).   Before 1919, the peacetime expansions were

on the average little longer than the contractions in business activity (the·

figures are 24 and 22 months, respectively).      Afterwards, they were more than

twice as long .(the corresponding averages are 32 and 15 months), and this des-

pite the fact that the comparison includes the long depression of the 1930's

aDd excludes three long wartime expansions.      The vivid shift indicated by the

average measures is somewhat further elaborated by the frequency distributions

of .hort, intermediate, and long expansions and contractions (part B of the
                                                                                ,
table) •

     Of course, the data available to the NBER analysts for their        ~ork   on iden-

tifying and dating the business cycles of history increased hugely in quant;ity
                                                            -25-



                                                    Table 2

       The Duration of Business Cycles in the United States, 1834 - 1980


                                 A.   Average Measures, by Pha9iand Period!                                     "
                                                                                                                I

                                                                                                                     a
                                                       Mean Duration (Standard Deviation), Months

                         Number of         All               Peacetime b           All                All      Peacetime
Line    Period             Cycles       Expansions           Expansions         Contractions         Cycles      Cycles C
        -----rrr-    d
                           (2)             (3)                  (4)                 (5)               (6)         (7)
 1     1834-1855            5                26(20)                 e                 24(15)         50(23)              e

 2     1854-1919           16                27(10)            24(7)                  22(14)         48(19)     46 (19)

 3     1919-1945            6            ,35(26)               26(15)                 18 (13)        53 (22)    46(16)

 4     1945-1980            7                49 (27)           39(12)                 10(3)          60(27)     49(11)

 5     1834-1980           34                33 (20) .         27(13)                 '19(13)        52(21)     47(17)


                                 B.   Frequency Distributions, by Phase and Period


                                  Expansions                                               Contractions

                     18 mos.          19-36      37 mos.                      12 mos. 13-24 25 mos.
                    & shorter          mos.     & longer           Total     & shorter mos. & longer                Total
                        (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)          (6)   (7)       (8)                 (9)
                                                               Number
 6     1854-1919           3           12               1            16         3               10       3               16

 7     1919-1980           1             5              7           13         ,7                5       1               13
                                                                                ·,t
 8     1854-1980           4           17               8               29     10               15       4               29

                                                               Percent
 9     1854-1919          19            75              6          100         19               63      19          100

10     1919-1980           8            38             54          100         54               38       8          100

11     1854-1980          14           59              28          100         34               52      14          100




     a Standard deviations of the duration estimates, in months, are give'n in
parentheses.

     b Excludes the Civil Har and Horld Har I expansions (line 2), the World War
II expansion (line 3) and the Korean War and Vietnam War expansions (line 4).
In line 5 below all five of these wartime expansions are excluded.

       c Excludes the cycles that contain the wartime expansions.                                    See note b.

       d Measures in this line are based upon calendar year dates.

     e No major wars in this period (but note that the short war with Mexico
coincided ,dth the expansion of 1846-47). Same as entry to the left.

Source:     National Bureau of Economic Research (for all reference dates used,
            except for August 19S0. I:1\' 0"": tentative',choice for the last trough,
            see Chart 1 and n0te ~;).
                                                 -26-



and improved substantially in quality over time.30 For the early decades, very

few adequate time series exist, least of all in the most desirable form, which

is comprehensive monthly or quarterly data on income, production, and employ-

mente            Here it was necessary to rely in the main on three sources, beginning

with the descriptive evidence from "business annals" of contemporary opinion

a b out t h e stage and spread       0f                                   · i ty. 31
                                          fl uctuat i on i n economi c act1v           The annals

were next checked against indexes of business conditions and other series of

broad coverage.            Finally, arrays of cyclical turns in the more important monthly

and quarterly series on individual processes were ascertained and closely ex-

amined so as to sharpen the choice of the reference dates. 32

           These studies of business cycle history replaced the concentration on

financial crises, panics, and deep depressions, which was characteristic of

the earlier work in this area, with efforts to examine all business contractions,

the mild ones as well as the severe ones.                Mitchell noted that "The same de-

velopments which make it wise to substitute the concept of recession for the

concept of crisis make it wise to recognize the shorter segments into which

the long swings are           frequen~ly   divisible.    This change reduces the typical

duration of American cycles to roughly one-half of the estimate commonest

among theoretical writers.,,33             By the same token, the approach nearly doubles

the number of basic observations (cycles) to be analyzed, acknowledging the


     30 For example, U.S. industrial censuses ate decennial from 1810 to 1899,
qoiquennial from 1899 to 1919, and annual thereafter. The data problems for
the study of business cycles in other countries are on the whole greater yet.
(The NBER chronologies extend over long stretches of time: for Great Britain,
back to 1792; for France, to 1840; and for Geraany, to 1866.)
   .   ",.,.,'        -            ....
           II             .                                                    .
        Willard L. Thorp,           lusu~e~s ~s, ~iona1             Bureau of Economic Research,
New York, 1926.
            32 For more on this procedure, see Burns and Mitchel1~ op.cit., p. 76 ff.
            33
                  Business Cycles: The Problem and Its Setting, as cited, pp. 386-387.
                                    -27-



great diversity of these fluctuations in length and size, but emphasizing their

continuity.    It presumes that the most severe and the mildest contractions

are not of an entirely different species, even though they are certainly of

a very different   order of magnitude.

     However, where consistent, comprehensive time series on the main aspects

of aggregate economic activity are not available, the severity of business

contractions and the vigor or expansions cannot be estimated with adequate

confidence. 34   The evidence from business annals is deficient and susceptible

of bias.   Allowing for the lags of recognition, the consensus of contempor-

aries can determine rather well that business conditions have deteriorated

or improved on a large scale and approximately when such shifts happened; it

cannot tell us nearly as well just how much they deteriorated or improved.

In a growing economy, downturns will attract more attention than upturns. 35

After a strong expansion, a mild decline (or even only a slowdown, if suffi-

ciently long and diffused) may cause as much discomfort and alarm as a larger

decline coming after a weaker expansion. 36   Hence it is possible that observers

would tend to overstate the dimension of some of the movements in the former

category, perhaps even mistaking at times a major retardation for a business

contraction.


     34 This has been fully recognized by those who have done most to help
remedy this situation. Thus Burns and Mitchell, op.cit., p. 402, state flatly
'~nfortunately, we lack at present reliable measures of the amplitude of suc-
cessive business cycles." This conclusion still holds at least for the first
half of ' the period covered by the NBER chronology.

      35 Referring to the duration estimates derived from business annals,
Mitchell, op.cit., pp. 421-422, states: "Our measurements are based solely
upon the intervals between recessions. It would be desirable to check the
results by a second set, based on the intervals between revivals." We have
Dot attemptf:d such a check, because business commentators have paid less at-
tent ion to the upward than to the downward turning points of business cycles."
(Note: In this discussion, business cycles are treated as having four phases--
prosperity, recession, depression, and revival. The terms "recession" and
"reVival," then, refer to the turning zones.)
     36            .
        This is certainly consistent with the recent experience in fast growing
econoaies auch as 3apan.
                                       -28-



        Time series data permit some verification of the lessons from business

annals.     Moreover, they add valuable, though severely limited, quantitative

information even for the earliest times covered.       There are annual quantity

series for individual but important items and monthly data for wholesale

commodity prices, stock prices, bond prices, short-term interest rates, and

(later) bank clearings.     As noted before, indexes of business activity, which
represent weighted combinations of such series, have been popular in the early

statistical studies of business cycles.       It is unfortunate, however, that

for the period before 1975 these indexes exist exclusively in trend-adjusted

form.     Clearly, it is difficult to distinguish business cycles from growth

cycles in series that show deviations from trend only.

        In this context, it is important to recall that the expansions and contrac-

tions of the early business cycles in the NBER chronology tend to be of nearly

equal length -- much like the phases of growth cycles and very unlike those

of the later business cycles in which the expansions are much longer than

the contractions (compare lines 1-2 with lines 3-4 in Table 2).        Given this

observation, and the limitations of the materials available for the identi-

fication of the early cycles, it is natural to ask whether some of these

fluctuations may not be in the nature of growth cycles rather than business

cycles.    The reliance on business annals and    trend-ad~usted   indexes, in partic-

ular,might well have produced a certain amount of bias in that direction.

        The question, far from being purely academic or pedantic, is important

in a basic sense, since i.t involves the reading of contemporary as well as

historical trends •. Thus it is well worth knowing whether business expansions

have in fact grown longer and contractions shorter -      or whether the evidence

in Table 2, which confirms that they have, is seriously flawed by a lack of
                                      -29-


 consistency in the measurement of the fluctuations over time.



                                       VI

      Do all the "contractions" dated in the NBER reference chronology represent

 actual declines in economic activity or do some of them represent phases of

 below-average growth?   It is much easier to raise this question than to answer

 it with sufficient confidence, for the already familiar reason that the data

 are so limited.   A thorough review of the NBER chronology and the underlying

materials is beyond the scope of this paper.    Still, even a partial re-exam-

 ination of the evidence could be of some help here, at least in determining

 the dimensions of the problem.

      Table 3 reviews the period 1834-82, i.e., that segment of the NBER ref-

 erence cycle chronology for which there are no comprehensive measures or

 indexes of economic activity without trend adjustments.   A comparison of

 columns 2 and 4, and of columns 3 and 5, shows that each of the NBER cycles

 corresponds to a cycle recognized in the U.S. business annals.   It is this

 broad parallelism that interests us here, not the timing discrepancies which

seem considerable but are mainly due to the inevitable vagueness of the annals

in this respect.

      The measures in columns 6-11 are based on the only index of business

activity in the U.S. available for these early decades, the Cleveland Trust

. Company index compiled in 1931 and intensively used by Ayres (1939).   This is

a weighted combination of trend-adjusted series on prices, physical quantities,

and pecuniary volumes of transactions or trade.   As such, it contains con-

8iderabl~   information but in a form that lends itself to much popular use
                             Business Cycle Chronologies and Measures of Amplitude and Duration
                               Based on Trend-Adjusted Time Series, United States, 1834-1882

                                                                         a
                   NBER Reference Dates             Business Annals          Ayres' (Cleveland Trust Company) Index of Business Activity
                                                                                            b                    c
                      Business Cycle                      Timing of           Date and Value of           Change         Number of Months
                                                                                                       HiEh to Low to             Above
Line       Peak          Trough        Peak       Revival      Recession     Local Low    Local High      ow       High  ~~~~~    Trend
           (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)           (7)       (8)         (9)   (10)    (11)

1           n.a.            1834          1836    L34-E35       Mid-37       10/34   -7.4   2/37 +21.0     _l3.5 e    +28.4       16       23
2              1836         1838          1839    L38-E39       Fall 39       4/38 -11.8    3/39 +15.2     -32.8      +27.0      18        15
3              1839         1843          1845    L43-E44       May 45        2/43 -19.1    2/46   +4.5    -34.3      +23.6       68        9
4              1845         1846          1847      E47           L47         6/46   -1.4   6/47 +14.3       -5.9     +15.7        If      24
                                                                                                                                                g
5              1847         1848          1853      L48        L53-E54       12/48   -5.4   3/54 +14.6      -19.7     +20.0       17       55
                                                                                                                                                     I
6              1853    Dec. 1854   June 1857        L55        Mid-57        12/54   -3/8   5/56 +10.1     -18.4      +13.9        6       27       w
                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                   1859          L60                                                                            h    I
7        June 1857     Dec. 1858   Oct. 1860                                  1/58 -13.0    9/60   +4.7    -23.1      +17.7      18        15
8        Oct. 1860     June 1861   Apr. 1865        L61          L65          7/61   -9.8   4/64   +9.8    -14.5      +19.6       23       27
                                                   1868          E70                                                                            i
9        Apr. 1865     Dec. 1867   June 1869                                 11/65 -14.0    6/69   +4.9    -23.8      +18.9       11       23
10       June 1869     Dec. 1870   Oct. 1873        E7l        Mid-73        10/70   -4.8   1/73 +14.6       -9.7     +19.4        5       33
11       Oct. 1873     Har. 1879   Mar. 1882       L78-E79       L82          2/78 -12.7    1/81 +11. 7    -27.3      +24.4       70       50



     a L denotes "late" (last half or quarter); E denotes "early" (first half or quarter).                    In referring to parts of the
year, the first two digits are omitted.

     b Refers to the lowest (column 6) and highest (column 7) value of the index in the given cycle, in percentage devia-
tions from trend. The corresponding dates shown do not always c.oincide with the dates of business cycle troughs and peaks
designated by Ayres.

     c Amplitude of decline (-) in column 8 and of rise (+) in column 9, based on the corresponding entries in columns 6
and 7.

     d ~Ionths during which the index shows negative values (including the low in column 6) are given in column 10; months
during which the index shows positive values (including the high in column 7) are given in column 11. Refers to consec-
utive months, except as noted below.

         e From a high of +6.1 in 2/1832 to the low of -7.4 in 10/34 shown in column 6.

         f Exce!)t for the si.np.le 101.' "lonth of f,!lR/d.. , the indey. rcnainc,l poniti'!e h:0n o/lR45 throu[;h G/18 f fe, t~:l:: in, ovcr
    intervaln of 9 1'l0nthn and 24 nontlw (as r.hm.,n in colur.m 11).

         g From 12/1849 through 9/1854, with two minor interruptions of one month each.

         h From 3/1859 through 9/1859 and from 3/1860 through 10/1860 (small negative values in the                  five intervening months).

         i From 7/1868 through 12/1869 and from 4/1870 through 8/1870 (small negative values in the three intervening months).

           n.a. Not available
    SOURCES: Columns 1-3, Burns and Mitchell, op.cit., Table 16, p. 78; columns 4-5, Thorp, op.cit., chapter I; columns
              6-11, Leonard P. Ayres, Turning Points in Business Cycles, App. A, Table 9, column 1.
                                      -31-



and misuse; it ought to be handled with great care and caution.   In particular,

it is important to recognize that the annual movements in the index have a

different meaning from the monthly movements, since the former reflect mainly

changes in production and trade, the latter changes in commodity and security

prices (the monthly series used as interpolators).   Also, like other early

indexes, this composite refers'in large measure to durable goods whose cyclical

sensitivity tends to be high, which means that it may overstate the fluctua-
                                 37
tions of the economy at large.

     Contemporary testimonies and data broadly agree on the earliest develop-
ments covered, including a moderate decline in 1833-34, an expansion accompanied

by much speculation in land through 1836, a financial panic followed by an

incomplete recovery in 1837-38, and finally one of the longest and deepest

depressions in U.S. history, marked by sharp deflation and repudiation of,

or postponement of payments on, large amounts of private and state debts.

In sharp contrast to that depression, which ended in 1843, the NBER-designated

contraction of 1845-46 was a mild affair, which indeed is open to serious

doubt: the episode may well have been one of a mere growth-cycle retardation.




     37
         In the period under review, the index comprised detrended series on
commodity and security prices, imports and exports, ship construction, coal
production, tons of registered shipping, and government finance (before 1855);
later, pig iron consumption, railroad freight ton miles, blast furnace activity,
rail production, locomotive production, miles of new railroads, canal freight,
and cotton consumption. For detail, see Leonard p. Ayres, Turning Points in
Business cycles, Macmillan, New York, 1939, Appendix C, pp. 204-205. Although
the composition of the index is different for the years before and after 1855,
tests for an overlap period are reported to indicate a very substantial similar-
ity of the results from the two sets of series.
     The Ayres index, now published by Ameri Trust Co. (Cleveland) is reproduced
in graphical form in many widely used economic textbooks, as a rule without
any explanation. While its historical use can be justified, its current use
appears highly questionable (e.g., its entire course since 1961 is shown as
somehow persisting well above its zero "long-term trend" line).
                                       -32-


Ayres speaks of "a minor dip in business in 1846;" his index stays positive,

i.e., above "normal", in all months but one from September 1845 through June

1848 (Table 3, line 4).38      The business annals describe a suspiciously short

cycle in terms that are inconclusive but, compared to those used elsewhere,
              39   Moreover, several independent studies using mainly annual data
quite mild.
on the volume of domestic and foreign trade fail to confirm the ocurrence of

a business contraction in these years.        They suggest a single business cycle
                                                                 40
between 1843 and 1848, with only a mild setback in 1845-46.

     The years 1853-54 saw rising interest rates and strongly declining security

prices, and these financial developments dominate the accounts of the recession



     38 Ayres, op. cit. ,. p. 11, stresses that in 1846 there was "no real de-
pression. It may well be that conditions were then developing which may have
initiated a real depression, but that renewed business activity was temporarily
stimulated by the government expenditures of the Mexican War."
     39
         As summarized by Thorp, op.cit., p. 124, there was in 1845 a "slump
ascribed to political difficulties, May; return to activity, October;" in 1846,
there was a "slackening of activity to dullness" and, since May, war with
Mexico and "severe pressure in money market." Mitchell notes in his Intro-
duction to Thorp's volume, pp. 42-43, that the annals imply for 1845-46 a cycle
of about one year's duration when measured between successive recessions (i.e.,
downturns). This would have been a very short cycle indeed, and one difficult
to reconcile with the Burns-Mitchell 1946 definition, which has business cycles
exceed one year in length.

     40 C. J. Bullock and H. L. Micoleau state that "the movement of foreign
trade and that of commodity prices do not point to a depression or even a
serious recession in business in 1846" (see their "Foreign Trade and the
Business Cycle," The Review of Economic Statistics, November 1931, p. 153).
Detrended indexes of the volume of domestic and foreign trade constructed by
Arthur H. Cole from series on tonnage carried on canals and railroads, of
vessels built, total merchandise shipped to and from abroad, etc., show de-
clines in all NBER recession years during the period 1830-1862, except in 1846
and 1854. See Cole, "Statistical Background of the Crisis of 1857," Review of
Economic Statistics, November 1930, p. 172; also, W. B. Smith and .A. H. Cole,
Fluctuations in American Business, 1790-1860, Harvard University Press, 1935,
chaps. XII and XX. Donald W. Gilbert, "Busin~ss Cycles and Municipal Expendi-
tures," Review of Economic Statistics, August 1933, p. 141, concludes that
after 1843 " ••• a level high enough to be characterized as prosperity was not
achieved before 1846 and that the years 1844 and 1845 cannot be called pros-
perous years but rather years of broken and halting revival."
                                        -33-



in Thorp's annals as well as in the statistical studies by Ayres and Cole.

But the evidence of a contraction in real termS is weak, except with respect

to business fixed investment.       The construction of new railroad mileage

dropped sharply, but       Cole's index representing mainly the physical volume

of domestic trade increased about 5 percent in 1854.      Wholesale commodity

prices show very little softness in this episode.       Thus here too, despite

the general agreement in the literature, there is some room for doubt about

the genuineness of the contraction (as distinct from an undoubted financial

trouble and business slowdown).

     Data are still scanty for the next fifteen years which includes the Civil

War, but they provide general support for the business contractions with the

NBER-dated troughs in 1858, 1861, and 1867 (Table 3, lines 7-9).       It is fairly

clear, however, that the last two of these were relatively mild, and the

designation of 1865-67 as a contraction finds no support in annual production
                             41
data which show increases.          The latter observation applies a fortiori to

the 1869-70 episode, which was much milder and shorter yet.       Indeed, it is

puzzling how to explain   eve~    a mild contraction at a time of the greatest

acceleration in railroad investment.      A careful study, which notes this fact,

suggests that short-lived financial difficulties may have discouraged inven-

tory accumulation, which played a relatively large role at the time. 42



     41 Frickey's index of industrial and commercial production (1899=100)
has the following values: 13 in each of the three years 1860-62, 15 in 1863,
17 in both 1864 and 1865, 19 in both 1866 and 1867, and 20, 22, and 23 in
1868, 1869, and 1870, respectively. After adjustment for secular trend, the
index fluctuates in broad conformity with the NBER chronology, declining in
1860-62, 1864~65, 1866-67, ar,d 1869-70. See Edwin Frickey, Production in
the United States, 1860-1914, Harvard University Press, 1947, pp. 125-129.
     42  See Rendigs Fels, American Business Cycles, 1865-1897, The University
of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1959, pp. 96-97.
                                       -34-


     Again, it is possible that in terms of production all that happened was

a phase of below-average growth rather than an actual decline of cyclical

proportions.    In the absence of reliable, comprehensive data on intra-year

output changes, no firm conclusion can be reached.     But there is another

important factor here, namely the decidedly downward trend in prices, which

prevailed for about thirty years after the Civil War.     In such deflationary

times, cyclical movements show up much more strongly in nominal (current

dollar) aggregates of income and spending than in their real (constant dollar)

aggregates.     (In inflationary times, the opposite is the case, as shown by

recent experience.)     Presumably, the high degree of price flexibility existing

at the time has mitigated the output fluctuations.     But a perceived deflationary

trend generates expectations of further price declines, which are to some

extent self-fulfilling (just as inflation generates partly self-validating

expectations of further price rises).     Such expectations are worrisome and

can be seriously destabilizing, particularly since they are always clouded

by uncertainty.     The changes over time in the price level are generally quite

uneven -- e.g., the deflation of 1865-96 was interrupted by several relatively

short and weak upward price movements, mainly during business expansions.

Thus price expectations are as a rule only roughly verified by ·the overall

trend and often falsified by the shorter movements.     Moreover, the dispersion

of the changes in individual prices is high.     The uneven declines in prices,

values, and spending during the period under review were undoubtedly hurting

many people.    Business cycles are not, and cannot be, isolated from these

developments.     They cannot, therefore, be judged by their "real" elements alone.

     Thf; 1873-79 contraction was exceptionally long and by most accounts     an~

measures very severe (see Table 3, line 11, and Table 4, line 1, which contains
                                    -35-



some additional informationo)   However, the available evidence is heavily

weighted with nominal series-prices, bank clearings, railroad revenues, im-

ports -- which fell sharply; the physical-volume series show shorter and

smaller declines, mostly between 1873 and 1876. 43

     Beginning in the late 1870's, more comprehensive statistics are avail-

able monthly, and not only in trend-adjusted form.   Table 4 lists the ampli-

tudes of cyclical movements -- percentage declines and rises -- in deflated

bank clearings, three indexes of business activity without trend adjustments,

and an average of three indexes with such adjustments.   This is useful infor-

mation, but it must be interpreted with care, since each of these aggregates

has considerable limitations and there is a considerable amount of duplication
              44
among them.



     43
         Friedman and Schwartz, op.cit., pp. 43-44, note that "the steady
decline in prices from 1873 to 1879 probably led contemporary observers and
certainly led later observers to overstate the severity of the contraction in
terms of real output ••• The contraction was severe. Yet an analyst who
assessed the contraction on the basis of physical volume series alone would
regard it as shorter in length and far less severe than it has generally been
judged." Similarly, Fels, opocit., p. 107, states that the "depression of
the 1870's", though second only to that of 1929-33 in monetary statistics,
was "nevertheless, in terms of output ••• singularly mild." This is strongly
supported by Frickey's data (see ref. in note 41).                          .
     44
         Bank clearings outside New York City (the exclusion is designed to
lessen the impact of financial transactions, largely in the stock and bond
markets) have been widely used in the literature as a measure of aggregate
economic activity. Since 1919, the better series of bank debits (also out-
side N.Y.C. and deflated) is used. See F. R. Macaulay, as cited in Table 4;
E. Frickey, Economic Fluctuations in the United States, Harvard University
Press, 1942, pp. 338, 360-361; and George Garvy, Debits and Clearings Statis-
tics and Their Use, Federal Reserve Board, 1959.

     The Axe-Houghton index, which starts in 1879, is based on pig iron pro-
duction, imports, bank clearings outside N.Y.C., and revenue per mile of
selected railroads. The Babson index is a base-year weighted aggregate of
seasonally adjusted physical volume or constant dollar series, with coverage
expanding from 11 to 33 components. It includes manufactures, minerals,
agricultural marketings (but not farm production proper), construction, rail-
way freight ton-miles, electric power, and foreign-trade volume. The weights
                                        -36-

     The series used in Table 4 show expansions and contractions corresponding

to the NBER business cycle reference dates in all instances but two:      the

Babson index of physical volume of business activity did not decline in 1890-

91 and the deflated bank debits paused but did not fall in 1926-27.      Howeve~


a few of these movements have been questioned, viz. Ayres whose index does

show a mild decline in 1926-27 disregards it in his chronology, and the same
                                         45
applies in the case of Axe and Houghton.

     Despite the    shor~mingsof    the underlying data, the amplitude measures in

Table 4 rank the cyclical episodes sensibly, that is, in broad agreement with

the judgments expressed in the most informed and careful studies of American
                   46
business cycles.        However, the rankings differ depending on whether trend-


are value-added data. See G. H. Moore, ed., Business Cycle Indicators, NBER,
New York, 1961, volume II, pp. 39-40, for more detail. The A.T.&T. index is
described as "primarily a measure of manufacturing activity and the physical
movement of commodities" (see Rorty, as cited in Table 4). In 1922, it co~
prised 12 items (identified with weights in Mitchell, Business Cycles: The
Problem and Its Setting, as cited, p. 295), but in earlier years its coverage
was much slimmer. These three indexes (Axe-Houghton, Babson, and A.T.&.T.)
are available without trend adjustments.

     The trend-adjusted indexes used to compute the average cyclical amplitudes
in columns 4 and 5 of the table are those by Ayres and A.T.&T., plus the index
presented and described in W. M. Persons, op.cit., pp. 8-9, 91, Ill, 131, and
152-156.
      45 See Ayres, op.cit., p. 45, and E. W. Axe and R. Houghton, "Financial
and Business Cycles, Manufacturing Growth, and Analysis of Individual Industries,
 1883-1930," The Annalist, Jan. 1931. Ayres speaks of "a minor business downturn
 in 1927 which was not sufficiently important to be considered as marking the end
 of a cycle." But Burns and Mitchell, op.cit., p. 109, observe that "this decline
 [in the Ayres' index] is a trifle longer and at least as large as the 1887-88
 decline, and definitely larger though a little shorter than the 1869-70 decline,
 ~oth of which Ayres considers as marking the end of a business cycle.  A similar
'remark applies to Axe and Houghton ••• ". See also ibid., Table 27, p. 108 and
 text, for more on the comparison of NBER and other chronologies.

     46 Burns and Mitchell, op.cit., Table 156, p. 403, use the ~rend-adjusted
indexes of Ayres, Persons, and A.T.&T. to rank the amplitudes of U.S. expansions
and contractiousin 1879-1933. G. H. Hoore, Business Cycle Indicators, Table 3.6,
pp. 104-105, extends bhese measures to cover the period 1854-1958. It should be
noted that our review ends in 1929 and so excludes the "great contraction" of
1929-33 and the much shorter but deep contraction of 1937-38. The 1926-27 episode
is believed to be the last one for which the data leave some uncertainty as to the
Dature of the cyclical developments involved. Hence, given my present objective,
tbere was DO point in aoina beyond the cycles of the 1920' s.
                                                                                         Table 4

                                  Measures of Amplitude of Cyclical Movement for Three Trend-Adjusted and Four Unadjusted Indexes of
                                                           Business Activity, United States, 1873-1929

                          NBER Reference Dates                  Three Trend-Adjusted     Deflated Bank            Axe-Houghton Index of           BabR () n 1nd eX-e.'!.LJ'.!!Yo'!..i   t;;!l.       A.'I'./,'I'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     - - -_.        __ ..or_-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I"ckx
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ._~-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                              a                     b                                                                                            d
                                                                      Indexes             Clearings             Trade   &   Indus. ActivityC      Vol. of       1l11~!~l!:':~'!...3ctivLsY.           I!~~lIR~.Act IvJ.t.Y
                               Business Cycle                      Average Change
                                                                                           Percentage                     Percentage                         Percentage                                    Percentage
                                                                 High to        Low to
          Line     Peak            Trough         Peak            Low            High     Fall      Rise            Fall               Rise             Fall               Rise                         Fall      Rise
                   (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)            (5)      (6)       (7)             (8)                (9)              (10)                (11)                        (12)      (13)
                                                                         f                                 g                                  h
            1    Oct. 1873        Mar. 1879     Mar. 1882        -33.6        +31.5       n.a.     +89.7            noa            +46.5
            2    Mar. 1882        May   1885    Mar. 1887        -32.8        +26.0      -17.6     +62.2           -2406           +37.1
            3    Mar. 1887        Apr. 1888     July 1890        -14.6        +21.3      -12.3     +36.4            -8,2            +32.1
                                                                                                                                                                                    i
            4    July 1890        May   1391    Jan. 1893        -22.1        +21.1      -10.2     +23.0           -11, 7           +16.8                n.m.              +22.7
            5    Jan. 1893        June 1894     Dec. 1895        -37.3        +27.8      -29.8     +39.6           -29_7            +37.3              -26.9               +35.9
            6    Dec. 1895        June 1897     June 1899        -25.2        +27.9      -16.0     +56.8           -20,8            +58.9              -15.3               +47.6
......I
C"l         7    June 1899        Dec. 1900     Sept.1902        -15.5        +12.9       -9.4     +30.9            -8.8            +36.3              -12.2               +41.4                        -9.2      +38.5
   I
            8    Sept.1902        Aug. 1904     May     1907-    -16.2        +24.7      -10.5     +41. 3          -17.1            +39.4              -14.2               +48.1                       -17.6      +54.4
            9    May   1907       June 1908     Jan. 1910        -29.2        +24.4      -25.4     +42.2           -31,0            +59.3              -22.7               +43.6                       -29.1      +44.9
           10    Jan •. 1910      Jan. 1912     Jan. 1913        -14.7        +14.4       -6.4     +16.1           -10,6            +25.6                -9.0              +23.3                        -7.8      +30.8
           11    Jan. 1913        Dec. 1914     Aug. 1918        -25.9        +35.7      -14.9     +59.2           -19,8            +49.2              -18.9               +56.8                       -19.5      +52.3
           12    Aug. 1918        Mar. 1919     Jan. 1920        -24.5        +19.5      -10.1     +37.4           -14.1            +23.2              -28.6               +34.2                       -21. 5     +28.9
           13    Jan. 1920        July 1921     May     1923     -38.1        +36.7      -13.9     +24.2           -32.7            +68.5              -32.3               +65.0                       -29.4      +60.1
           14    May   1923       July 1924     Oct. 1926        -25.4        +21.7       -7.5      n.m            -22.7            +36.1              -17.2               +28.0                       -20.5       +39.4
                                                                                                            j
           15    Oct. 1926        Nov. 1927     Aug. 1929        -12.2        +14.9       n.m      +54.5           -10.0            +21.6                -9.5              +25.2                        -5.8       +24.9
                                      -37a-


Footnotes to Table 4


     a Based on three tren~adjusted indexes: ~yres' index of business activity
compiled by the Cleveland Trust Company; index of industrial production and
trade constructed by Warren M. Persons; and American Telephone and Telegraph
index of business activity. The Persons index begins in 1875, the A.T.&T. index,
in 1877. Each index is expressed in percentage deviations from its base (trend)
line, and changes are computed between the extreme values of these deviations
in each cycle; the entries below are averages of the corresponding changes in
the three indexes.
      b
       1875-1918: bank clearings; 1919-1930: bank debits. NBER data (Macaulay),
deflated by Carl Snyder's Index of General Price Level. Not adjusted for trend.
Seasonally adjusted. Series begins in 1875.
      c
       Furnished by E. W. Axe and Co., New York. Not adjusted for trend.
Seasonal adjustment by compiler. Series begins in February 1879.
      d
       Furnished by Babson's Reports Inc. Not adjusted for trend.       Seasonal
adjustment by compiler. Series begins in January 1889.
      e
       American Telephone and Telegraph Co., Chief Statistician's Division
(a confidential release, Sept. 6, 1944). No adjusted for trend. Seasonal
adjustment by compiler. Series begins in 1899.

     f Based on the declines in the Ayres' index, 1873-78, and in the Persons'
index, 1875-78.

     g Measured from the trough in 3/1878 to the peak in 6/1883; disregards a
downward movement in the series from 7/1881 to 1/1882. See Burns and Mitchell,
op.cit., Chart 30, p. 255.

     h Measured from the low·of 2/1879 to the peak of 8/1882; disregards a down-
ward movement in the series from 3/1880 to 1/1881.

      i Measured from the low itl 9/1889 to the peak in 3/1892.

      j   Measured from the trough in 9/1923 to the peak in 11/1929.

      n.a.    Data not available.
      n.m.    No movement in the series corresponds to the NBER reference dates •

.tClJRCES:   See Table 3, for columns 1-3 and on the Ayres' index. Columns 4-13:
             NBER files; Frederick C. Macaulay, The Movements of Interest 'Rates,
             Bond Yields, and Stock Prices in the United States Since 1856, NBER
             Hew York, 1938, Table 30, pp. A289-A296; Warren M. PersQns, Forecasting
             Business Cycles, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1931; M. C. Rorty, "The
             Statistical Control of Business Activities," Harvard Business Review,
             January 1923, pp. 159-160 (A.T.&T. index, trend adjusted). See also
             notes b,c,d, and e above.
                                       -38-



adjusted or unadjusted indexes are used.      As would be expected, the declines
are generally much larger and the rises much smaller in the former than in the

latter series (cf. columns 4 and 5 with the corresponding entries in columns

6-13).

     The fact that not only the trend-adjusted but also the unadjusted series

match all but a few of the turning points in the NBER chronology can be said

to confirm the latter in a broad and conditional sense.      This means that it is

primarily the occurrence of these cyclical movements approximately in the indi-

cated periods which is supported by the data, rather than the precise dates of

the peaks and troughs.     It also means that the quality of the evidence depends

on the degree to   ~hich   the indexes used reflect the true cyclical movements

in the economy at large.     These movements cannot be observed well without more

comprehensive, nonduplicative measures of aggregate economic activity.      The

available series, used as proxies for such measures, could either underestimate

or overestimate the true movements, but the greater risk would seem to be that

of overestimation because the data appear to represent the cyclically sensitive

sectors of the economy such as manufacturing better than they do the other

sectors.

     Of course, the serious nature of several contractions listed in Table 4 is

not in doubt.    The decline in 1882-85 was among the longest and rather severe,
                                                                                  47
although again more so in prices and money transactions than in production.

Ge~erally   poor business conditions and a protracted deflation characterized the

3 ~ year period 'from the beginning of 1893 to mid-1897, which saw two major con-



     47    .                             ~
                                               .
        Frickey's annual index of industrial and commercial production (1899=100)
has a peak of 48 in 1883 and a trough of 46 in 1885; in trend-adjusted form, the
decline is from 109 (percent of trend) in 1882 to 93 in 1885 (see fn. 41 for
reference). See also Fe1s, op.cit.,. pp. 128-131.
                                        -39-



tractions separated only by an abortive revival from the middle of 1894       ~hrough


1895.     The debacles of 1907-08 and 1920-21 were both relatively short but very

severe.      There was also a serious decline in production and real income in,the

years 1913 and 1914, which was fully reversed only in 1915 by the inflow of
                                                  48
orders from abroad as World War I intensified.

        The other contractions were definitely much milder, and some of them may

well have been marked by retardations rather than absolute declines in total

output.      The one in 1887-88 is described as a brief "slight recession" in the,

business annals; it does not register as a decline in a number of important

series but only as a retardation; and it is omitted from cyclical chronologies

by some scholars. 49     The next contraction on the NBER list, attributed   tomoneta~y


disturbances originating.abroad in mid-1890, although shorter yet, is viewed

as more pronounced, but not by much.      After a brief but vigorous expansion

following the depressed years 1893-97, another     ~xtrem~ly   mild contraction is

identified by NBER in 1899-1900, which also does not show up in annual       ~easures


of output and real income. 50


        48
        For further evidence on the above episodes, see Fels, op.cit., chapters
10 and 11; Frickey, as quoted before; Friedman and Schwartz, op.cit., pp. 99-102,
108-113, 156-158, 196-197, and 231-232.

          49 In particUlar by Jos~ph Kitchin inhis"Cy~les and Trends in Eco~omic
  Factors," Review of Economic Statistics, January 1923, pp.lo-16. Fels,op.cit."
  p. 142, agrees "that 1887';;'88 'was about as mild as any contraction worthy of the
  lUIIIle. The only difference of opinion to be found in the literature is ,whether
  it should be recognized as a cyclical contraction at all." He lists several
  .anthly series for banking, imports, rail,r()ad,traffic and earnings that show
·110' cyclical peaks in thiS 'period but also notes that 'investment in railroads
  and buildings did weaken. Frickey's index;assumes,the values 54, 60, and 61,
  in 1886, 1887, and 1888; in trend-adjusted form, the corresponding readings
 ·are 103, 107, and 104.
        ~                                                              ,



         Beginning in lB89, annual figures on the value of net national product
 in 1929 do1l~rs are available from John W. Kendrick, Productivity Trends in -the
 United States, Princeton forNBER, 1961. This series, due to Ktlznets and Kendrick,
 shows increases of 4.3 percent -and 2.7 percent in the "trough" years 1891 and 1900,
 respectively (in contrast to aizable declines in thedepresaedyears 1893-94 and
 1896). Similarly, Frickey's unadjusted index rises in both 1889-91 and 1899-1901
                                      -40-



        The first contraction of this century, in 1902-04, was rather lengthy but

certainly not severe.     Still, there is no reason to question that it was a true

decline in aggregate economic activity as both real net national product and

the index of industrial and commercial production had small losses (of about

1.8% and 1.5%, respectively) in the year 1904.        Similarly, the contraction of

1910-12 was mild, although it too lasted about two years.        Prices fell markedly

in this period, while real net national product increased but slightly in 1910

(by 0.8 of 1 percent) and the index of industrial and commercial production

fell 3.3 percent in 1911. 51

        The 1918-19 contraction as dated by the National Bureau was extremely

brief (7 months) so it is not surprising that it is not registered in annual

data.     The amplitude measures of Table 4, however, show it to have been more

serious than most of the contractions discussed previously.        It seems appropriate

to regard it as a sui generis end-of-the-war recession along with the similarly

short 1945 episode.

        The last two cycles to be considered are those of 1923-29, a period of

calmness before the storm,     ~haracterized   by relatively stable economic growth

and fairly stable prices.     The contraction of 1923-24 was moderately brief and

mild, but the Babson index suggests that it saw a decline in industrial pro-

duction similar to those that occurred in 1895-97 and 1913-14 (cf. lines 6, 11,

and 14 in Table 4).     The nature of the extremely mild 1926-27 phase is much



(but dec1inenwhen trend-adjusted in both 1891 and 1900). The monthly Babson
index, which has a relatively good coverage of industrial output, moves along a
low plateau but shows no decline from its beginning in 1889 through early 1891
(see fn. 44 and 'lab1e 4, line 4). For further information, see Friedman and
Schwartz, op.cit., pp. 94 (Chart 8), 104, 136 (Chart 13), and 139; also, Fels,
op.cit., pp. 166-171.
     51
         The Nutter index of industrial production, based in large part on Frickey's
data, shows a very similar decline in the same year (see ref. in Table 1 above).
See Friedman and Schwartz, op.cit., pp. 173-174.
                                        -41-



more questionable, however.        As already noted, some investigators excluded this
                                                       r

movement from their cyclical chronologies (see fn. 45 above).        They may not

have consistently followed their own criteria in doing so, but from the present

point of view more doubt is justified.         Even the sensitive industrial production

indexes (F.R.B., Babson) fell but relatively slightly -- about 8 or 9 percent --

in this period, and there is no good evidence that real income and total output

declined, although money income probably did, a little, along with prices. 52

     In sum, this reappraisal suggests that generally the contractions in NBER

chronology do represent cyclical declines in either real income and output, or

money income and spending, or both the real and the nominal aggregates.         In my

view, it is necessary to consider both groups of variables: in the recent infla-

tionary era, the cycles are mainly in the real aggregates, btlt in the past,

when the price level fluctuated and long periods of deflation occurred, they

were often more pronounced in the nominal aggregates.

     Nevertheless, there are a few doubtful episodes.        All of these go back

to the 19th century, unless the recession of 1926-27 is questioned, 'which is

a difficult, marginal case•. The 1845-46 phase is most dubious, but 1869-70

is also of uncertain nature as are 1887-77 and 1899-1900.         It seems impossible

to refute the hypothesis that these were periods of below-average growth rather

than actual declines.    The same may apply to a few other minor contractions

aentioned before, but it seems prudent not to press the matter.        While some

fa~tors   point to retardations, others such as the length of some of the phases

Or -1:he behavior of prices and monetary and current-dollar series point to the
-'Possibility of mild declines •


     S2
        See R. A. Gordon, "Cyclical Experience in the Interwar Period: The
Investment Boom of the Twenties," Conference on Business Cycles, NBER, New York,
1951, p. 208, and references therein. Also, Friedman and Schwartz, op.cit.,
pp. 197 (Chart 16) and 288.
                                            -42-


        Suppose the four periods just listed are treated as growth cycle slowdowns,

 not business cycle contractions.          This would make some business cycle expansions

 longer and larger.       The effects on the averages are illustrated in the tabulation
below, which compares the figures from Table 2, lines 1 and 2, with their counter-

parts for fewer cycles obtained by including the slowdowns in expansions.                Clearly,

 the differences between expansions and contractions are much increased. Butthe

contrast with the business cycles of 1918-80 (based on the NBER chronology as

in Table 2, lines 3 and 4), though attenuated, is still in evidence.


                                           Mean Duration (Standard Deviation), Months

  Period            Number of Cycles          Expansions           Contractions

1834-1855                   5                      26(20}             24(15}

1834-1855                   4                      36(22}             27(15}

1854-1919                  16                      27(l0}             22(14}

1854-1919                  13                      37(19}             23(16}

1919-1980                  13                      43(26}             l4(9}



                                             VIII

        This concluding section    S1DDS   up a few points of the paper.

        1.     Severe depressions reduce economic growth strongly for some time,

-vigorous expansions, which often follow, have similar -transitory effects in the

opposite direction.       Most of the cyclical movements, however, are short and

-mld.        The last hundred years can be about evenly divided between a set of

        .
,four periods of relatively high stability and a set of four periods of rela-

t1vely low stability, each period being a sequence of two, three, or four

complete peak-to-peak business cycles.              In one set, the standard deviation
                                       -43-


of the annual growth rates in real GNP is 4.4 percent, in the other it is 7.4

percent.    The corresponding average annual growth rates are 4.0 percent and

2.6 percent.     These remarkably symmetric results suggest that growth was gen-

erally higher when stability was greater.      Presumably; instability of aggregate

demand and of the general price level impede growth.      However, long-term growth .

and cyclical variability depend partly on common and partly on different fac-

tors, and there seems to be no good general reason to expect any simple and

stable relationship between them.

     2.    Business cycles have changed in several   i~portant   ways under the

impact of the developmentsinftiated during and after the cataclysms of the

depression and war of 1929-45.     Recessions are perceived as having decreased

in frequency, duration, and amplitude; the apparent reasons for this lie in

structural, institutional, and policy changes that have been much studied.

But the process also introduced new destabilizing and growth-inhibiting ele-

ments.     The recent changes in cyclical behavior are not necessarily irreversible

alterations or trends that can be extrapolated.

     3.    The mildness of economic fluctuations after World War II led to a

revival of the interest in    grow~h   cycles, that is, cyclical movements in trend-
                                                                  \

adjusted indicators.    A great deal of valuable information for      ma~y countrie~


has by now been assembled and evaluated on this basis.       Growth cycles are rel-

atively symmetrical in duration, in contrast to the recent business cycles which

consist of long expansions and short contractions.      Measures of several 1m-

portant aspects of growth cycles show greater uniformity than their counter-

parts for business cycles.     A cODlJ>arison of the timing of recent growth cycles

in the market-oriented economies linked by trade and financial transactions

suggests a strong element of international diffusion. of these movements.
