                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              EXPECTED INTERRUPTIONS IN LABOR FORCE
            PARTICIPATION AND SEX RELATED DIFFERENCES
                       I N EARNINGS GROWTH

                           Yorarn Weiss
                          Reuben Gronau

                      Working Paper No. 66i




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCh
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          April 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #667
                                                             April 1981



                                     ABSTRACT



            Expected   Interruptions in Labor Force Participation and
                    Sex Related Differences in Earnings Growth



     The paper analyzes the joint determination of wives' earnings and
labor force participation over the life cycle given the interruptions in
wives' work careers. The interruptions affect the profitability of the
investment in human capital, which in turn determines earnings. The earnings
prospects feed back into the participation decision, namely, the decision
whether and for how long to drop out of the labor force.

     The formal analysis compares the age—earnings profiles of persons
who drop Out of the labor force with those who do not during the pre— and
post—interruption period. The comparison is carried out where interruptions
are assumed to be exogenous and when they are endogenou The effect of
productivity at home, the initial stock of human capital and its rental
value on the length of the interruption is investigated.



                                                Yoram Weiss
                                                Department of Economics
                                                Tel Aviv University
                                                Tel Aviv, Israel


                                                Reuben Gronau
                                                National Bureau of Economic Research
                                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                Cambridge, Mass. 02138

                                                (617) 868—3900
1.   INTRODUCTION


         The last decade has witnessed an awakened interest in the role of

women in the labor market, Spurred by the increasing share of women in the

labor force, economists have focused on the factors that affect women's (and n

particular, married women's) labor supply and their compensation (particularly

their pay relative to males). Though it has long been recognized that wages

arid participation are jointly determined, most empirical studies of labor force

participation tend to regard wages as an exogenous variable, while studies of

the structure of women's wages (and male-female wage differentials) often regard

labor force experience (namely, participation in the past) as exogenous.

In this paper we examine the mplications of the interaction between participation

and wages for the interpretation of observed, sex related, differences in earn:ngs


         The link binding participation and wages is the individual investment

In himself Investment in human capital on the job is one of the ways for an

individual to increase his future wages. Labor force participation is a pre-

requisite for this kind of investment. Thus participation affects future wages

which in turn affect future participaton. Conversely future participation pars

determine the utilization of human capital and therefore influences current

investment decisions.

         The feature that makes the women's experience so unique and different tom

that of males' is the interruptions (or expected interruptions) in thel .   careers

associated with marriage, birth of chi idren and geographical mobility The

interruptions do not merely result in the loss of current earnings; they also
                                     —2-


 affect investment in human capital. Consequently, the difference between

 the earning of women and men reflects both the loss of human capital due to

 past interruptions and the lower accumulation of human capital due to expected

 future interruptions. An understanding of these complex interactions between

wages and partcpation at different stages of the life cycle is crucial for

 the interpretation of recent findings on sex related differences in earnings

growth and on wage discrimination,

      1n often-noted empirical regularity is the tendency of the sex-related

earnings differentials to increase with potential work experience for at least

the early phases of the work cycle. While the phenomenon has been observed in

both cross—section arid longitudinal data (see Johnson and Stafford [1974],

Farber [1977], Weiss and Lillard [1978]), a different explanation applies in

each case In cross—section data, as potential experience increases so does the

like thood of past breaks in experience.   It is then sufficient to assume that the

accumulation of human capital i inhibited by exits from the labor force.      In


longitudinal data where individuals are observed repeatedly, or alternatively

when retospective data on past exits from the labor force is avai lable, one can

control for such differences in work history. The explanation In this case must

rely on the unobservable future breaks in labor-force participation.   It has been

argued (see Mincer and Polachek [1974]) that a woman who expects a shorter work spar

will invest less in activities that raise her earning capacity.   In contrast to

the previous explanation, which relies on properties common to all wealth—maximizing

models of human capital, the second explanation requires assumptions on the specific

form of the production function, The reason is that the slope of the optimal earning
                                      -3-


profile depends not only on the rate of investment but also on the speed at

which investment is reduced. An explanation that merely states that women are

likely to invest less in on the job training is incomplete, unless it is also

shown that women do not reduce their investment faster than men. A question arises.

what are the restrictions on the production function which would enable us to

infer the effects of future breaks on earnings growth?

       Several authors (e.g. Johnson-Stafford [1974], Oxaca [1977] have attempted

to measure the discrimination that women face in the labor market. Attention has

been given to wage discrimination (as distinct from barriers to entry) whereby

the market awards women with lower returns for "identical" characteristics.

Presumably such a phenomenon would be revealed by differences in the level of

earnings standardizing for differences in schooling and work experience. However,

such comparisons fail to account for the unobserved differences in participation

plans. Thus, for the same experience, women may have lower earnings because they

invested less in the past, expecting to participate less in the future. One

would not ascribe this gap in earnings to discrimination, unless the expected

interruptions are caused by discrimination. Two questions arise: can one separate

the effects of past and future breaks? How much of the observed difference in the

level of earnings can be ascribed to discrimination?


       The objective of this paper is to provide a theoretical framework for the

analysis of the above issues. A modified version of the model in Blinder and

Weiss [1976] is presented in which labor force participation and earnings are

jointly determined over the life cycle. In previous works, either wages or

participation were taken as exogenous (e.g. Heckman Macurdy [1980], Polachek [1975]

Our analysis is also limited, however, in treating fertility and marriage decisions

as exogenous and   in   ignoring variations in the intensity of labor force participation
                                   -4-


        To simplify the exposition, we first assume that labor force interruptions

 are exogenously determined and fully anticipated. Breaking the link between

 earnings and participation, we are free to analyze the effect of career

 interruptions on the earnings structure. Two features of the earnings profiles

 are examined: the level of earnings and their rate of growth. To separate these

issues, we restrict the analysis to models in which either the absolute growth or

its rate are independent of the stock of capital. The age-earnings profiles of

people who drop out of the labor force are compared with those who do not during

the pre- and post-interruption periods. It is often asserted that women have a

flatter earnings profile because of their lower rate of investment in human

capital. We point out that to make this assertion one has to know not only the

level of investment but also its rate of change over time. It is shown that under

our assumptions on the nature of the investment production function, an expected

interruptions in labor force participation will lead to a reduction in earnings

growth if and only if the earning-experience profiles are concave.


       The second part of the paper relaxes the assumption that labor force

interruptions are exogenous. The labor force participation decision depends on

current wages, the prospects of further investment in human capital, and productivity

in the home sector. We begin by noting that planned temporary (as opposed to

permanent) withdrawals are not consistent with fixed market conditions and fixed

productivity at home. It is, therefore, necessary to introduce some time or age

dependence into the model. We introduce explicit dependence of productivity at

home on age. It is assumed that increases in home productivity occur in jumps

associated with the birth of children, with productivity declining as the children
                                             —s.


grow older. It is shown that a necessary condition for women who have left

the labor force to return co work is that the rate of decline of home producti

exceeds the rate cf depreciation of human capital. The probability and the

duration of    wtthdravai are   greater the higher is the productivity at home and

the lower s the initial stock of human capital and its rental value, As noted

by Strober and    Quester          and Johnson and Stafford [1977] discrimination

against    women in the lahot force is a possible cause for their longer withdrawals
Thus, wage iscr:mnacien cri affect not only the level          of earnings hut also the

patterns    of lfl\ eSTmeflt and earning   gowrh through its effect on   the length of
career interrupt Ions
      The last seetton of the paper draws the implications of our analysis for
the interpretaUori of sex related differences in earnings.
 2.    A MODEL OF EARNINGS AND LAJ3OR FORCE PARTICiPATION

2a. Desci        ion of the Maximlratron Problem

           Con dci an ndiv.dual who plans a life time earnings and participation
program under conditions of certainty and perfect capital markets. At each
ponr n tinie t1e endsvidual may either participate in the labor force or not.
           t he the index of labor force participation such that P(t            I

yhr :ncL vlduai s LO the labor force. or in chool and P(t)           0 otheise,
harnngs capac ry rn        the   labor market depends on pt participation and investment
1-:t terns      Actuai earnings depend on current earning capacity and
        hK(r     be. the earnings capacity of the individual where K is the
ctock of     human   cap.tal   and R ts rental value. Let yt,, 0        y(t)        1, be
the           earnings potentiai that is realized in the form of actual
       prop :'rt on of

ernng. thus, f the individual participates, his observed earnirLg, Y, equals
      8> grv.ng ip pat of lu current earning capacity, the     idual improves
his furire eanrngs' potenrai according to the production function:!

                                    Pf,K -    •K   ,   £    0, K0
where          denotes the deprecration rate of human capital.


          ftc vaiue of time during periods of nonparticipation is denoted by          Qt.
Productivity     at home is assumed    exogenous, that is, independent of the

participation and investment history of the individual. It may depend, however,

on    age, number and age of chi idren, health and similar factors, and may V ary,
therefore ocr the life cycle.
                                                       —7—


          The individuaPs maximization problem is:


                                   T
(2)              max           J
                                    e       [PRKy +       (l-P)Q]dt
        P(t=O,l,0Kv(t)sl



                              sOt, (1) and K(0) =
                                                                      K0



where     F     is the   planning horizon and r the market rate of interest.


          the necessary conditions which the optimal program must satisfy are:


                                    P(K if)                   =   0              0 <
(3)                                                                         if         y   <       1


                                                                            if         y=0
                                                                            if         y=l

                                   Ky        ipf        Q/R
                                                              '
                                                                  0        1ff   P =   1


                                                                           iff   P=0

(5)                                     =   (r     +                             (T)           0


where the function (t) is the shadow price of human capital divided by

         Condition (3) determines the optimal value allocation of                                      earning potential

between       current earnings and investment, If the individual participates, P = 1,
then an interior maximum requires that the opportunity costs of y in terms of
current earnings (represented by K) equals the value of marginal product in
terms of future earning potential (represented by iPf) If the individual does
                                        -8-

 not participate (P =      y is indeterminant, Participation need not imply
                          0)

 positive earnings, since the individual may specialize in "schooling'
 (y = 0)
           The participation decision described in condition (4) involves the comparison

 of home productivity with the full value of market oriented activities
                                                                           consisting
 of realized earnings and the value of investment. One may participate even if the

 current wage is below the productivity at home provided that the imputed value of

the increase in future earnings capacity is
                                                sufficiently high. The participation
decision is a function of past work history (embodied in      K) and future work

plans   (reflected in ).
         Condition   (5) describes the development of the marginal value of human

capital along the optimal path. When the individual is out of the labor force
(P =   0),   the shadow price of human capital is increasing (see also Polachek [1975]),

This reflects the profitability of shifting investment from the time just prior to

the exit to the time just after entry, thus saving the depreciation and interest

costs associated with unutilized human capital.


        We describe the solution to conditions (3) to (5) in two stages. In

subsection 2b, we consider the case in which labor force participation is exogenously

determined and condition (4) is therefore not binding. The problem is then reduced

to the analysis of the effects of past and anticipated exogenous interruptions in

labor force participation on the development of earnings over the life cycle. We

consider separately in sub-section 2c the case in which labor force participation

is endogenous.
2b. Exogenous Breaks in Labor Force Participation


       We wish to compare the optimal earnings profiles of two (otherwise identical)

individuals: A, who participates continuously (P(t) = 1                             for all t        a [O,T]);

and B who expects a single interruption in labor-force participation such
that P(t) =     0    for   ta    [t', t"] and       P(t) =        1    for    t a [0,t')       and
t a   (t",T].   The difference in the earnings profiles of the two individuals

prior to t' can be ascribed to differences in their anticipations while the

difference after t" can be ascribed to differences in their                          history. The
history   of the system is captured by the accumulated amount of human capital K,

while anticipations for the future are summarized in the shadow price

In general, K and          tJ
                                 affect both the level and growth of earnings, and it

is difficult to separate the roles of past (potentially observed) and future

(unobservable) interruptions in labor force participation. There is, however,

a special class of models in which expected interruptions are revealed by the

choices of the individuals with respect to their earnings growth. That is, the

slope of the earning profile is independent of the level                         of human capital. There
are two such specifications:

(6)                 f(K,y) =    g[K(1 -   y)]   ,   g'       0, g" c         Q   g(0) = 0

and

(7)                 f(K,y) = Kh(y)              ,   h'   <
                                                             0,       h"     0, h(l) =     0




The   form (6) imposes Ben-Porath's [1967] "neutrality" hypothesis. In this
case the slope of the earning profile, i.e., the absolute growth in earning,
is, in the absence of depreciation, independent of K. The form (7), due to
Blinder and Weiss [1976], leads to the independence from K of the slope of
the
                                                                3/
      log earning profile (i.e. the rate of growth in earnings),—
                                                - 10        -




       Consider the formulation (6) first: The optimal path is characterized

by the following conditions:



(3')                 P[1 —       bg'(K(l    —
                                                y))]              0            if 0 < y       1




                                       1r 6] -                        P        if   0   y     1




                                                        O       - Pg'(K)]     if yr     0


                                     = 0



       For ihe   specification        (61 one can show that during periods of participation,

          is ever positive it remains positive thereafter.!' Since during periods
 f nonparticipation, P = 0,       is increasing,it follows that during periods
of participation, P = 1,      must decrease monotonical1y Otherwise the condition
       U i.1i be .o1ated, If we denote the shadow price for the two indcviduals
by 1it)    and    Bt) respectively, then it follows from (3') and                                  (5') that

person A and person B face the same shadow price of human capital after the
Lnterrton        ()I)A(tj =      Bt) for t                      (t", T]), but person A has a higher
shadow price prior to the interruption (A(t)
                                                                            B(t)    for t c
       The slope of the earning profile during periods with positive earnings can
he written as:
                     Y
                             r         g'       +       -       6K             if 0                 p     1
                                                    g                                   y     1,

                     =   -                                                     if   y = 1,          P =   1
                                              — 11   —




             It   is seen from (8) and (3') that if 6 = 0,       the slope depends only on

 In this case, individuals A and B will have the same slope for their earnings

profile (i.e, the same absolute growth in earnings) during the interval (t", T].

 in the period preceding t', the slope of B's profile will be lower if and

only if the (absolute) curvature index L1_ is decreasing with the rate of

investment. This is seen from:



(9)                                  [(gtt) gtgtj( -1) when 6 = 0,              0   y <   i,   p = 1.


            The concavity of the earning-experience profiles during the period of on-the-
•                                        dY >
job investment requires that                  0.   Thus a specification of the production function

that   yields a strictly concave earning-experience profile also implies a lower
earnings growth for B prior to the withdrawal from the labor force at time t'
(specifically, this is true if           one adopts the commonly used homogeneity assumption,
namely, that g( )              has a constant elasticity). A border-line case in which the

slope of both earnings profiles is the same is when g( )              is   exponential, i.e.
                           -
    = a -


            VThen   the   rate of depreciation is positive, the slope of the earning profile

depends also on the level of human capital, and therefore on initial conditions.

Since B has a lower rate of investment prior to t', he will have a lower level

of K, and thus a higher slope for his earning profile during the interval (t",T].

During the period prior to t', the lower accumulation and the shorter horizon

may have opposing effects on the slope of the earning profile and the outcome

appears ambiguous.

            In empirical comparisons of men's and women's earnings, it is common to

compare the logs of earning profiles, that is,to focus on earnings growth rates.
                                               — 12   —




However,   under specification (6) the effect of an expected interruption on the
rate    of growth in earning is unclear, since both Y and Y are likely to be

lower during the phase preceding t'. Let us turn, therefore, to specification

(7) which places direct restrictions on the growth rate of earnings. The

optimal path is now characterized by the conditions:




(3's)            P[l +   Ph'(y)]   =       0                                  if 0 < y       < 1




(5'')            (T) =    0   and i        = (r÷            -
                                                                P[y+iph(y)]


        As in the previous case,                is increasing when P = 0             and decreasing

elsewhere.' Also              =
                                   8(t)          for t            (t",T] and     A(t)    >
                                                                                             iP(t)    for

t c [0,t").

        A convenient property of the specification (7) is that during periods

of positive earnings          is determined uniquely by i                      according     to the relation:




(10)             .= -1--[-(r+6)        +
                                           y(Eh + Eh,
                                                      + 1)]           -       if 0 < y   <    i,   p = 1
                     h'



                                                                              if y=l,P=l

where we define:




(11)             Eh =   - h'(y)y   > 0          and       Eh, =           >0



        Thus, for the interval (t",T] both individuals will have the same

slope for their log earning profile. In the period prior to t', B will have a
                                                          - 13   -




    lower earnings growth if and only if the (relative) curvature index                                             is

increasing with y. This follows from:



    (12)                        d()            1        (h')2                       d
                                       =
                                                         h"
                                                                 ((r +   rS) _h(Eh+l))-   Eh,. If 0 < y         <    1, p =   1
                                 di        E
                                               h'   2




Again,           we note that if a specification is chosen such that log earning experience
profiles are concave during the period                           of positive on-the-job investment

    (0   <
             y   <   1)   then the effect of expected interruption is to reduce earnings growth.
A border-line case in which the slope of both log earning profiles will be the same
is       when h'(y) is of constant elasticity, i.e., h(y) =                             (l   -




                 So far, we have discussed only one aspect of the optimal lifetime earnings

profiles, namely their slope. The implications for earnings growth must, however,

be tested jointly with                the implications concerning the level of                   earnings and

the period of schooling. Under both specifications (6) and (7),                                   the   level

of earnings must be lower for individual B during the interval (t",T]. This

results from the fact that during this phase, the investment rates of A and B

are identical, while B's stock of human capital is lower. During the phase

prior to t' the level of B's earnings may exceed A's for a while since B

invests a smaller proportion of his lower earning capacity. Both models predict

a shorter period of specialization (in which y = 0                               and therefore Y = 0)               for
         •   6/
individual B.—
•




                 Finally,   wage discrimination does not affect the investment in human capital

and earning growth as long as the length of the interruption in the womants work

career is exogenously given. Discrimination, in our case, affects the cost of

investment and the return to the same extent. It lowers the level of earnings but

does not affect earning growth.
                                              - 14 -



2c.    Endogenous Withdrawals from the Labor Force


          The pattern of exits and entries into the labor force depends on the

development over time of productivity at home and in the market. We wish to

present some restrictions on Q(t) which will limit the number of exits and

entries and determine their pattern. In this analysis we shall restrict ourselves

to the specification (7). We utilize some special properties of the optimal

solution which hold under specification (7). These are described in the following

two lemmas.


Lemma 1: Let V denote the maximal current value of market activities, i.e.

V = max    R(Ky +   iKh(y)),      then
  O>r<l



(13)                   - <r.
Proof. Differentiation of V with respect to time yields:



(14)                  V = R{[y      +    h(y)]K   +   K[1   +   h'(y)]y + Kh(y)}

Using conditions (3tt)      and    (5") we obtain:


(15)                  V =    - 6V   +    (r÷)RKh(y) = rV -        RKy(r+ó)
                                  - 15   —




Lemma 2:   Let E(t,K(t)) denote the present value (evaluated at t) of

earnings associated with the optimal program. Then,


(16)                    E   =




That Is ,       which, by definition, is the marginal value of K (divided by R)
also equals the average value (divided by R). (See also Blinder Weiss[1976,p.456]).


Proof, Using (5') we find that:



(17)                    (ipK) =    + iK      =   r'K   - PKy



       Multiplying both sides of (17) by Re(Tt), and integrating from
t to T,    using (T) = 0, we obtain:



(18)                    RK = j e_Tt)RPKy dT



       Let Q(t) be differentiable. We can then prove the following
propositions:

Proposition   1: At a point of entry into the labor force, productivity at

home must increase at a rate which is less than the market interest rate,



Proof. At a point of entry we must have Q = V             and Q < V.   Therefore

< <r.
                                             - 16 -


Proposition   2:    At a point of exit from the labor force, productivity at

home cannot decrease at a rate which exceeds the depreciation rate of human

               >-   S.
capital, .
Proof. At a point of exit we have Q = V                            Q > V.                               -S.
                                                            and                 Therefore      >
                                                                                                   .>
Proposition 3: If a point of exit is followed by a point of entry, then at the

point of re-entry, productivity at home must decline at a rate which exceeds

the depreciation of human capital.

Proof. Let there be an exit at time to followed by re-entry at t1.


        If the re-entry point is chosen optimally then, due to (16) it must

maximize:


                                            t1                             -r(t1-t °)
(19)                      w(t1) =                          Q(t)dt + e
                                        Jt0e_t_t0)
                         —s (t1—t ° )
where   K(t1) = K(t0)e                  ,        K(t)   is taken     as   given and     all other possible
switching points remain constant.
        The first and second order derivatives of W(t1) are:


                                             -r(t1 -t0)
(20)                      Wt(t1) = e                      [Q(t1) -    \T(t1)J


(21)                      W"(t1)
                                   =        - rW'(t1) + e -r(t1-t )                +    5V(t1) -
                                                                    [Q(t1)

                                                  RK(t1)h(y)(t1)J

An   interior solution for t1 requires W'(t1) = 0 and W"(t1) < 0. Since
        < 0 it is necessary that Q + óV(t1) = Q + SQ(t1) < 0.
                                                 - 17   -




               Notice   that the Pontryagin necessary conditions (3) to (5) imply only

      W'(t1) =    0.    The second order condition w"(t1) < 0                                  is an additional

      requirement for optimality which becomes relevant if                                     the       solution to (3)            to   (5)   is
      not    unique. Indeed, due to the multiplicative appearance of K, P and y,
      the maximand in (2) need not be                 concave. In order               to gain further insight into
      the    nature of this difficulty, assume that Q(t) is a constant and consider

      the phase diagram in Figure 1.                  Suppose that there is a solution to conditions (3)
      to    (5) such that P = 0             for t £     [0, t1) and P =                    1    for t e [t1.,T]. This

      solution is presented in the phase diagram by trajectory II. Existence of such a

      solution implies that there are at least two other solutions, one with P =                                                         1


      for     t c [0,T]     and another with P =            0    for t                [O,T] which also satisfy the
      necessary    conditions (3)           to (5).     These   are presented in Figure 1 by the
      trajectories      I and       III   respectively. Lemma 2             allows us to compare the value of
      the   objective function associated with each of the three programs. From (21)

      we    see that Q(t) =         0     implies that W"(t1) >             U        for all t1 in which                           W' (t1) = 0.


    -l                                  -         .
                                                                            y=O,P=l
                            —
                  k                         -.                     —..
                                                                                                          p=1
                                                                                                          0          y     1

                                                                       -.




                                                                                                              p1
-     1
                            P       0                                           --    —
                                                                                                         ..... . -
                                1
    (h'(l                                                                              .




                                                                                                         V      P = 1
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                y    = 1
                        I
                                                                                                                               K
                                0
                                                 FIGURE            1
                                            - 18   -




Thus either of the "corner" solutions t1 = 0 or t1 = T                   is superior to a

plan with re-entry at 0 <
                                  t1
                                       <   T.


       An important corollary of our analysis is that constant productivity

at home cannot generate the exit and re-entry patterns of married women.

When Q(t)       is   a constant independent of age, workers will choose either to

work   throughout their life (with a possible final "retirement't phase) or not
to   participate at all. The choice between these alternatives depends on the

relative magnitudes of Q and RK0 and on the potential gains from

investment in human capital.


        It seems likely that productivity of men at home is relatively low and

independent of age; their optimal plan is therefore to participate continuously

in the labor force. For a married woman (or one who expects to marry) it is

more plausible to assume that Q increases at early ages when family size

increases and decreases at later ages as children grow up. Moreover, Q(t)

may have jumps at points at which birth occur. There is thus a potential for

planned exits and entries into the labor force. Let us assume, for simplicity

that productivity at home has a single jump, at t =                      and depreciates at
                                                                   to,
a constant rate thereafter. That is



                         10                for 0<t<t
                                                —   0
(22)            Q(t) =
                              —p(t—t o)
                                            for t0<t<T

        If we   further assume that p >            5, then, due to Proposition 2, an exit
from the labor force may occur only at the point of discontinuity to,
                                       - 19   -




 and, due to Proposition 3, an interior solution with re-entry at some point

 to <        < T    may be optimal. There will be at most, one episode of a planned
        t1
 departure      from the labor force. The remainder of this section is devoted to
 the analysis of this expected departure.
                              p (t-t0)
       Defining Z(t) = K(t)e           we can use a phase diagram similar to the
 one used before to describe the solutions for equations (3)to (5) during the

phase [t01T]. For any given departure of length t1 -                   to   one can use

 (3") and (5") to determine the shadow price of human capital (t) at the

point of re-entry t1 and the             point of exit t0. Given the demand price of
human capital at to, one can solve for the optimal accumulation from

time 0 to t0, K(t) and the stock of human capital at the point of re-entry

K(t1) =      K(t0)et1_to)            and obtain the corresponding values of Z(t )
                                                                                    ° = K(t0)
and             =   K(t)e
                            (p-s)   (t1-t)    The line   ss in Figure 2 describes the
        Z(t1)

 level of human capital that will be supplied at to for any given shadow price

P (t0). Its positive slope reflects the fact that, due to (3") the rate

of accumulation of human capital is increasing in .                The pairs Z (t1), t1)

associated with different prespecified values of re-entry time, t1, are repres-

ented in Figure 2 by the curve aa.                For any prespecified value

t1 the optimal trajectory satisfying (3")                 and   (5")

must start on         ss     at time t, and cross           aa at time t1.

The trajectory corresponding to the optimal value of t1 satisfying conditions

(3"), (5") and (4) must pass through the intersection of aa with Q = V

locus. The crucial assumption for the purpose of comparative statics is that
                       - 19a -




                   S



     j)


                          y_zo        ,   p=1

 1
ht (Q)


                                           p=1
                                           O<y<1
              .4

                                          II

 1
h'(lJ
          A                ..


                                 ..
                                               i1   P1




                       FIGURE 2
                                     - 20   -




 aa   has a smaller slope (in absolute value) at the point of intersection

 than the locus Q = V.     This assumption guarantees that an interior solution

 represented in Figure 2 by the trajectory II is the only one satisfying the

 necessary conditions and is truly optimal.-7'

         Consider now the effect of an increase in Q. This will shift the locus
 V = Q    to the right. The new intersection with aa will be at a lower level

 of 1(t1),implying an increase in    t1 and the duration of the departure from

 the labor force.-" If the increase in Q is sufficiently large, aa and the

 locus V = Q     do not intersect, i.e., no re-entry occurs. Similarly, an increase

 in the initial stock of human capital      K0 shifts the ss and aa curves
 to the right. Since the intersection of aa with the V            Q locus will be
 at a higher level of     (t1), t1 must be reduced.       (If aa intersects ss
 above the point where the locus V =    Q       cuts ss, the person will not withdraw

altogether.) Thus, women with a higher initial stock of human capital will

plan shorter withdrawals from the labor force. Their earning profiles prior to

the withdrawal will be steeper.

         We have seen that when labor force interruptions are exogenous, wage

discrimination had no effect on earning growth. This is no more true when

the length of the interruption is a decision variable. The effect of a reduction

in the rental rate for human capital, R, is identical in the

present model to that of an increase in Q. Wage discrimination results in

flatter earnings profiles because it increases the length of career interruptions.
                                    - 21   -




3.   IMPLICATIONS FOR SEX RELATED EARNINGS DIFFERENCES


        The discussion in this paper highlights the strong interdependency between

lifetime plans of labor-force participation, the level of earnings, and earnings

growth. Differences in the level of earnings reflect both past and future

participation plans. We identified, however, models in which differences in

earnings growth reflect differences in participation plans. Observing two groups
with similar growth rate we may conclude that future plans and thus current
investment   patterns are similar. We can then    ascribe differences   in wage levels

to differences in earning capacity. Differences in earning capacity not explained

by differences in experience or schooling may be ascribed     to discrimination
provided    that past departures from the labor force are viewed as exogenous.

If withdrawals from the labor force are partially endogenous, standardization

for differences in work history will underestimate the full effect of discrimination

on earnings differences.       Findings by Farber [1977] suggest that the

male-female    difference in earnings growth is   more pronounced at early ages and

tends    to vanish later. Thus the natural period in the life cycle for sex related
comparisons    in   earnings is rather late, e.g. the 40-50 age group, contrary to the
procedure    suggested by Johnson and Stafford [1974] who compare initial

salaries.


        If women expect longer breaks in their work career, thei.r reduced investment

in human capital should not be confined exclusively to investments on the job.

Schooling will also be reduced. If one admits the possibility that the

interruptions may be due to discrimination, a standardization for schooling in

comparing male-female earnings differences yields an underestimate of the full
                                        - 22   -




impact.       One may also question the legitimacy of the comparison of earnings

of women and men with the same level of schooling on the grounds of selectivity

bias. Expecting an interrupted work career, women will invest in schooling as

much as men, only if they are more efficient investors.2'


           Expected withdrawals from the labor force, whether caused by discrimination

or 'objectivet factors, discourage investments in increased earning potential.

Investment, however, is not directly observable and the question is; What are

the empirical manifestations of the reduction in investment? It is not true

that earnings growth is uniformly lower for individuals who choose to invest less.

However, for the special case of separable production functions where earnings growth

depends      only on the level of investment, one obtains an a priori consistency
test:        any two measured characteristics that can be assumed to have the same
effect on investment will have      similar effect on earnings growth. Thus, if

earnings growth declines with experience, women will have lower growth in earnings

than men. This conclusion is consistent with evidence from panel data that the

earnings growth rates decrease with experience and are lower for women after

adjustment is made for past breaks in experience (see Mincer and Polachek [1974],

Weiss and Lillard [1978], Gustafson [1980]), and that women who reported

expectations for labor force participation have higher growth in earnings

(Sandell and Shapiro [1980]).

        The introduction of endogenous departures from the labor force enriches

the models of wage growth      considerably. The separation between   factors that

affect the level and growth in earnings, introduced by the simplifying

specification of the production function, disappears. In particular, differences

in   the   rental rate and in the initial stock of human capital affect schooling
                                  - 23   -




and earnings growth. Discrimination reflected in a lower rental rate for women

induces longer planned withdrawals from the labor force. Thus discrimination

reveals itself not only in the wage level which women may receive for the same

work experience and the same education but, to some extent, in their lower

wage growth as well. Findings by Mincer and Ofek [1980] indicate that higher

schooling levels are associated with shorter durations of the interruption i.n

labor force participation. Such a relation contributes to a positive interactIon

between education and earnings growth. One would, therefore, expect the schooling

experience interaction to be stronger among women than among men with similar

work history. Our preliminary tests using Israeli data fail to support this

hypothesis

      The labor force participation model that emerges from our analysis is quite

different from the simple view of women as marginal workers moving in and out

of the labor force as new wage opportunities arise. Instead, the woman is viewed

as choosing between two occupations; work at home and work in the market. The

accumulation of human capital, or learning—by-doing in the market sector, is a

strong deterrent to occupational mobility (see Weiss [1971]). Even if one extends

our model to allow unexpected events, specialization is quite likely. It has been

recently argued (Heckman Willis [1977]) that post marital labor force experience

of women has a J shaped distribution, a large fraction of women working only a

very small part of their time after marriage and a large fraction working through

most of their lifetime. Our model provides a rationale for this presumed

heterogeneity in behavior. By this explanation, even a symmetric distribution

of characteristics such as the initial stock of human capital, K0, and home

productivity, Q,   may generate a J shaped distribution of post marital (or
                                 - 24   -




more accurately, post birth) labor force participation. A certain fraction

of women will never drop out of the labor force since at the time of birth

their full value of market activities exceeds their home productivity.

The distribution of the other women by the duration of their withdrawal from the

labor force depends on the parameters           r, S, p   and
                                        RK0,                    to. Because
of the finite lifetime we may observe a bunching at the other extreme end of

the distribution due to truncation (i.e., women who are expected to reenter

the labor force at a point t1 > T   never return).
                                         - 25   -


                                   F   0 0 T N 0 T ES

     The authors are grateful for the helpful comments of S.Rosen and the

     referees of the Review of Economic Studies. Reuben Gronau's research

     has been supported by NSF Grant Soc 79-07848.

1.   Strictly speaking (1) is a description of the equilibrium wage structure

     rather than of production technology (see Rosen [19721).


2.   This assumption ignores accumulation of capital in home activities and

     transferability of capital across activities (see Weiss [1971)). The

     assumption that human capital acquired at the market has only limited

     use at home is quite plausible for on—the-job training and for high

     levels of schooling (e.g. Ph.D Degree). Empirical findings of a positive

     effect     of schooling on labor force participation suggest a bias in
     schoolings towards market activities.

3.   A more realistic formulation of the Blinder and Weiss function is

     (7')                   f(K,y) = K   Max[h(y), a(1-yfl

     The two branches of (7') correspond            to investment-on-the-job and in school
     respectively.      We may assume that schooling is the more efficient way of

     acquiring high levels of growth, i.e. h(o) < a,             and that on-the-job

     investment is more efficient for low levels of investment, i.e.

     h' (1) >   -a.   The linearity of the schooling activity reflects the

     feasibility of mixing schooling with work. This formulation can capture

     the discontinuity in investment which appears to occur at the end of the

     schooling period (see Mincer [1974], p.94). Upon entry into the labor

     force there is a jump from y = 0           to y = y0 where y0 is defined

     implicitly by
                                                a   - h(y)
                                                -h' (y0)
                                                             - 26      -




4.    For intervals in which                         =       (r    +           - 1,    if       )   is   ever positive then

      is positive and increasing thereafter, This contradicts ip(T) = 0.                                                            Hence,

      in particular, (r + 6)ij                           1        at the point of exit from the phase in which

     y =     0.     Therefore (r + 6)                    <
                                                              gt(K*)           where K* is the amount of capital

      accumulated up to this point, Since g"( )                                        < 0,         it follows that

      (r +    6)    <   g'(K)      for all K0                     K        K*,


5.   We assume h(0) >               r    +   6.      For y =               0     and P =    1       it follows immediately that
       =                                     0.
             tp[r   + 6   -
                              h(0)]      <        For 0 ' y                    < 1    and P =        1   we have
       =   [r       +   6- h(y) +        yh'(y)],             since [(-h(y) +                   yh'(y))     =
                                                                                                                 yh"(y)     <   0,
     h(y) -       yh'(y)      >   h(0)       and i < 0.                    For y       i p =         1      =    (r   +   6)p-l      and

     must be negative or else the transverslity condition iP(T) = 0                                                       will be

     violated. A similar argument holds for specification (7') in footnote 3,

     except that we assume a >                       r       + 6       and use the fact that h(l +
                                                                                                                      Eh)
                                                                                                                            =   a    at y0.

6.   Under specification (6) the period of specification is determined by the

     condition g'K) =               (t).          Since
                                                                   g'(K)
                                                                                 is increasing with age throughout the

     interval y = 0                (this can be shown to hold even if 6 >                                   0)    and since

     B(t) and A(t) are both decreasing while B(t) <
                                                                                                         A(t      the specialization

     phase will end earlier for B. Similarly under specification (7) a switch

     occurs when 1P(t) =                -                    again since B(t) and iI)A(t) are decreasing,
                                             h'(o)'
              <               and -                          is a constant, B will start to have positive
                                             h'(o)
     earnings at an earlier age. The same is true if we use specification (7')

     in footnote 3 except that there will be a jump from 0 to                                                    y0 when
     (t) =        - ___
                                          - 27 -




7.   Taking   the derivative of (19), allowing k(t0) to vary, we
     obtain   the following second order condition:


                                                                                 am   K(t °
     (21')     Q(t 1) + 'SV(t 1 )   - RK(t o )h(y)    i(t o)-   V(t 1   )
                                                                                              )
                                                                                                  <0
                                                                                      at1



     The slope of the locus V =         Q, evaluated          at t1 ,       is    given by:



                            +

               dZ
                          Z(t1)h(y)



     The slope of the aa locus, evaluated at t1 ,is given by:




               di =   ___________________________
               dZ                       aln K(t1)
                      p—)Z(t1) + Z(t1)               at1


     Comparing the two slopes it is seen that (21') implies that the slope
     of aa is smaller in absolute values.
                                                      - 28




8.      A direct proof can            be      derived from the following inequalities:


              etRKydt         +               ePt +                       etRKydt
                                                                      I
                                                                                                :° etRKydt
                                          Q                                                >                 +
(23) :°




                                                + et                      dt +
                                                                                  fetRKydt



(24)     f   e_rtRKydt        +                      )tdt   +
                                                                L e_TtRKydt        >
                                                                                                eRKydt   +
                                   )to                          Jtl                         0

                                                                                       T

                                                     11 e_tdt
                                                                                       t
                                                 +                            +            e_rtRKydt
                                                      to
                    *                 *                                                                  *
        where       Q >   Q       and Ky is evaluated along the path optimal for Q and Ky

        is evaluated along the path optimal for Q. These inequalities hold because

        the accumulation path Ky is feasible also at the 'price' Q and vice versa,

        Subtracting (24) from (23) and rearranging yields:



(25)            -                 (P-r)t         >   o implying, implying t > t1.


9.     It is the relative efficiency of investment in school and on the job

       which is relevant for the determination of the schooling period. Women

       may   invest as much in schooling as males                         despite their shorter horizon

       because they find that they cannot invest on the job at the same terms

       of trade as males.
                                          - 29   -




                                      REFERENCES

 Ben-Porath, Y., "The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle in

           Earnings" Journal of Political Economy 75 (August, 1967), 352-365.

 Blinder A. and Y.Weiss "Human         Capital   and Labor Supply: A Synthesis" Journal of
           Political Economy3 84 (June, 1976), 449-471.

 Farber, S., "The Earnings and Promotion of Women Faculty: A Comment" American

       Economic Review, 67 (March, 1977) 199-206.

 Gronau, R., "Leisure Home Production and Work; The Theory of the Allocation of

       Time Revisited" Journal of Political
                                                      Economy 85 (December, 1977) 1099-1124.
 Gustafson , S. "Male-Female Life-Time Earnings Differentials
                                                              and Labor Force
       History" Mimeo.              I.U.I. Conference on Labor Economics,
                                                                               Stockholm, July,'79.
Heckman,     J.   and T.Macurdy "A Life Cycle Model of Female Labor Supply" Review of

      Economic       Studies   47 (January 1980) 47-74.

Heckman, J. and Willis, R. A Beta-Logistic Model for the
                                                                       Analysis of Sequential

       Labor Force Participation by Married Women. Journal of Political Econon

       85 (Feb.1977) 27-58,

Johnson, C. and F.Stafford "The Earnings and Promotion of Women Faculty"

      American Economic Review, 64 (Dec.         ,   1974), 888-903.
Mincer, J. Schoolipg Experience and Earnings National Bureau of Economic Research,

      New York, 1974.

Mincer ,    J.    and H.Ofek "Interruptions in Work Experience and Earnings of Intermittent

      Workers: The Case of Mature Women" Mimeo. Columbia
                                                                   University, March, 1980.
Mincer, J., and S.Polachek "Family Investments in Human Capital: Earnings of

      Women" Journal of Political Economy 82 (March/April, 1974) S76-S108.
                                        30 -



 R.L.Oxaca "The    Persistence   of Male-Female Earnings Differentials" in T.Juster

       ed. The Distribution of Economic Well Being N.B.E.R, 1977.

 Polachek, S ,    'Differences   in expected Post School Investment as a Determinant

       of Market Wage Differentials" International Economic Review 16 (June,

       l97) 45L470.

Rosen, S , Learning and      Experience in the Labor Market" Journal   of Human Resources
      7 (Summer,     1972) 326-342.
SandeIl,Sand DShapiro "Work Expectations Human Capital Accumulation and the
      Wages of Young Women' Journal of Human Resources 15,3 ( Spring 1980) 336-363.
Stroher, M.JI,, and A.OQuester "The Earning and Promotion of Women Faculty:
      Comment" American Economic Review 67 (March, 1977) 207-213.
Weiss, Y.   and L.Li[lard   "Experience Vintage and Time Effects in the Growth of
      Earnings:     American Scientists 1960-1970" Journal of Political Economy,

      86 (June, 1978) 427-448,

Weiss, Y. Learni.ng-By-Do.ng     and Occupational Specialization. Journal of Economic
              3   (June, 1971), 189-198.
