                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    INDEXING AND INFLATION



                        Stanley Fischer


                     Working Paper No. 610




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           May 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #670
                                                                May 1981




                                 Indexing and Inflation




                                        ABSTRACT



      Much of the opposition to indexation as a means of adapting to ongoing

inflation arises from the view that indexation is itself inflationary.

This paper examines the basis for that view in a simple macroeconomic

model in which budget deficits are in part financed through the printing

of   money. It   is shown that all aspects of indexing——wage indexation, bond

indexation,   and tax indexation——tend to increase the impact        on the price

level   of any inflationary shock. However, this association between index—
ation   and inflation is in   large part a consequence of the monetary     and

fiscal policies being followed by the government.

      Evidence from a cross—section of forty countries on the effects of

indexation on the inflationary impact of the oil price shock of 1974 sug-

gests that indexation did not in general increase the inflationary impact

of the oil shock. However, the impact of the oil shock was significantly

stronger in those countries that had adopted bond indexation,



                                                   Stanley Fischer
                                                   E52—280A M.I.T.
                                                   Economics Department
                                                   Cambridge, Mass. 02139

                                                   (617) 253—6666
    Revised                                                January 1981


                                INDEXING AND INFTATIa



                                  Stanley Fischer*

          The main reason governments are reluctant to adopt price indexation
 in their own transactions and encourage its use in the private sector is
 that indexing is thought to be inflationary) The arginent is that an indexed
 economy inflates nore, and nore rapidly, in response to an inflationary
 shock than does a non—indexed economy, given the nonetary and fiscal policies
 being followed. It is also argued that the will to fight inflation is
 weakened when the costs of inflation are reduced by indexing - equivalently,
 that the adoption of indexing affects the choice of policies.
         The question examined in this paper is whether indexing is inflationary.
Section I reviews a simple nodel that has previously been used to examine the
effects of wage indexation on the price level and level of output. Then in
Section II the nde1 is expanded to include the government budget. Deficits
are assumed to be financed in part through the printing of honey. It is shown
that all aspects of indexing--wage indexation, bend indexation, ar tax
indexation-—tend to increase the impact on the price level of any inflationary
shock. However, this association between indexation and inflation is in large
part a consequence of the rtonetary and fiscal policies being followed by the
government.

*
   Department of EconomIcs, M.I.T. and Research Associate, National Bureau of
Economic Research. This paper was prepared for the Conference on World Inflation
and Inflation in Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, Deciiber 1980, organized by the Getullo
Vargas Foundation. I am grateful to Jeffrey Miron for research assistance and
the National Science Foundation for financial support.
1. ?inother reason for government reluctance to indek, which applies particularly
to indexation of the taxation of returns on capital, is that it is complicated.
While this is no doubt true, the right question to ask is not whether perfect
indexation is possible, but rather whether 'xrkab1e imperfect indexing is better
than none at all.
                                            -2—

         Evidence fran a cross-section of forty countries on the effects of
indexation on the inflationary impact of the oil price shock of 1974 suggests
that indexation did not in general increase the inflationary impact of the
oil shock. However, the impact of the oil shock was significantly stronger
in those countries that had adopted hond indexation.
I. Review.
         There ale at least to distinct senses in which indexing might be said
to be   inflationary. First, the impact on the price level of any given inflation-

ary disturbance might be larger in an indexed than         in   a non-indexed econany.2

It is probably in this first sense that it is camDnly argued that indexing           is
inflationary. Second, the average price level or inflation rate might be

higher in an indexed than   in a   non-indexed econarty,   given the nonetary and
fiscal policies being followed and the distribution of the disturbances
affecting the econany.
        Earlier United States literature on the effects of indexation on
stability centered on the relationship between wage indexation and the
variability of output and prices (Gray 1976, Fischer 1977, and Blanchard
1978). The conclusion on the price side was that wage indexing speeds up

the transmission of shocks to the price level implying that wage indexing

is   inflationary in the first sense. Given the assumed constancy of the ironey
stock, the extent of wage indexing has no effects on the average price level
or inflation rate, implying that wage indexing is not inflationary in the
second sense.

2. If indexing is inflationary in the first sense, then a deflationary shock
produces a larger impact on the inflation rate in an indexed than in a non—
indexed system. It was in this context of deflationary policy that the virtues
of Brazilian style indexation were stressed for U.S.        audiences by   Friedman (1974).
                                                  —3—
        The   simplest rrodel with which - to deritnstrate these conclusions consists
  of a wage sctting ecjuation3
  (1)                +           +
        w                            u,

 an outp.it supply function
  (2)
        YtY(Pt.-wt)+vt,

 and an aggregate dand euation

  (3) mp+y+z
 •Lower case letters are deviations of the relevant variables from

 steady state values; w is the wage rate, p the price level, y real

 output, rn the money stock, u, v, and z are mutually and serially
 uncorrelated disturbances. The notation                            denotes the expectation
 of Pt based on information available at time (t-l). The parameter

 5 represents the extent of wage indexation; for ô=l, the wage is

 indexed, and for O the wage is entirely predetermined.4

        The aggregate supply function      is derived   from (1) and   (2):
 (2)'         y(l—6) (Pt -             -    +
                                                Vt.

zthining      (2)'   with (3), and   assuming   expectations are   rational,   the price
level   is
 (4)
        Ptt_1mt+O[(mt_tlmt)+W_vz]
where 0 = [l+y(l—6)J


3.The model is beEthought of as the linearization around the
steady state of an underlying model
                                    set up in Appendix 1, with the
steady state money stock, wage rate and
by choice of units.                     price level set at unity

4.  In Fischer (1977) I noted that wage indexation is typically a
means of making mid—contract
a mechanism that adjusts     adjustments to wage rates rather than
                         wages to make ex post payments to workers
for inflation that has already occurred. For that reason it is
desirable to model wage indexatjon
The concentration on single period using multi_period contracts.
                                   contracts in this paper is for
the sake of simplicity.
                                          —4—



        Equation (4) shows that the effccts of any inflationary disturbance
 (an increase in u, representing a wage push, a decrease in v, representing
 an adverse supply shock, or a decrease in z, representing a reduction in the
 danand for nney or increase in aggregate dand) on the price level is larger,
 the larger is e. And 0 is clearly larger the irore the wage is indexed, or the
 larger is 5. Thus the impact effect of any inflationary shock is larger when
there is wage indexing. Wage indexing is therefore inflationary in the first
sense.
         Under the assumption that the disturbances in the model are white, it
is also clear from (4) that the extent of indexation has no effect on the average
price level or inflation rate, and thus that wage indexing is not inflationary
in the second sense.
       Three cczrments on equation (4) are in order. First, the variance of. the
price level can be calculated from (4) and is


 (5)         0[yc+ cc+ c]
 where      is the variance of x.

Since 0 increases with S, the variance of the price level is larger the more
wage indexation exists; the conclusion that wage indexing destabilizes the
price level is thereby demonstrated.
         Second, this simplest model contains no dynamics. All effects of
disturbances are absorbed in the period the disturbance occurs. Of course,
this is hardly a description of the real orld unless the period is made too
long to be interesting. In practice, wages adjust slowly, disturbances
affect inventories and investment, and so forth, and adjustment to a
disturbance is spread out over time. But there Is no reason to think that
                                                   —5—



dynarnizing this model by including reasons for persistence would change the
basic result.
         Third, it is clear thal if monetary policy can react within the current
period to disturbances, it can stabilize the price level caTipletely. All that
is    necessary is to set the      term in brackets      in (4) to zero.   Although   there

is no explicit maximization underlying this              mod, a case can    be made that
such a policy would be optimal. It would ensure no divergence between expected
and actual prices and would allow real side disturbances to have their full
impact   on output. The level of output is:


(6)         = (1-0)
                    [mt_tim_z]         e[1t_vt]

If monetary policy operates to keep          the   price level constant, so that




then   the   level of output is given by

(6)'yt=_u+v
In (6)' beth u and
                         v     have their full   impact on   real output. Workers who

dariand a    higher real wage (when u rises) obtain that         real wage,   at the expense

of lower     output,   and   any increase   in productivity or other supply shock (when

V   rises    increases output.

         Why   would allowing such shocks to affect output be desirable?              The

argument,    advanced initially by Barro (1976), is that the level of output is
optimal when markets clear without any expectations being disappointed and
information in that sense is        perfect.     The argiinent is suggestive, hut in the
present context, it cannot be more than that without explicit optimization.
      It should be noted that the policy that produces (6)' destabilizes
real output--but the argument is that such destabilization is socially desirable.
                                        —6—




Note also that when monetary policy stabilizes the price level perfectly,
indexation is irrelevant to the behavior of prices, as should be expected.
1nything that indexation would do is done by nonetary policy.
       The conclusion fran this surrrnaxy of the standard literature is that
wage indexing is inflationary in the first sense but not in the second sense.
A third sense in which indexation might be said to. be inflationary occurs
when indexation renders unstable a model that would otherwise be stable.5
No such instability is resent in the model of this section.
       The stabilizing mechnaism in the present model can be viewed as
the real balance effect. Given the strict quantity theory formulation of
the demand for money, and the fixed money stock, any increase in prices
reduces aggregate demand and thereby stabilizes the price level. The first
sign of instability in a nxel of this type emerges when the demand for
money is. made a function of the nominal interest rate or expected inflation
rate, and (3) is amended accordingly. The inclusion of an IS carve, or
assumptions abeut the behavior of the real rate of interest, will close the
system. It is well known that there are in general many rational expectations
solutions for the price level in such a system, even given a constant nominal
money supply; only one of the paths is a stable path. Hcever -    and   this
point bears emphasizing - this indeterminacy/instability has nothing to do with
the presence or absence of indexation. It is therefore not discussed further
in this paper.
        If indexing is to be inflationary in the third sense, in the context
of a simple model like that examined atove, it must be because it affects

5. Reflection will suggest that the third sense in which indexing can be
described as inflationary is a special case of the second sense.
                                        —7—



the rroney stock. The link will come throucjh partial or total financing of
budget deficits by the printing of nney and the interactions of the deficit
with inflation. Indexation affects the links 1x?ten the budget deficit and
inflation.
     Those links between indexat ion and the rroney supply process are the focus
of the extension presented in this paper of the standard literature on indexing
and inflation. The major links arrong indexin, inflation, the budget, and
noney growth are:
1. If government debt is indexed, the nominal deficit reacts to actual rather
than previously expected inflation.
2. Indexation of wages and social security similarly ensures that the nominal
deficit reacts to the actual rather than the previously expected price level.
3. Tax indexation renoves the generally pesitive impact of higher prices on
real government revenue.
4. Indexation of interest on past tax obligations on the contrary makes real
government receipts less sensitive to the inflation rate.
5. Increases in the budget deficit are likely to be financed at least in part
through the printing of noney.
6. Since indexation makes inflation easier to live with, governments are nore
likely to adopt inflationary rolicies when the econonrj is substantially indexed.
     The role of the first five factors in determining the relationship between
indexing and inflation is examined in Section II. Factor six is briefly discussed
in Section III. Evidence on the effects of indexing on inflation is presented
in Section IV, and concluding corrments are contained in Section V.
                                                     —8—



II. Inducing the Government Budget Constraint.
      The plicit assumption               in the standard analysis presented above
is that taxes and/or government spending are manipulated to maintain the
budget in balance. Alternatively, though less plausibly, it could be assied
that all deficits are financed by borrowing and that changes in the stock of
debt are viewed by the public as merely delayed taxation, so that budget deficits
are financed by future taxation.
      The government budget deficit is financed either through the printing of
noney or by borrowing. Denote real government spending by Gt, nominal taxes
by Tt, the nominal stock of government debt outstanding by Dt, and the nominal
interest rate by i. Assirne that all debt has a one-period maturity. Then
the budget constraint is
          -        +   Dt -      Dti = PtGt + itDti - Tt
 Assuming     that the   real interest rate (z). on indexed             debt   is

the same as that       on non-indexed, the nominal interest              rate payable   by the
government
(8) i =

where
               in period

              r+         -
                             t   is

                                      +   )
          is the proportion of the debt that
                                                         -
                                                             is indexed. The nominal    interest

payable   on   the indexed portion         of the   debt     is determined on the basis of   actual

inflation     and interest payable on the non-indexed portion is predetermined on
the basis of the expected rate of inflation.
      Based on a linearization of the budget constraint (7), as described in
the Appendix, and assuming that taxes are proportional to incarie and that the
ratio of debt to rroney is kept constant, the change in the noney stock is
described by
(9)   rn -         =a            -
                                     t-l    +
                                                b(t_ip   -         +
                                                                       cy + dpt +

a,b, >O, c<O, dO.
                                           —9—



The expressions for parameters a-Es are given in the Ippx3ndix. Frcxn (A7)
it may be seen that, given a positive stock of government debt, the parameters
a, b, and       are positive. In increase in the extent of indexation of the
government debt increases a while reducing b. Parameter c is negative
(increases in the level of real income increase taxes and reduce the deficit).
        It will be seen below that the parameter d is of decisive importance
for the stability of the system. Without indexation of taxes, d is likely
to be negative as increases in the price level increase taxes mare than
government spending. Or, if the tax system is indexed and nominal government
purchases are proportional to the price level, the sign of d depends on whether
the budget is in surplus or deficit. If the budget (exclusive of interest
payments) is     in surplus, d will be negative. But   d may be positive,   and we

shall   see   that the system then is unstable.
     The full rrodel with which we are now wrk consists of equations (1), (2),
(3), and (9). The standard rrodel has been supplemented by the addition of an
hypothesis abeut the determinants of nney growth. We are interested particularly
in the effects of parameters a, b, and d in (9) on the stability of the price
level, and in possible interactions between the extent of wage indexing (the
parameter S) and the parameters of the rroney growth rule in determining the
response of the price level to disturbances.
        The addition of the meney growth/deficit financing equation (9) will
affect the analysis of the effects of indexation in tw ways. First, the
inact effects of disturbances will now be different than they were in the
simple rrcdel where the rroney stock is fixed. Second, the analysis now contains
sane dynamics, in that disturbances that affect the noney supply today can be
                                                        —10—



expected     thereby also to affect the money supply and thus prices in subsequent
periods.
        Fran (2)', (3), and (9), we obtain the folling equation for the
detennination of the price level :6

(10) Pt = b0pt 1 +         b1 t-lt + b2 t-2t-l
                                               +
                                                           b3 + b4ct       +
                                                                               bz + b6zti
where        b0 =     [(l+y)(le) -       a   - bJ


             b1
                  =   [y(l-c) + b]
             b2   = - ['y(l+e)J
                  = [l—cJ
             b3
                  = —[l+e)
             b4


             b5       -
           b6
                  =   [l+eJ
                  =    [l+y(l-c)   - a   - d]1      ,          -   ,   y       y(l-), e = e(l—X)
        Tha first use of (10) is to discuss the impact effects of current supply
disturbances, e1, and dand disturbances, z, on the price level. These
impact effects are given by b3 and b5 respectively. Note that           - v.
is treated as an aggregate supply side disturbance since an increase in
that increases wages has the same effect on prices as a decrease in v. that
decreases     aggregate output.

        Consider      first a unit decrease in z., an increase in aggregate
danand or velocity. This will increase the current price level by the arrount
(-b5) or
         =[1+(l-c) a -        —
                                   d]
which is assi.med positive. Cczrtparing with 0 in equation (4), we note that
 (b) In solving for (10) it is assumed that the rroney debt ratio M/D is constant
so d1 in (9) is equal to ((l_A)/X)mi, where A is defined in the
                                        —11—

  the parameters a and d both increase the impact effect of an inflationary
  shock on the price level. The pararreter affects the price level in basically
 the same way here as in the simpler irodel, except that now is multiplied by
  (1—c). The interpretation        changes is simple. When the price level
                              of the

 increases in the current mxlel, the rrcney stock will increase to an extent
 that depands pasitively on a and d. Thus bond indexing, which means that
 the budget deficit increases when the current price level rises, and anything
 else that reduces the inflationary drag whereby inflation tends to put the
 budget into surplus (and thus increases d), will increase the impact effect of
 inflationary disturbances on the price level. As before, increases in the
 extent of wage indexing which reduce y, also increase the impact effects of
 inflationary disturbances. Since an inflationary ncminal disturbance tends
to increase output, the total impact effect of a disturbance is reduced by
increased sensitivity of the budget deficit to the level of output, as
represented by the parameter c. Thus the conclusion is that the impact
effect of an inflationary daiiand side distrubance on prices is larger the
nore indexing there is: this applies to wage indexing, to bond indexing
and, to the extent that tax indexation reduces inflationary drag, also to
tax indexatiori.
      A similar analysis with similar conclusion—that all forms of indexing
are inflationary in the first sense--applies in the case of an adverse supply
shock. The effect is surimarized by the paraxroter b3. The only difference with
the analysis of the previous paragraph is that nc the effect on prices is
larger the larger is (—c), i.e. the greater the effect of changes in output
on the budget deficit. The difference arises fran the fact thab an inflationary
supply shock reduces output. The larger is c, the greater the effect of the
output reduction on the budget deficit, therefore o the rroney stock, and
therefore on the price level.
                                                —12—




           result so far is that all types of indexation are inflationary
             The

 in the first sense? The explanation for the effects of wage indexing on
 the price level is the same as that in the trx1el of Section I; the effects
of bond and tax indexation follow from the link between the budget deficit
and rroney growth.
             As noted previously, the addition of the deficit financing hypothesis
 (9) adds dynamics to the simple rtix1el. We therefore turn next to the
dynamics of the effects of shocks on the price level, and to the role of
indexing in determining the magnitude of those effects. For that purpose,
the price level equation has to be solved explicitly, giving the price level
as a function of all current and past disturbances. Expectations are assumed
to be rational.
The solution will be of the form
(11)         Pt =   aet_1 +
A    solution specifies the values of the parameters       c and
        In order     to rk with stochastic     steady states,   it is necessaxy   that there
be such       a state,   equivalently that the process for the price level specified

by   (10.)   be stationary. There was no question in the simplest rrodel with its
ODnstant noney stock and white noise disturbances that the price level was
stationary. Here however it           possible that the price level will not
                                    is quite

be stationary. In such a case, the price level will not fluctuate around a

7.   If wages are not fully indexed, then increases in a and d increase the
 effects of an inflationary nominal shock on output. Thus obviously not all
forms of indexing stabilize output in the face of nominal shocks. I do not
discuss output behavior further? leaving calculation of the effects of
disturbances on output for the interested reader.
                                                    —13--



constant average level, but           may   either explode in response to disturbances, or
else rrove around aimlessly in the same general way as a random walk process.
To show this it is convenient to solve for the parameters c and                in (11)
by uating coefficients of the                 and   z in (10) arid (11).
The results are:
(12) a0 =

        a1(l-b1) = b0b3 + b4

        a.(1-b )
         1      1
                     = (b0 +                  i =   2, 3

        o = b5
                     = b0}   +
                                 b6

             (1—b1) =     + b2) i—l           i=    2, 3

        If the price level is to be stationary, the weights ct and            have to
converge to zero. From (12) and (13) the condition for stationarity is
             b0 +   b2
(14)                     <.1
              1—b1

or
(14)' d+e<0
        The parameters in (14)' relate to the rroney growth rule and are
independent of the extent of wage indexing. Further, since a and b do
not enter (14)', the existence of stationarity is independent of whether
the debt is indexed.8 Given a positive stock of debt e is positive. Thus
d, which represents the effects of the price level on the budget deficit, has
to be negative if the price level is to be stable.

8. If it was assed that the indexed debt carried a lower real               interest
rate than nominal debt, then stationarity would be rrcre likely with           indexed
debt.
                                       —14—



     The reason for this instability is not hard to find. Suppese there
was a budgt deficit last period that increased both the money stock and the
debt. The budget deficit this period will tend to be larger than it ould
otherwise have been because a larger stock of debt has to be turned over.
The price level will tend to be higher this period because the money stock
is higher. Unless the higher price level reduces the budget deficit (i.e.
unless ci is sufficiently negative) the budget deficit this period will be
greater than last period' s, the money stock will increase again, and so an
unstable process is set in train. The view that indexing is inflationary
in the third sense receives minor suppert from the analysis aix)ve in that
indexation of the tax system vuld rve part of the fiscal drag associated
with inflation that, in this model, feeds back to stabilize the money supply
process.
 •
     But it is clear that this petential instability has nothing to do with
the existence or non-existence of wage indexation and bond indexatioñ, so
long as both wages and interest adjust for expected changes in the price
level, as has been assumed. Of course, if inflation is a method of reducing
real wages or real interest, then indexation of wages and interest is more
likely to be inflationary in the third sense.
     There is no great mystery in this model about how to rtove
this pessible instability. Fiscal pelicy has to be used to
offset the instability associated with money financing of deficits. This can
be ensured either by running a basic budget surplus (easier written than done)
or by varying tax rates in a counter—inflationary direction. The timing of
such adjusbiients of tax rates is not crucial, in that stability may still
obtain even if there is a lag in the respense of tax rates to the deficit.
                                        —15--



      Is it possible that although the price level in such a nodal is unstable,
 the inflation rate is stable? That , might it be the case that disturbances
produce terrqoraiy increases in the inflation rate that ultimately die down,
but are never reversed, with the result that the price level is permanently
higher than it ould have been in the absence of the disturbances? With the
noney growth equation (9), such stability is not attained unless d is negative.
The reason is that (9), as written, implies that during a process in which
the price level is rising, the real deficit increases continually if d is
positive. Since the increased deficit will have to be financed by an increase
in the growth rate of rrcney and through debt, the inflation rate too will be
unstable. If d is negative or even if taxes are adjusted with a lag to close the
deficit, the inflation rate may be stable. Thus the analysis of the stability
of the price level applies also to the stability of the inflation rate around
its average.   Deficit financing provides a destabilizing el-nent as it does
in the analysis atove. The conclusion is once again that sensible fiscal policy
to control nonetaxy policy will stabilize the syst, but that blind adherence
                                             9
to rroney financing of the deficit will not.
     We return now to the dynamics of the effects of disturbances on the
price level. We saw earlier that all forms of indexing increase the impact effect
of disturbances--whether derrend or supply side-on the price level in the period
they occur. The full dynamic effects of disturbances are specified by the   c
9. iii- the nodel used acove, deficit financing through ]xnds is not formally
destabilizing for the price level, because th.e stock of governmentJonds is
not assumed to affect any of the behavioral equations. There are some nodels
in which such a conclusion is appropriate (Barro, 1974) but it is assumed  in
those cases that taxes will at some time be levied to pay off the debt. Less
is known alout the irrpiications for behavior of an ever-increasing stock of
government debt, and I wuld not want to argue that there uld be no effects
on the price level from such a policy.
                                                               —16--




and      in equations (12) and (n). Solving (12) and (13):
(12)' a0 =        [1—c]     >   0
               [(1+e) (a-c+cI)—(1--c) (a+b)]
         a
          1              [1-a-b-d]

                  l—a-b+e                           1       2, 3
         a. —                   O
                  l—a—b--d


(13)'                    <0
              =   -    [ (yc+a+d)        (1+e) -   (a+b)]
          1                  [1-a-b-d]


              — l-a-b+e
                  1—a—b—d       i—1                 i =     2,3



        Careful       examination of (12)' and (13)' suggests that there are no   simple

relationships         between the dynamic pattern of adjustment to disturbances and
the extent of indexation. This is in large part because the signs and
are indeterminate. For bath supply and dand disturbances, it is quite
likely that the price level overshoots its equilibriiin level in the period
after the shock.
     Consider, for example, the expression for which gives the effect of
an increase in             I assume that the rrcdel is stable so d is negative,
and also that (a+b) <               1.     Then Ct1     will be negative if
(15)     (l+e) (a—c-Fd) — (1—c) (aTh) < 0.

There are two sets of terms in (15). The first describes the impact of the
disturbance in period t on the rioney stock in period t and thus in (t+1),
(this is the term (a-c-fd)), as augmented by the need to service the increased
stock of      in (t+l) (hence the (l+e) term). If the irodel is stable, (a-c+d)
              debt

is pssibly negative. The second set of terms involves the fact that the
disturbance that caused the inflation in period t is no longer present
                                            —17—



 in pericd (t+l). For that reason the price level is expected to fall,        and

 the naninal interest rate adjusts downwards, reducing the needed amount of
 debt servicing. Both sets of terms in (15) may be negative, in which case
 there will certainly be overshooting of the price level, and there may be
 overshooting in any event A similar argnt will show why there may be
 overshooting of the price level after a dnand side disturbance, under which
 circtmstances     will be pesitive.

     Although    there are no simple relationships between the      pattern
                                                                 dynamic
of adjusthent to disturbances and the extent of indexation, it should be

noted that all the coefficients in (12)' and (13) include the term
and thus all are larger in absolute value the larger the impact effect of
inflationary shocks on the price level. Thus the basic conclusion that
inde.xation increases the impact   effect   on the price level of an inflationary
shock--that indexing is inflationary in the first sense--carries over also
to the lagged effects of the shocks.
     In later periods the effects of the shock die away geometrically. The
rate of decay is slower the larger is (l-a--b+e)/ (1—a-b-d), the root of the
systn. Since a and b enter the expression as (a+b), bond indexing has no
effect on the rate at which the disturbances decay. Nor does the extent of
wage indexing. The reason is that the effects of
                                                  I+j t+2' etc.
are all anticipated once becomes known. These effects are thus reflected
in the wage and the interest rate even without indexation.
    Figures 1 and 2 show the dynamic effects of supply and dand shocks
on the price level. An inflationary supply shock is shown as increasing the
price level in all         but as noted above there may be overshooting in
this case. If so Figure 2 uld describe the adjustment pattern for a supply
shock too. In Figure   2 an   inflationary d€iand shock is shown increasing
                              -17a-




Price
level




                      indexation




         Figure 1: Dynamic Effects of a Supply Shock.




Price
level




                                          --..---
                       ---..--. ---4---
                                    I
               -- With        indexatiori



        Figure 2: Dynamic .Effects of a Demand Shock.
                                      —18--

the price level in the current pericxl and reducing it in subsequent periods.
Also represented in the figures are the likely effects of
indexation on the magnitude of the price effects.
     The results of this section show that all foims of indexing tend to
be inflationary in the first sense, given the assumed link between the budget
deficit and monetary growth. Prices will increase more in respanse to an
inflationary shock in an indexed than in a noi-indexed econany. The absolute
magnitudes of the lagged effects of the shocks are also larger the greater
the extent of indexing. Fran the viewpoint of the stability of the system,
the key issue is whether total taxes can be increased when the price level
rises. This effect is frequently known as the inflationary fiscal drag.
To the extent that indexing of the tax system tends to reduce the effects
of inflation on total government revenue, a stabilizing element is removed
fran the system and tax indexation may be said to be inflationary in the
third sense.
    What should be made of these results? It does appear that indexing is
inflationary for both supply and demand side disturbances. But is must be
phasized that this result stems mainly f ran an assumption about government
policy, and particularly the money growth or fiscal policy rnle (9). In
this simple nxxel, monetary and/or fiscal policy can be used to offset the
potential inflationary effects--in both the first and third senses--of
indexation.
    Whether indexing is inflationary is thus not a question that can be
answered a priori. The answer depends on the types of policy being followed.
If governments follow the type of monetary/fiscal policy described by (9),
                                               —19—



indexing is inflationary. But         these   pDlicies are a matter of choice arid
not necessity.1°


III. Further Considerations.

       In this section I briefly discuss three issues         suggested by the analysis
of   Section II.
1. The Stabilizing Mechanism,         Adjustment,     and Rational   Expectations.

       The   stabilizing meáhanisrnsthe Section II rrtdel are the real balance
                                       in

effect and the rroney growth rule, in which the feedback parameter d is crucial.
The adjustment mechanism is one in which prices and wages are flexible, and
expectations are rational.         Under   these curcumstances, adjustment to disturbanáes
is extremely rapid.
     The easy control over the price level that is petentially available to
rolicymaers in the Section II rrodel is doubtless unavailable in practice.
But there     is   no reason to think that the basic result—-that indexat ion speeds
up the transmission      of    inflationary disturbances to the price level--uld
be affected by the inclusion of sticky prices, (using a Phillips curve in
which unemp1omient       is   needed to rrove wages) or slow expectations adjustment.
2. Mutual Causation.
       The   previous section analyzed the effects of indexation on inflation or
the price level for a given rronetary/fiscal pelicy and set of disturbances.
But there is also a reverse link, fran inflation to indexation.               If   an
inflationary process becomes established, the private sector will begin to
use indexation as a means of reducing the costs the inflation irnpeses on them.
And typically, if the inflation rate is high enough, the government will

10. The link between budget deficits arid money growth represented in
equation (9) certainly does not hold for all countries (D3rnbusch and
Fischer, 1981).
                                             —20—



 eventually    do likewise. This reverse link is a potential problem in
 empiricl rk, but it i not relevant to the question considered in Section II,
 which is whether the presence of indexation, for whatever reason it was
 introduced, is inflationary.
 3. inarnic Inconsistency.
       It has been argued that introducing indexation uld be a "confession
 of failure"     in the battle against inflation, a uld aiso weaken the will
 to fight inflation. The confession of failure argimient, which may have been
plausible in the fifties is no longer attractive: there is no need for a
confession when the murderer is caught red-handed at the scene of the crime.
       However, the argument that indexation ould weaken the will to fight
 inflation is not absurd. It is related to the       problem of dynamic
                                               12
 noDnsistency    in optimal control problems.       The problem arises when a plan
that is optimal from the viewpaint of a given date is no longer optimal at a
later date, even if no nq information has arrived in the meantime. The
nost   impz)rtant case in which the problem can arise is in the short-run inflation-
output tradeoff. Because getting rid of inflation is a slow process in which
the costs are paid early, and success comes late if at all, the temptation
in   any short run situation is to avoid contracting output even if that is
necessary to reduce inflation. The plan u1d be to keep output constant row
and start the battle against inflation later, But of course when later
                                                                              comes,
it is again not optimal in the short run to try to reduce inflation at the
cost of unemployment.

11. Resort of the Caunittee on the Working of the Monetary System (Radcliffe
Caimittee), London,    HMSO,   Q'nnd 827, 1959, paragraph 573.
12. See Kydland and Prescott       (1977); Fischer (1980) contains a simple
expDsjtion.
                                           —21--


        tinder such circumstances, the government will have a tendency to choose
 inflationary policies even though it recognizes that from the vipoint of the
 long run, it has at soma tirr to confront the inflation issue. One way of
 avoiding the inconsistency is by structuring the environment so that the
 easy option is renoved.
      In this vi, rot indexing the econoir is one way of making the inflation
 option less attractive. The political will to fight inflation will be
 stronger when inflation matters irore.
        Interesting as this approach to policy-making is, in the context of
 indexation it raises the question of whether inflation is to be treated as an
 evil independent of its costs. Indexing may lower the costs of inflation
 even   if it results in a higher inflation rate.

        Wnatever   the welfare economics of this type of argument, there is an
 underlying political plausibility to the viei that indexation is inflationary
 because it makes it easier to adopt inflationary policies. The emphasis
on   policy choice reinforces the message that there is no inevitable
• thretical link between indexing and inflation. Evidence on the cross-
country association between indexing and inflation is examined in Section IV.

IV. Eirical Evidence.
        The irodel of Section II suggested that indexation uld increase the
inflationary irract of adverse supply side disturbances, especially given
policy that links honey growth to the budget deficit. It was also emphasized
that policies, can be adopted that ould avoid this association. This section
presents evidence on the relationship beten indexat.ion and the change in
the average inflation rate experienced after the oil shock of 1973, for. a
cross-section of forty countries. I interpret the evidence as bearing on
the impact effect of an inflationary shock.
                                             —22—



       Table   1 lists durrriy variables representing different aspects of
indexation for the forty countries, as of .1974. The dunrny takes the value
one if there was indexation in that aspect of the econoj in 1974 and zero
otherwise. There was no attempt to quantify the extent of indexation: any
pesitive evidence of indexation in a particular area resulted in a drrny
equal to one for that variable. For instance, if tax brackets were indexed,
the tax durmiy is one, even if capital income taxation remained on a nominal
basis.
       The table lists sources. Data on indexation of social security is
probably the nost reliable, and that on wages least reliable; it w3uld not
be surprising to discover that wage indexation occurs in all countries.13
There are separate durrmies for bond indexation, present only in Argentina,
Brazil, France, and Israel, and for indexation of any capital market trans-
actions (excluding rents), present in an additional five countries;
       For each country, the ratio of the average inflation rate 1974-1978
to the   average inflation rate 1969-1973 was calculated. The log        of that ratio,
called LPIR,was    then   used   as the dependent variable in a   regression in which
the   right hand side variables were the duranies shown    in Table 1. The basic

regression     results are presented in (P1) and (P2) in Table 3.
      What   should we expect to find? The analysis of Section II suggested
unambiguously that all forrr of indexing increase the impact effect on the
price level of an inflationary shock. Subsequent price level reactions were
less clearly affected by indexation, and if there was overshooting, indexation
could even stabilize the respanse to a supply shock. What should be seen in
the regressions is primarily the impact effect, which is certainly likely to

13. Cattnents that will improve the accuracy of the table are solicited
and will be much appreciated.
                                              —23--


be   spread out aver several years, of the oil shock. We expect therefore

an inflationary    effect   of indexing,   unless pelicies    that avoid this link

were chosen.
      The regressions are     set   up to avoid the reverse causation probln.

 Simultaneity   is roved by making the dependent variable the ratio of the
inflation rate pre and pest the       oil shock,      and having   different aspects of

indexation    at the time of the shock as the independent variables.
      The results presented in Table 3 show that no form of indexation, other
than that on bends, significantly affected canparative inflation performance
after the oil shock)4 The main implication is that the                       respenses
to the oil shock were probably largely independent of whether there was
indexation in place in 1974.
      In the case of bend indexation, the regression tells us basically that
Argentina, Brazil, France and Israel on average had worse relative inflationary
experience in the face of the oil shock than did other countries. It does
appear, since the relative Argentinian inflation rate is a spectacular
outlier, that the result may be attributed to Argentina. However, as (R3)
shows, the other countries do contribute to the significant effect of bend
indexation.
      The results shown in Table 3 provide little suppert for the implications
of the model discussed in Section II. There is nothing in that riodel that
1x)nts particularly to bend indexation as the primary link between iriclexation
and inflation. Indexation of        social   security should have a similar effect.
The question thus   arises   of what the link between bend indexation and the

14. Other regressions run but not reperted included all possible subsets
of the di.nmty variables as independent variables.In no case did the
coefficient on any variable other than that for bond or capital market
indexation approach significance.
                                              —24—



 inflationary process is in the four countries)5 rxrnbusch and Fischer (1981)
 find a significant association betLwcen budget deficits and money growth in
 Israel,   and   Aghevli   and Khan (1978) have found   such   a link   for   Brazil,

rejx)rtng    also on similar findings for Argentina. Whether indexed bonds
play any special role in the association between the budget deficit and
inflation will have to be the subject of future research.


V. Concluding Ccinrnents.
     The theoretical developnent of Section II implied that indexation does
ut potential destabilizing mechanisms in place that will worsen the impact
of an inflationary shock, given monetary and fiscal policies that link money
grcwth   to the budget deficit. But it       was also emphasized that the link
between inflation and indexing is not inevitable, and tht appropriate policies
can prevent the inflationary shock-cinr-indexing effect on the budget deficit
that is responsible for the result.
     The empirical evidence is that countries with bond indexation were
more seriously affected by the oil shock than other countries. For three
of the four countries with bond indexing, there is also evidence of the link
between budget deficits and money growth, which is the central mechanism
of Section II. Whether and why bond indexing might play a special role
in this regard is a subject for further research.

15. Bond indexation in France has been on a small scale and France does
not really   belong in this    group   of four. But it did not seem desirable
to adjust the data shown in Table 1 to reflect riry inccmplete knowledge
of the extent of indexing in acme countries while not making adjustments
for others. I have instead relied entirely on the published data.
                                       Table 1


                                  Indexation DurrTaics

Country       Wages       Taxes          Social          Investhent        Governrrent
                                        Security              V              V
                                                                                 Bonds
                           V




Argentina       0           1               1                1                     1
Australia       0           0               0                 0                    0

Austria         1           1               1                 o
                1           O               1                 0                    0
Belgium
Bolivia         0           0               1                 0                    0

Brazil          1          1                1                 1                    1

Canada          1          1                1                 0                    0

Chile           0           1              1                  0                    0

W1uthia         0           1               1                 1                    0
Denmark         1           1               1                 1                    0
Ecuador         0           0               1                 0                    0

Egypt           0           0               0                 0                    0

Finland         1           0               1                 1                    0

France          1           1               1                 1                    1
Germany, FR     0           0               1                 0       VV
                                                                                   0
Greece          0           0               0                 0                    0
Iceland         1          1                0                 1                    1
India           0           0               0                 0                    0

Indonesia       0     V
                            0               0                 0                    0

Ireland         1           0               1                 0                    0

Israel          1           1               1      :          1                    1
Italy           1           0               1               .0                     0

Japan           0           0               1                 0                    0
SouthKorea      0           0               0                 0                    0

Mexco           0           0               0                 0                    0

Netherlands     1           1               1                 0                    0
New Zealand     0           0               1                 0                    0
Norway          1           0               1                 0                    0
Philippines     0           0               0                 0                    0
Portugal        0           0               1                 0                    0
SouthAfrica     0           0              0                  0                    0

Spain           0           0               1                 0                    0
Sweden          0           1               1                 1                    0
Switzerland     1           1               1                 0                    0
Country            Wages          Taxes           Social           Investment            Covernment
           ___________________________           Security                                   Bonds
Thailand             0               0              0                    0                    0
Thrkey               0               0              0                    0                    0
United Kingdom       1               0              1                    1                    0
USA                  1               0             1                     0                   0
Uruguay             0                0             1                     0                   0
Venezuala           0                0                                   0                   0

Sources:       Braun, Anne Romanis (1976), "Indexation of Wages and Salaries in Developed
                    Economies," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 23 (1),
                     (March), pp. 226—271.

              ConTnittee on Fiscal Affairs of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
                  and Develoinent, (1976), The Adjustment of Personal Income Tax Systens
                    for Inflation, Paris.

              _______________ (1975), Indexation of Financial Assets, Paris.

              Giersch, Herbert (1975), "Index Clauses and the Fight Against Inflation,"
                    in Essays on Inflation and Indexation, American fliterprise Institute.

              Page, S.A. B. and Sandra Trollope (1974), "An International Survey of
                    Indexing and Its Effects," National Institute of Economic Review,
                    70, (Novber), pp. 46-60.


              Tanzi, Vito (1980), Inflation and     the   Personal Income Tax, (Cambridge
                    University Press: Cambridge).



              U.S. Department   of   Health, Education, and   Welfare   (1975), Social   Security
                    Programs   Throughout   the Wr1d, (G. P.O. Washington).
                                  Table 2
                          Ciarativc Inflation Pates
 Country         1969—73               1974—78        Ratio

Argentina         0.368                 2.135          5.802
Australia         0.080                 0.116         1.450
Austria           0.065                 0.057         0.877
Belgium           0.066                 0.075         1.136
livia            0.197                  0.100         0.508
Brazil           0.198                  0.410         2.071
Canada           0.059                  0.089         1.508
Chile            1.391                  1.213         0.872
Columbia         0.145                  0.236         1.628
Denmark          0.086                  0.099         1.151
Ecuador          0.114                  0.122         1.070
Egypt            0.048                  0.108         2.250
Finland          0.087                  0.119         1.368
France           0.077                  0.101         1.312
Germany, FR      0.056                  0.041         0.732
Greece           0.101                  0.141         1.396
Iceland          0.183                  0.395         2.158
India            0.114                  0.029         0.254
Indonesia        0.181                  0.158         0.873
Ireland          0.108                  0.146         1.352
Israel           0.176                  0.460         2.614
Italy            0.089                  0.155         1.742
Japan            0.106                  0.073         0.689
South Korea      0.135                  0.166         1.230
Mexico           0.100                  0.190         1.900
Netherlands      0.073                  0.068         0.932
Ne   Zealand     0.086                  0.143         1.663
NDrway           0.082                 0.085          1.037
Philippines      0.170                 0.096          0.565
Ftrtuga1         0.132                 0.213          1.614
South   Africa   0.075                 0.118          1.573
Spain            0.098                 0.183          1.867
                                         Table 2 (contixiuel)




 Countxy                    1969-73                 1974-78     Ratio


 Sweden                      0.074                   0.097      1.311
Switzerland                  0.070                   0.029      0.414
Thailand                     0.086                   0.069      0.802
Turkey                       0.130                   0.326      2.508
United Kingdom               0.096                   0.155      1.615
USA                          0.061                   O.08&      1.311
Uruguay                      0.548                   0.598      1.091
Venezula                     0.042                   0.090      2.143




Source:    International Financial Statistics   Yearbcxk.
                 •              Table 3:     Regression Results.
Igression            Dependent                             Independent
                     Variable                             Variables
                      I2IR                 DUMWPCE      DUMTZX        DtJMSS
   P1                                      — .055       —.106         —.092         .632    .093
                                           (.203)        (.233)          (.206)   (.241)
   R2                                      —.087        —.146             .035      .909    .140
                                           (.199)        (.227)          (.204)   (.301)
                                                                                  DUMBOND
   P3                                       .064        —.162         —.054         .633    .028
                                           (.207)        (.219)          (.202)   (.323)
   Notes: 1.   Standard errors in parentheses.
          2.   See Table 1 for variable definitions
          3.   P3 excludes Argentina fran the sample.
                                              pIrKX

1.      Let uppir      case letters denote levels o variables arid   letters   without
subscripts the pDints around which the equation is linearized.             Then the

wage     is given by:

         W                                    U
(A].)
                   W
                           ÷(1)t_lPt1     +
             t                        t       t
so   that          =              +               .+ Ut

Setting W =          1 = P,   we obtain (1) in the text.
        The aggregate supply equation is
                              p
                            +vt
                            t
Linearization          gives

                 Yt-Y                             +vt

This implies (2) in th text,

        Finally,       the rrüney demand equation is
(A3) Mt =         Pt. + z
so       -   M   =      + py - 2PY +

With    Y = 1 we obtain               in the text.
2. The       government budget nstraint is
(7) Mt - Mti           +          - Dti   PtGt +    itDti - Tt
Now assurre that a fraction ? of the budget deficit is financed by noney

printing         and (1-A) through the issue of debt.
                                                   —2--




(A4)          -          = X [PEG + itDti —
                                            T.PtYtI

        In (A4) we have assumed the level of government spending is fixed, and
that taxes are propertional to nominal incxme (no tax lag is included). Now
linearizing (Al) around assumed stationary values of the interest rate, the
debt, the price level and real outpit, denoted 1, D, P and Y respectively, we
have
(A5)    Mt -      Mt_i
                         = X
                               [PG + iDti + itD
                                                   -   iD     —   T       +      -
Using   equation (8) of         the text:




                                    t
(A6)    Mt -      Mti =    X   {Pt(G.TY) + Er +           -           +   (l-)          — t—l1 D

                                -       -   iD + wz} +    A



        B.uation         (9) in the text    is based on       (A6), which.    implies

 (A7) a =     AD
        b = A(l—)D
        c = - XTP

        d =   A   (G-ty)
         = Xi
                                  BIBLI(XPHY


Aghovli,    Bijan,
              -
                      and Mohsin   I<han (1978), "Government   Deficits and the Inflationary
                     Process in Developing Countries", IMF Staff      Papers, 25, 383—415.
Barro, Robert J. (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?", Journal of Political
               Econcnrj, 82, 6, (December), 1095—1117.

________ (1976), "Rational Epectations and           the   Pole of Monetary Policy",
                     Journal   of Monetary ECOnOmiCS, 2, 1,    (January), 1—32.

Friedman,    Milton (1974),       "Monetary Correction", in   H. Giersch et. al.,
                  Essays on       Inflation and Indexation,   American Enterprise
                     Institute.
Blanchard, Olivier (1978), "Wage Indexing Rules and the Behavior of the             Econary",
               Journal of Political Economy, 87, 4, (August), 798-815.

D3rnbusch, Rudiger and Stanley Fischer     (1981), "Budget Deficits and Inflation",
                   forthcoming in Developnent in an Inflationary World, M.J. Flanders
                   and A. Razin (eds), Academic Press.

Fischer,   Stanley (1977), "Wage Indexation and Macro—Economic Stability", in
                 Stabilization of the Dernestic and International Economy, Carnegie-
                 Rochester Conference Series, Volume 5, K. Brunner and A. Meltzer
                 (eds), North-Holland.

                  (1980), "Dynamic Inconsistency, Co-Operation, and the Benevolent
                    Dissembling Government", Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
                    2, 1, (February), 93—107.
Gray, Jo Anna (1976), "Wage Indexation: a Macroeconomic Approach", Journal of
               Monetary Economics, 2, 2 (April), 221—236.
Kydland,   Finn E. and Edward  C. Prescott (1977), "Rules Rather than Discretion:
                   The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans", Journal of Political Economy,
                   86, 3 (June), 473—492.
