NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION AND CAPITAL MARKErTS

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper No. 678

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

May 1981

The research reported here is rart of the NBER's research program
in

Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions

expressed

are those of the author and not those of the National

Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #678
May 1981

Information and Capital Markets

ABSTRACT

This paper provides the foundations of a general theory of information
and the capital market.
We show that in a pure gambling market, even with asymmetric information,

there cannot exist an equilibrium with trade with rational individuals.
We argue that although a pure exchange stock market is not a pure gambling
market, most of the trade on the stock market arises from irrationality
on the part of some investors and the rational
response on the part of
other investors to take advantage of that
We show that

dissemination

irrationality.

the private returns to information acquisition and

differ markedly from social returns and

as

a result the

market equilibrium is not a (constrained) Pareto optimum. Moreover, we
show how firms' actions, e.g. the fraction of shares retained by the

original entrepreneurs, the debt equity ratio, and

may

convey information about firm

characteristics.

the

level of investment,

This in turn affects

the behavior of firms. As a result,

the original owners of firms will be
incompletely diversified, firms will not take actions which maximize
their stock market value, and, in particular, they may behave in a risk
averse maimer, paying attention to own risk (which traditional theory

suggests that the only risk firms should care about is the correlation
with the market).
Professor

Joseph E. Stiglitz
Department of Economics
Dickinson Hall

Princeton University
Princeton, N.J. 08544
(609) 452—4014

INFORMATION AND CAPITAl, MARICTS*

by
I. Introduction

Joseph

E. Stiglitz

Is the stock market just a gambling casino? Are too many
resources being spent on obtaining information by individuals who

are attempting to beat the market? Is it in fact possible to beat
the market?

The answer to these questions is important for an evaluation

of the role of the stock market in our economy. In neoclassical
economic theory, the stock market provides a crucial link between

consumers and producers. In theory, the stock market is supposed
to provide the signals for firms to make the correbt investment

decisions. If, at the extreme, individuals had no "information"
about the relative probabilities of different events and the relative
merits of different investment opportunities, prices would simply
be random, and the stock market would be unable to perform its role
in allocating investment.

There are two contrasting views of information in the stock

market: one that if the market worked well, so prices reflected
values, there would be no incentive to obtain information and
therefore, there cannot exist an i.nformed market equilibrium. Even
if prices did not reflect true values,to the extent that insiders'

gains are at the expense of outsiders, rational outsiders will

*This is a revised version of Part II of a paper presented at
the New Orleans meetings of the Econometric Society, December, 1971.
Since that time, the literature on the subjects discussed here has
grown enormously. I have not attempted to reference all of these more recent contributionS.. I an indebted to N. Rothschild, C. von Weizsacker, R.
Lindsey, V. Krishna, S. Salop, A. Dixitearid A. Weiss for extremely helpful

discussions. Forthcoming in Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of
Paul H. Cootner, edited by Cathryn Cootner and William F. Sharpe,
Prentice-Hall. My interest in the questions discussed here was greatly
stimulated by Paul Cootner, both directly and through his writings.
His influence on my thinking, and my indebtedness to him, should
be apparent.

2.

refuse to "play"; and if that happens, the insiders have no one
from whom they can make money.

In contrast, Hirschleifer has argued that in a pure exchange
market, there are strong incentives for information acquisition;
for any individual who finds out information about which state of
nature is about to occur, e.g. which securities are going to rise
in price and which are going to fall, will be able to make a profit
out of the capital gain.
A simple example along the lines of that employed •by Hirschleifer

might be instructive. Let there be two factories. If state 1
occurs factory 1 has an output of Q, factory 2 an output of -IQ;

if

state 2 occurs, factory 1 has an output of Q, factory 2 an

outputThf 0. Initially, with individuals assuming the two states
equally probable if they choose a portfolio to maximize their expected
utility then the relative price of the two factories will be unity.
If an individual knows that state 1 will occur, he will demand
shares of factory 1 and sell short shares of factory 2 so long as

the relative price of factory 1 shares is less than 2. When it
then becomes publicly known that state 1 will occur, the price
of the shares of firm 1 will rise, those of firm 2 will fall,
and the informed speculator will thus make a large profit.
Indeed, Hirschleifer argues that because the gains from
information acquisition are purely redistributive, any information

acquisition has no social value: some gain at the expense of others.
These two hypotheses appear to be in direct contradiction of one

another: the one suggesting that even when there is a social return to in
vesting in information,. there may be no investment in information, the othe

3.

suggesting that even when there is no social return to investing in infor-

mation, there will be some investment. We argue that both positions are
wrong--the latter because it implicitly assumes irrationality and/or
noncompetitive behavior, the former because it fails to recognize
the role of the seller of securities in providing information,
because it fails to take account of the presence of "noise" which
results in prices imperfectly conveying information from the
informed to the uninformed,1 and because it fails to note that, even

with free entry into the "information" industry, equilibrium may be
characterized by partial monopolies, in which particular individuals
may have a monopoly of particular pieces of inforrnation

2

Both views suffer from failure to identify fully the nature of
the social and private gains to information.

It-is clear that central to an understanding of the functioning
of capital market is an analysis of

(a) the incentives, within a market economy,for individuals
to acquire information;

(b) the extent to which market prices reflect the information
of informed individuals; and

(c) the role that market prices play in determining the
behavior of managers of firms.

We argue that within a competitive economy there are only
limited incentives to acquire information which is of general value;

1This aspect of the argument is developed more fully in
subsequent work by Grossman and Stiglitz (1976, l98) and
Grossman (1977).

2This aspect of the argument is developed briefly in
Stiglitz (197 5a)

indeed, j....one

ntrakut1imiting,,,.g,se. of a pure exchange econo

the only equilibrium entails zero expenditure

Qu_information (and no trade). In more general cases, where
individuals differ, there will be some incentives for acquiring

information, but, Jaormation is costly, market prices reflect
t,,,.jn.p.rmatiori of the informed individuals only_imperfect,
do not
Tite fact that market prices/reflect the true value of firms has

two important consequences:

Owner-managers who know that their firms are undervalued will

diversify imperfectly. Firms which they control will behave in a
risk averse manner, even though their output (profits) have a zero
correlation with the market, and even though the market values

-

them ma risk neutral manner. Firms do not, we
argue, pursue a
marketvalue maximizing policy but are npt, at the same time,
subjected to the threat of take-over.

Secondly, good firms may attempt to convey to the market information

about their quality. Since direct statements (such as that their
prospects of returns are very good) have only limited credibility,

indirect screening devices may be employed. Since owner-managers
of good firms will be more willing to retain a larger proportion
of their own firms than are owner-managers of poor firing, the

fraction of shares owned by insiders ij serve as an effective
screening deviceJ In order to do this, however, owner-managers
of good firms have to retain a larger fraction of their own shares
kin the more recent literature on imperfect information, this
is sometimes referred to as an example of a self-selection device;
and the fraction of shares owned is said to serve as a signal.
See Stiglitz (1982), Spence(1973) and Salop and Salop (1976).

5.
than they otherwise would, so that even in situations
where the
market prices do accurately reflect the returns, the firm acts in

a risk averse manner. There are other situations; however, where
the only equilibrium is one in which the market does not differentiate
between ttgood and "bad" firms in order for the fraction of shares
retained by the owner-manager not to convey information about
quality, the poor quality firms have to imitate the good firms, i.e.
they too have to retain significant fractions of their shares.
Other policies, such as the debt-equity ratio and dividend
policy may also serve as screening devices.

We do not pursue the

implications of our analysis for these other important aspects of

financial policy here.1

n..

II.

Can There Be an Informed Securities Market?
In this section, we consider in somewhat more detail the

paradox discussed in the introduction; alternative

resolutions of

the paradox are presented, of which only one will be pursued in
subsequent sections of the paper.
We limit Ourselves to a

pure exchange economy. Individuals are

endowed with ownership claims on different "factories." The output
of the factories is distributed at the end of the period to different
individuals in proportion to their ownership claims at the time.
1See, for instance, Leland and Pyle (1977), Ross (1977),
Stiglitz
(198Z and Stiglitz and Weiss (1980, 1981)

6.

Between the beginning of the period and the end of the period there
are, say, T trading periods, during which individuals can trade
their ownership claims with one another.

There is little loss of

generality in assuming only two trading periods and it simplifies

the discussion considerably. In.the intervals between the beginning
of the period and the trading points, individuals can expend resources
to acquire information about the output of the different factories,
or about the probabilities of different states of nature.
We assume everyone has the same tastes and the same initial
endowments (i.e. their ownership shares in the different firms are

identical). Assume that the output in the different states of
nature of each of the firms is knowJ but the relative prObabilities
of the.different states are unknown. Assume, again for simplicity,
that there are only two states of nature.

Initially, all individuals

assume the two states equally likely. Consider the following possible
scenarios:

(1) No one does research. Then at the first trading date, the
relative price of the different factories will reflect the individual's
priors that the two states of nature are equally likely. Since all
individuals have the same priors, the same tastes, and the same

endowments, no trade will actually take place. The prices established
on the market at the two trading dates are identical.
(

2)

One person does research. Could the situation described above

be an equilibrium? Hirschleifer argues that it is not. For an

1lndeed conventionally, we define a state of nature as a
complete specification of all the outcomes of the different firms.

7.

individual can come along, invest some resources In obtaining information about which state of nature will occur. Assume he obtains the
information before the first trading point. He then knows that the
market value of some firms is too high, some too low. He sells

short the overpriced firms and buys the underpriced firms with the

proceeds. In the interval between the first and second trading
period he makes the information public; this raises the price of
the underpriced firms and lowers that of the overpriced firms,

enabling our investor-in_information to make a capital gain on both
parts of the transaction and to pay for the cost of research.
Thus, the expenditure on information turns out to be profitable.
Since the amount available for consurttion is unchanged by the
expenditure on information, Hirschleifer has termed this expenditure

on information socially wasteful. One

person

is made better off,

at the expense of others who are worse off, and because it requires

resources to obtain information the gains of the former are smaller
than the losses to the latter.

There are three objections to this argument:

The uninformed individuals in this argument are particularly
naive. At the minimum, they should discover that, were they to have
a)

held on to their original portfolios, they would have done b!tter
than

to have engaged in speculative activity.

They should have, in

other words, pursued what I call later, a non-speculative strategy.
Their expected utility from pursuing such a strategy is higher

8.

than that from pursuing the naive

policy assumed by hirschleifer__

and it is equally unsophisticated.

b) It might be argued, on the other hand, that the
uninformed
individuals are more sophisticated

than suggested just now; that

they observe that the market price

Conveys information__when the
price of a security for a particular state is bid up, it is because

the informed know that the state is going to occur. In
this
particular case, the implication of this is that again there will
be no trade, but whereas in
the previous case, they refused to trade,
here they have a demand function for securities, but the
only market
clearing price entails no trade.

c) Finally, there is no reason to believe that only one
individual will do research. Indeed, consider what happens if

-

only
two individuals do research, and they both come up with the
same
result about which state of nature is to occur before the first

trading period. Assume that they behave

competitively (rather than
collusively). Then they will bid against each other and drive
up
the price of the securities which otherwise would have been undervalued, and drive down the price of the securities which otherwise
would have been overvalued.. Thus, when the next trading period
occurs, the prices will be the same as they were at the first
trading point, and neither individual makes any gains (or losses);
but they are both worse off than those who did no research, since

they have invested in resources to obtain information.
Thus, Hirschleifer's argument for excessive expenditure on
information implicitly requires both irrationality on the part of
the uninformed and a monopoly on the part of the informed. It is

9.

hardly a model of a rational competitive securities rnarket)
This leaves open the question of the possibility of a rational,

competitive, informed securities market. We shall argue that
(i) A rational pure exchange market with trades cannot exist if
individuals have identical endowments, tastes, and information.

(ii) Moreover,

if the level of information is endogenous,

a rational, jformed market cannot exist.

XIX. Pure Gambling Markets
There are two central properties of what we shall refer to as

aure gambling markets. (i) The gains of one individual are completely
at the expense of some other individual, i.e. it is a pure exchange

market and (ii) the outcomes (events on which the bet is placed)
are uncorrelated with all participantsother sources of income.
The latter condition is what distinguishes qambljg markets from

inaarance markets. The reason that trade (gambling) occurs is that
individuals have different opinions about the probability distribution

of the outcomes. The prototype of a pure gambling market is a horse

race. One of the questions to which we shall turn later is whether
the stock market ought to be viewed as a pure gambling market.
There is a widespread view that rational individuals who are

risk averse should not (or would not) gamble. This, it is believed,
would be true even if individuals could acquire information about

11t is not an answer to this to suggest that it is unlikely that
two individuals will come up with exactly the same information at
exactly the same moment. For if one individual comes up always
first, then he is in effect a monopolist in information and the
market is not competitive; if different individuals
up with the
information first in different periods, then the individual is a
temporary monopolist- -the market is still not competitive in the
conventional sense. In either case, for Hirschleifer to be correct
requires that the uninformed also be irrational, in the sense to
be defined below.

10.

the various events. The fact that some information about the
relative merits of different horses can be acquired does not make

it any more rational to gamble on horses. Equilibrium in a pure
gambling market with rational risk averse individuals thus entails

no trades (no gambling) and no information. These contentions, if
true, clearly have profound implications for understanding the

nature of the stock market, j the stock market can be described
as a pure gambling market.

In this section, we examine the nature of equilibrium in pure

gambling markets with rational, risk averse, individuals. Critical

to the analysis is an understanding of the concept of tionality.
The central question is, what is

reasonable for the individual

to know? What does he observe, and how does he make inferences on
the basis of these observations?
Our concern here is with repeated markets, like horse races.

The reason that there is a widespread presumption that betting on
horse races is irrational is that there is enough experience with

gambling in such markets that rational "individuals should have
learned that they can't win." (This is not a completely persuasive

argument, because some individuals do win, and it is this observation

which keeps others in the market.) The
intuitive belief

that gambling is irrational is, however,

I think, correct. Our objective is to clarify the precise sense
in which this is so.

In the subsequent discussion we shall explore several alternative

notions of rationality. We begin our analysis with a concept we
refer to as weak rationality. We shall say that an individual's

11.

xectatione weakly rational if the expected value of his
aains are equal to his averaga ins.
Note that rationality in this sense is much weaker than that
which usually goes under the rubric "rational expectations" where
it is the expectations on the whole distribution of returns that
conform to ex post realizations.

We now show:

Proposition 1. _jJ individuals have weakly rational expectations.
and are risk averse, there will be no trading in a pure garling
market.

Proof. For simplicity, assume individuals' income apart from the

gamble is given. Let the gamble be defined as, follows: if a particular
even Eeoccurs, the individual receives 1; if it does not occur, he

pays p/l-p. The amount he bets is chosen to

max u(Y+B )11J + u(yJ -

(5.1)

where JI is the jth individual's estimate of the probability; hence
—
-

(3.2,

(1-nJ)

u'(y

1-p

Clearly

(3.3)BJ >0 as 11.

>_LL
C 1-p

The expected gain is
(3.14) 1s[u

-

(l—n)]I.

Thus if betting occurs (1B1> o),
some individuals must have expectations of gains which are not
realized.
g.e.d.

12.

On the other hand, the following converse of Proposition 1
can also be easily established:

Proposition 2: If there are some

individuals

who do not display

rationality, and some who do. then equilibrium in a pure betting:

mcdl entails some_gamj,jg:.

Proof.

()

We established earlier that

BO

as

i-iP<

Let IN be the "true' probability of the event. By assumption,
for some individuals
-

(3.6) ff
while for others

(j.7)

uk

11*.

Hence, for at least two individuals, j and k

(.8) n
Assume there were no trade. Then for all individuals
3.

—

contradicting (38).
In this discussion

-

so far, we have said nothing either about the

consequences of differential information or about the incentives to

acquire information. It seems plausible that in most interesting
situations (including the stock market) individuals have (or can

13.

obtain) information, that different individuals obtain different
information, and these differences are what make

such markets

function. We shall show that even when individuals have different
information, provided they are rational in a particular sense to
be explained below, there will be no trade in a pure gambling market.
First, however, we examine a somewhat different notion of
rationality, in which there will be trades in the.pure gambling
market. We shall say that the market exhibits group

rational1

if the average value of individuals' estimates of the probability

of the states is equal to the true

probability. Assume, for instance,

that individuals are betting on the proportion of red balls in a very

large urn containing red and black balls. Each individual is
allowé3 to draw 100 balls from the urn. The proportion of red
balls in their sample provides an unbiased statistic on the proportion
of red balls in the urn. Thus the verage value of individuals'
estimates of the probability of red balls is equal to the true

probability. If individuals bet on the basis of their estimate,
and if the distribution of estimates is symmetric we can show
Proposition 3:

The market odds provide an estimate of

j2.ch are biased towards .

for

the

probabilities

events with probability near .5

gr for concentrated distributio. More generally, market odds
will not equal
the true probability, even with a large
population.
Proof:
Let

11*

denote the true probability. Consider the demand

and supply of bets of individuals who over and underestimate it by

an amount x. By the assumption of a symmetric distribution, the

"number of such individuals is the same. Assume p =
first the case of 11* =

1/2.

11*

Consider

.

It is clear that E(-x) =

-8(x)

where 8(x) is the demand for bets of a person whose estimate of II

is 1/2 x. For if

jY+B)(k+x)

(3.iOa)

= 1

=

i_p

then

-

L!LLY-B)(t-xj. —

U'(Y+B)(.+x)

i-p

We now show that if 11* > ,

(Y+B)(p+x)

(3.u) din

/

U'(Y-(1-p-x)
-,

8(x)

< -B(-x), x > 0

U'(Y-B)[p-x)

/ d

=

2j2p-1)
_______
2-

Ut(Y+)(i_p+x)

x2)((1

2 2
-p)-x)

e
+

B
I

(1-p)
At 11* =

_________

u'(y-—)
1—p

i-p

+

i.

ut(y+EQ._)

1-p

this is negative for all B > 0 .

sufficiently near -,

c

UI(Y_2)(1_p_x)

at

i-p

p = 11*, when

Hence for 11*
U'(Y-B)(p-x)

U'(Y+)(1-p+x)
i—p

hence 8(x) < -B(--x). Thus, for

JB(x)dXQ,p <11*

Simiiarly,

for x = 0, B = 0; hence the R.H.Sof (3.11) also equals zero.

Taking the derivative with respect to x, we obtain at x = 0 (since
.d8

ai—

=

= i/2nç1—rr)A(y)

where A ='tU!/U')

15.

2(2p-l)

-

p (1-p)

for 0< p 1 ,

i——--- < 0 ,
p(i-p)3

so again B(x) C -B(-x).
For II*_..j

large and x large, the market odds may provide

either an under or overestirliatej

Of course, in any market in which the market odds differ from
the true probability there is an incentive to obtain accurate
information concerning the true probability, provided such information
is not too expensive.

Still, in the situation just described, with the market displaying

aransionalitv, it seems foolish for individuals not to realize
that others are betting on the basis of their sample information;
their iétting behavior ought to convey information, and the rational
individual ought to take this into account in forming his
expectations.

We shall say that an individual is rational if the expected
return, conditional on whatever is observable to the individual,

is equal to the average realized return on an (arbitrarily) large

number of repetitions of the gamble. This concept differs from our
earlier notion of wsak rationality in that we require the individual
to form his expectations conditional on whatever is observable;

1Iet u'(y) =e
x =

, if

p/a - p) =

.

Let

II

=

3/Il., x =

1/8. Then for

3, from (3.2),

(exp.-). 7=3 or B=lnwhile for x =

Hence p > 3. .

1/8,

expfEi- .=3 or Is!

=

in

C

in I

16.

but like the concept of weak rationality, it entails a far less
stringent notion of rationality than that associated with conventional
rational expectations, since it requires only that the mean of the
distribution coincide with the mean of the true distribution.

Because,

in general, different individuals may observe different signals,
they will have different information and therefore different beliefs.
One might have thought that therefore, in this situation, there

could be trade on a gambling market. We shall now show that this
is not the case.
Proposition 1..

If all indj.iduals have rational expectations.

there can be no trade in a pure gambling market.

Proof. For simplicity, let us assume that we have two groups in
the population, one of which only observes the market odds of the
gamble-, the other of which observes something else, which is correlated

with the event on which the gamble is being made. The former
group we shall refer to as the uninformed, the latter as the

informed. Since the uninformed observe only the market odds, if
they trade it must be the case that (using (3.2))

E(ff'ip) p
where the superscript u indicates that it is the uninformed
individuals' expectations.

The informed individuals form their expectations on some signal
£2

,

and possibly on p too. Clearly, their expected utility, if they

ignore the information £2, must be less than or equal to their

expected utility if they do not ignore their information

17.

max E(U'IQ,p) > wax
E(U'Ip)

(B)

(B)

(3.13)

Assume B*(7,p) is the optimum trade function of the informed and
IB*(&,pb>O

for

some

But if, say,

and BU > 0 ,

E(I1'Ip) > p

lear1y

B1 C 0

,

and the expected return to gambling, for that

is negative. Moreover, by hypothesis, both the signal

event

(3.JA)

are unconelated

with

and the

-

the individuals'inccme. Hence, the gamble

represents a mean reducing increase in the spread of the distribution
of income, and hence expected utility is lowered:
E(E(u'I

9,p)jp1(u Ip; .

This contradicts (3.13). Hence
B*(O,p) E

0

The result can easily be generalized to more than two groups.

The basic intuition is simple: gambling cannot increase the mean
income of all.groups; at least one group must have a lower mean

income. At the same time, gambling increases the dispersion of
the distribution of income. Hence, there must be at least one group
for whom expected utility is lowered as a result of gambling. Hence,
there cannot exist a gambling market with all rational individuals.

The argument we have just presented can also be easily generalized to

cases where Y is not constant and endowments are not identical.
The critical property of a pure gambling market is that it

serves

no

17a.

insurance function, i.e., if the bet is about the event S,

EU'JfyJij

—

.

.

all

,

EtJ'1[Y'p's]

3.

j,j

(where -S denote all the states in which S does not occur).
With perfect information, a market on the gamble on S would have
no trade. (The initial resource allocation, relative to the event 5,
is ex ante pareto optimal.) Assume some individuals have information
,

such that
Uh1[ytI2.sfl

-

EfU1'[y'jQ,s)

EfUJ'[yJ12,sfl

( 3. 17)

E(UJT[yJI&2,-sjJ

This asserts that if everybody had the

information, no further trade

will occur.
-

Assume now

only

a subset of individuals have the information.

Our "no gambling market" theorem asserts that there still can be no

trade. For B(p) > 0
EU' fYI 0.51

for

,

fffp,S)

EU'[Yp,t's]
where

the uninformed
>

-II

II(p,S) is the probability of S

occurring conditional on

observing the market odds p
p

can only depend on

Assume

.

p does not depend on

Then B must be independent of
The informed individual will only "sell" bets if

__EU'J[yJISlnLp.s)

< ..a..

(3.19)

EUTJEYJI_s](l_n(p,s))
which, using (3.16) and (3.18 ),

Assume p does depend on
to sell bets

is
.

clearly impossible.

Then

for

the informed to be willing

17b.

—<

EU'J[YJj...S,p,7](1.u(p,sf2))

for

each

,

and the given p .

iy'JfYJIsj2luc&2,s)

EU'3 {yJ

This

J(1_u(12, s))

—s—

,

Since

(3.20)
p is a function of

<

(3.21)

must be true for all £ for. which
(Q) =

p

But for each ,

(3.22)

for

Hence,

EUT1[Y'IS,f2Ju(7,s)c

Taking

which (3.22) is true, (5.17) holds.

r

EUhi[Yij_S,7)J

expectations over all

(l-rr,s)).

for which (3.22) holds, we obtain

EUt.[Yils,p]ucp,s)c1P_EuIiryil_Sp J(1-rr(p,s))
which contradicts (5.18).
The intuition behind this result may be put another way: Any
individual who is uninformed, and
knows that he is uninformed, will

not bet, since he knows that his

opponent will only bet when the odds are in his favor. Asswue that

individual does not know whether he is more or less informed
than his rival, but believes that his rival knows whether he is
the

18.

more or less informed. The rival

will only bet when he is the more

informed and the odds are in his favor. Since the
individual knows
this, he will not be willing to engage in the bet. Thus, the
only
possible case in which betting can occur is when both bettors
do
not know whether they are the more or less informed. it is
as likely
that the individual is the less informed as that he is the

more

informed. But then betting simply represents a mean
preserving spread in their incomes, and if both are risk
averse (no
matter what their utility
functions look like), neither will be
i..2
willing to engage in a bet.
IV. Incentives to Acquire Information in a Pure Exchange
Market

has one important corollary. Since
in a pure
gambling marketjith rational expectations, there will never exist
Proposition )-i-

trades regardless of informational

differences there Wi].]. never
be an incentive to acquire information

If we observe an

exchange market in which there is
trade,
either we can infer that
some participants in the market are not
rational or that the market is
not a pure gambling market Trade
may be desirable if individuars
marginal rates of substitution
across states of nature differ in the absence of trade.
Insurance
markets clearly serve this function. Although some
trading in the
stock market clearly serves this function, it is
-

question.apj.e

whether this provides a

primary motivation for most of the trading

which occurs.
-

In

an exchange market with trade, the question again arises,
whether
there will be an incentive to acquire
information Since there is trade,
there is am argument that by

beccaing bett informed about- the true
probabilities, say of the two alternative states, expected utility
1Recent work by Milgrom and Stokey (1979) has
using AumannTs concept
of common knowledge,(1976)

generalized this reult

2For
the definition and interpretation of a "mean preserving
in a disFrjhijj-jnn
spp Pnfhqrhj1_fjfl.7 (]Q7
spread"

19.

would be increased (for sufficiently small costs of acquiring
information) .

But that argument is not necessarily correct,for it

is possible that if some individuals were informed, then the market
price would convey all the information; but if the market price
conveyed all the information, it would not pay any individual to
pay to become informed.

ggetitive equilibrium with costly information in which prices
aiz_n.flect_the information.
-

A simple example may make this clearerJ
Assume we had an insurance market for rain.

Whether it rains

or not depends on certain factors which can be observed at a cost;
some of the factors are observed, some are not, so that from the-

obser€d factors, one cannot predict precisely whether it will or

will nt rain. Let

'1 represent the information, and let

it

be the estimate of the probability of rain when the information is I
II =

f('l)

For simplicity we assume f' > 0
We assume that everyone who observes the weather observes exactly
the same information (later, we shall consider the case where
different individuals obtain different information)'.
The net demand for "bets" on the weather (insurance for the
event rain) will be a function of the individual's estimate of the

1This kind of example has subsequently been developed at
greater length in a series of papers by Grossman(l977) and

Grossman and Stiglitz (1976, l980a).

20.

probability (and of the "price" of the bet, i.e. the market odds).

Let p represent the price. Then
B =

where

B1(p,Ir)

B is the (per capita) demand by informed individuals.

eco,
An increase in the price lowers the demand
but an increase in the

estimated probability of the event increases the demand.
The uninformed (those who do not observe

'1

).

must base their

betting on a priori information (which we assume is given, and unaltered
throughout the analysis) and on market price (odds); for the
individual knows that if there are

informed individuals, the

markeCodds will reflect their information. If we write
•

to

Bu= Bu(p), with B/p <
represent his demand function, then market clearing requires
B1(p,Tt-)+ Bu(P) = 0

Under our assumptions,for every value 11

there is a unique value

of p
p =p(n)

p' >0

i.e. the uninformed can infer precisely from the market odds the

information of the informed (even though the market odds need not
equal ii).

But then there is no incentive for anyone to obtain

information. /

Note that if no one obtains information, the market odds
will be invariant period to period and cannot reflect any information.
It would pay then.

someone to obtain the information if the

21.

information were not too costly.
Thus, there is no non-stochastic competitive equilibrium to
the exchange model with information which is costly (but not too

cdstly). If the demand functions for bets depend on some other
set of variables which were stochastic, and not observable (and the
values of which were not inferable

indirectly, say, by observing
some other set of markets),then the market price (odds) will depend

on this variable as well, and the uninformed will not be able to
infer precisely the value from the market odds. Thus, in
exchange
markets which are not pure gambling markets there may exist market
equilibrium with trade in which prices do not always perfectly
reflect the information of the informed, although they do on
average.
There is an incentive in this system for the uninformed to
study
the
demand functions of the informed and uninformed,

rather than 1 directly; for by knowing

the demand function

and the market price they can infer the information about , and
this may be a cheaper (or indeed the only) way for the uninformed
to obtain the information which we have assumed is available to the
informed.

V. The Stpck Market as a Gambling Market
The stock market is clearly not a pure gambling market. Yet,

the arguments of the preceding section suggest both that much of
the trading on the securities markets is based on some kind of
irrationality, and that there are only limited incentives to
acquire information about the returns of various securities.

In

-

22.

this section, we attempt to show this.

For simplicity, we assume that all individuals have a constant

wage income, are endowed initially with an equal fraction of the
shares of each of the firms, and are risk averse. Initially,
we
shall assume that they have the same degree of risk aversion. Let
us define a non-speculator as an individual

who purchases (holds)

a representative market share, paying no attention to price; we

define a culator as an individual who attemptà to form
expectations of the returns of various securities and allocates his
portfolio to maximize his expected utility, given those expectations
and market prices.
Individuals may form expectations about all securities or only
-'a.
about a subset of securities.
The expectations of the j.th.individual with respect to the i.th
.

security

are said to be nbiased if (where tildes denote the true
values, carets the estimated values),
1

=

.1'ELI.1k

=

where

is the jth individuals expectations about the mean of
the ith security and
is his expectations of its covariance

with the returns of the kth security.

If individuals have a choice between obtaining unbiased
information at a cost or following the non-speculation strategy,

all individuals

will follow the non-speculation

strategy.

Assume only one individual speculated. Clearly, if all others
are pursuing a non-speculative strategy, he must end up with his
representative market share of each of the firms, and hence his

23.

income pattern is the same, but he has spent resources to obtain

the information, and so is worse off. If several individuals
speculate, and they obtain identical information the argument is the

same. If they obtain different (but on average unbiased) information
on average they must obtain the market return, but sometimes they
do better than the market, sometimes worse. If the "quality of

the information" is uncorrelated with the output of the economy
(so that the individual does not consistently do better than the

market average when the market does poorly, and conversely)
the variance of his income is larger than with the non-speculative
strategy and, as we argued above, his net mean income is lower:
again it does not pay to speculate.

-

The result we have obtained is valid even if
some individuals

have a comparative advantage in obtaining information. If, for
instance, one individual could find out costlessly f or certain
the returns to different securities, others would be unwilling to
trade with him,

tie would simply determine the prices of the

different securities. If two individuals believed that they have
a comparative advantage--and they agreed on the returns (for
certain) of the different securities--again there would be
negative net returns to acguiring information, since in fact they
would end up with exactly the same portfolio that they would have
had had they followed the alternative non-speculation strategy.
The result can also be extended to cases where individuals have
different utility functions.

24..

Assume all individuals evaluate alternative strategies in terms
of the mean and variance of income
which they generate. Assume they have
choice between (a) obtaining unbiased information about individual secur—

ities, (b)followjng thenon-specuiai strategy, or (c) following the
non-speculation strategy with respect to the risky assets, but
obtaining information about the mean and variance of the risky
securities together, at a lower cost than obtaining information

about individual securities. We now show they will follow one of
the latter two strategies.
All

i

individuals

who obtain each period unbiased sure

information would purchase the same bundle of risky securities, i.e.
the market bundle. An individual who purchased only information

about the mean and variance of the market

bundle would, however,

have just as good a knowledge of the "market line"1 as the
individual who knew the returns to individual securities. But he
would have paid less for information, so he would be better off.

11n the terminology of mean variance analysis, the "market
line" is defined by
=

where

and

b(-r)

are the mean and standard deviation of the
income from a portfolio consisting of all the risky securities
on the market, and r is the (safe) rate of interest.
is.,

24a.

Thus, in a mean variance model, individuals would never
acquire information about the properties of individual
securities 1,2
Note that screening information (discussed below in
Section VII), that some,stock is above average, some other
stock below average, does not, in general, affect individual's

beliefs about the return of the market as a whole. Much
of the information provided by stockbrokers appears to be of
this type.

re

1
2

In subsequent work, S. Grossman has formalized and considerably
extended these arguments. Grossman (1977).
This result can be seen as an immediate corollary of
Proposition 4. In a mean variance model, information which
leaves unchanged expectations about the mean and variance
of the market portfolio leaves unchanged individual's portfolio allocations. Thus (3.16) and (3.17) are satisfied.

25.

Vi.

LQo Alternative Explanations of Trade and
Information
Acquisition on the Stock Market

Trades do occur on the stock market, and there is considerable
expendjtute on information about particular securitj•,. How do
we recencile these observations with the results of the preceding

two sections. There are two basic explanations for trading:
not all individuals are rational, in the sense in which we have
defined the term, and individuals' endowments differ so that trade

is desirable, even with identical information (and, perhaps more
to the point, their endowments of assets, including non-traded

assets, change in such a way as to warrant continuous trade in
the stock market): We discuss these alternative explanations in
the next two subsections.

VI.l Irrationality
In this section we shall see that as long as individuals are

finitely lived, and there is a continual stream of new individuals
being born (entering maturity) it may be optimal for there to be

speculation (from the private point of view). The argument
requires not only that a fool be born every moment but that each

of us believes he is not that foolj
An individual entering the market observes a distribution of

returns from speculating. If he assumed he were simply average,
he would not speculate. But if he believes that the reason that

1This corresponds to the observation of most teachers that
more than 1/2 of their students believe that they are in the upper
half of their class.

26.

individuals who have done above average is that they have a comparative

advantage in obtaining information (and are not just "lucky"-alternative hypotheses between which the data may not discriminate)
and he believes that he is one of those individuals, he will
go
ahead and speculate. If there are many such individuals, there will

be a "competitive" market for securities. As some individuals

"win"

their

estimate of their comparative

advantage may actually

increase; as other individuals "lose" their

estimate decreases, and

if they lose long enough they stop being speculators and adopt
the alternative non-speculative
strategy.
The "thinness" of the market will depend then on the flow of
new entrants into the market, the

speed with which individuals revise

theirxpectations and the variance of the returns. If they are
stubbdn, and revise their expectations only slowly (the gambler
whose luck is about to turn), then only if individuals have a long
string of bad luck will they drop out of the market.

IV. .2 Differences in endowments and tastes

Some trading on the stock market is life

cycle trading: young

individuals purchasing securitieth which they will sell when they

are old. But if our earlier analysis is

correct, rational

individuals would simply purchase a mutual fund; there would not
be trading in individual securities.
When entrepreneurs are lucky, and the firms which they have
started do particularly well, they will have a disproportionate share
of their wealth in their own firm. If they are risk
averse, they
will thus wish to trade their own finn for a mutual fund consisting

27.

of the market as a whole. This gives rise

to some trade; but again,

if the analysis of the preceding sections is correct, it cannot

give rise to sustained trading. Once portfolios are "balanced"
so that each individual has a proportionate share in all firms,
there will be no further trading.
Not all assets are tradeable; in particular, markets for
human capital are notoriously imperfect.
huthaxi

capital

To the extent that (a) the

of different individuaj.b yield returns which are ilzperfectly

correlated; and (b) different securities on the market have different correlations with the reFnrns to different

indlviduam' humancapital, if

individuals initially
had identical endowments of securities, there would be an incentive
for them to trade, to obtain portfolios that are appropriately
matched to their human capital.

Moreover, changes in their human

capital will, in general, give rise to changes in the optimal

portfolios. Thus coal miners are likely to sell coal short in their
portfolio.. (assuming the skills of being a coal miner are specific
to the industry).. I suspect this kind of "insurance" or "matching"

function of trading in securities is relatively unimportant. In

any case, if this is the primary motivation, it has

interesting

and important implications for the nature of the incentives for

information acquisition, which we shall discuss in the next section.

27a.

The assumption that individuals evaluate portfolios simply
in terms of their means and variances was critical to the
result that only information about the market portfolio had

value. (Information about the mean and variance of the market
portfolio has social value, when individuals' attitudes
towards risk differ, since it allows a more efficient distribution of the burden of risk; formally, for such infomration,

assumption (3.16) is not valid.) When individuals' attitudes
towards risk are not described by means and variances (or by
one of the other utility functions for which a generalized
mutual fund theorem (Cass—stiglitz, 1970) is valid), then,
again, information about a particular security may have value.
(Again, assumption (3.16) is not valid.)
vrsut note that if the returns to all securities can be

written as a linear combination of a set of market factors,
=

where

=

EMp.

+ e.

= 0,

and where there are enough securities

so that individuals can diversify out of the idiosyncratic
risk (ci) (as is commonly asserted), then again, information
about individual securities is again of no value. Individuals'
expected utility will be a function of the implicit prices
associated with each of the market factors (assumed to be
unaffected by information about a small firm) and the probability

distribution of these market factors. This will determine their
demand for each of the market factors. Thus ex post realized
utility level will be a function only of the realization of

the vector M and the implicit market prices associated with
each of the market factors (and, of course, the subject

27b.

probability distribution of these market factors). Again,
if assumption (3.16) is valid, (3.16) will be; infonnatjon
about particular securities will not generate any trades
and such information will have no value.

VII. The Returns to Information
In this section, we shall examine in more detail the nature of
the incentives for information acquisition in the stock market.
We shall show that there are marked discrepancies between the

social and private returns to information.

28.

VII.l The taxonomy of information and the capital market
First, however, we must distinguish among several different
kinds of information.
In another paper, on information in the labor market, (Stiglitz
1975) I distinguished between two kinds of information:

general

and specific. The former was information about a characteristic
of an individual which affected his productivity in a variety of
jobs, the latter was information relevant for a specific jnh.
Here we need to distinguish four kinds of information, depending
on how the information relates to both buyers and sellers.

(1) General-general: information which affects all securities
and all purchasers, for instance, that pertaining to the relative
probabi4ity of different states of nature which are of importance
to all -individuals (e.g. the probability of a recession).

(2) General-specific: information which is of importance to
specific individuals, but which affects their attitudes towards
a whole class of securities, e.g. the probability of a recession
in the coal mining industry is of importance for workers in that
industry, but if the decline of the coal mining industry is

uncorrelated with, say, the business cycle, it may be of relatively
little importance to individuals who work in other industries.

(3) Specific-general: information which is specific to a firm
(e.g. the mental stability of the manager) but which is of

interest to all individuals who own

the

security.

29.

(U) Specific-specific: information which is of value both to a
specific individual (or class of individuals) and to a specific firm.
If I am risk neutral, the only information I want is the mean return

of the curity; if I am risk averse, I will want information about
other risk properties of the security.

Most information obviously falls in scope between the very

general and the very specific: it affects not all firms but more
than one; it is of value not to all individuals but to more than
one. The dichotomy is. important, however, both because the mechanisms
for obtaining the returns to information and the relationship

between social and private returns differ in the different categories.
There is another important distinction which must be made:

some &fbrmation may be of "value" to different individuals, but
the information may increase the value of the security in the eyes
of some, decrease it in the eyes of others.

Information that the firm will do very well if a certain
contingency arises, but will do very badly Otherwise, may raise the
valuation of the security in the eyes of those who think the event
likely, lower it in the eyes of those who think the event unlikely.1
For instance, an individual who v'orks in coal mining and whose wage

is, as a consequence, correlated with the prosperity of the coal
industry, will value firms whose profits are negatively correlated
with the prosperity of the coal industry more highly than those
LObviously, if there is a complete set of Arrow Debreu securities
markets, then the judgments concerning the relative probabilities
of different events affects the relative prices of different
contingent commodities, but given the prices of Arrow Debreu
securities, the firm need not concern itself with the probability
of different events (see Stiglitz.(].97o), Grossman-Stiglitz (1977, l980b)).

30.

whose profits are positively correlated; for someone in another
industry, a negative correlation with the coal industry may correspond
to a positive correlation with his own wage, and thus he will find
such a security unattractive.

Consider a bit of information which affects two securities which

are initially indistinguishable. If, as a result of the information,
all individuals now agree that security A is more valuable than
security B, then we call that information hjerarchical; that is to
say, at least with respect to the characteristic being identified,
all individuals agree that, say, more of the characteristic is better

than less. For instance, information related only to the mean of
the securities is hierarchical. On the other hand, when one subset
of the-,-population values A more highly as a result of the information,

while another values B more highly, then we say that the information

is I.ching, i.e. it matches specific indi'uiduals to
specific securities)
vII.2 Social return to information in an exchange economy
From this discussion, we can see the nature of the social returns
in a pure exchange economy:2
to information/ given that individuals are different, it is in
general not optimal for individuals to have the same portfolio.
Information (both general and specific) allows a better "matching"
of securities with individuals.
1This distinction played an important part in my analysis of
information in labor markets. Information about the wage a
specific firm pays is hierarchical information about certain
non-pecuniary characteristics of die firm is 1i3ely to be "matching"
information. See Stiglitz (l97)..
See below.

production, there are, of course, further returns.

31.

VII.3 Private returns to information
What is the private return to providing information?
The private return to providing information takes two forms:
(a) a direct consumption effect, particularly of specific-specific
information, allowing the individual who acquires the information
to obtain a portfolio better suited to his needs; (b) a market
valuation effect; if announcement of the information results in a
change in the market value of the securities, then by buying the
security if it is underpriced or selling the security short if it
is overpriced, before releasing the information, and then making
the information public, the individual is able to reap a capital gain.
In this sub-section, we are concerned primarily with the
latte.r effect, particularly with the incentives for individuals

to obtain, and disseminate, hierarchical information.1 For
individuals

to be able to appropriate the returns from this kind

of information

(i)

they

must own, or be able to acquire, the asset before the

information

is disseminated;

(ii) there must be an incentive for someone to disseminate the
information, so that the market price can adjust to reflect the
information;

(iii)

and

the information, when disseminated, must be believed; it

must be credible.

1H.ierarchical information, it will be recalled, is information
which affects all individuals' evaluation of the asset identically;
it does not result in any better allocation of the asset among
the population.

31a.

There are problems at each of the three stages of the analysis.
Our previous discussion (sections II and Iv) argued that in a pure

betting market there would be no trade. The fact that one individual
(who is believed to be informed) is willing to buy some shares from
me conveys the information that he believes the shares are under-

priced; I will not, as a result, be willing to sell to him.
This has one interesting implication: it is sometimes

suggested that firms that are undervalued will be subjected to take

over bids. If all takeover bids were so motivated then they would
never be successful (if those making the takeover bids on average

were correct in identifying undervalued firms)
Information dissemination poses a standard public good (free

rideT) problem: all individuals who own shares in the finn would
like someone else to pay the costs of information dissemination.
All who own shares in the firm gain from the increase in the price.2
1There may, of course, be other motivations for take-overs;

a wealthy individual might, for instance, wish to buy an asset which
is negatively correlated with the return to his other assets. As
we argued earlier, trade can occur to match assets with
but it seems that this provides little of the motivation individuals,
for most
take -overs.

similar free rider problem arises in take-overs aimed at
improving the quality of the management. If on average, those who
engage in takeovers do improve the quality of management, so that
the returns on the asset are increased, it will result in an increase
in the value. But then no small shareholder has an incentive to sell
his shares to the firm attempting the take-over. He shares in the gains
from the improved management. The only situation in which there is an
incentive for a take—over to occur is when the new management can
appropriate some of the increase in returns for itself. This point
has been developed by Grossman and Hart.(l98o

32.

Only if a single individual owns all the shares, or if the
owners act collusively, can the full benefits of the change in
price from the information transmission be captured by the provider
of the information.1

c-r

1Note that if there is a cost of
transmitting the information,
and these costs are large, and are a function
of the number of
individuals to whom the information is
the only
individuals to whom it pays to transmittransmitted,
information are other
potentially
large shareholders (the wealthy). Thus the
are
other wealthy sellers of securities.

suppliedQrmatj

33.

There is, however, a natural method by which the owners of the

firm can act collusively: to have the information provided by the
firm itself. Assume that the owners of the firm have perfect
knowledge about the returns to their firm (and hence are in agreement).
Then clearly, provided the transmission costs are not too high, it
will pay the firm to make the information public.
It would of course pay firms with low returns not to have

information disclosed. But if some firms disclose information, and
others do not, the market will assume that the firms which have
not disclosed information must have a low return. Since there is
"no information" about any of these firms, they will all be treated

identically. But firms who are above the average of this "below
average group" can increase their value by disclosing

information,

or having information disclosed about them (at the expense of
course of those below average in the below average group). The
process repeats itself until information about all the firms is
revealed.

The process is closely parallel to that which I have used elsewhere to describe the education system as a screening device. It
is in the self-interest of the bright to become so identified, and
although this identification need have no

returns (if it

does not result in a change in production), it will yield private
returns to the bright at the expense of the stupid.
There are, however, some important differences which make the
analysis of screening in the capital market considerably more

complex than in the education market. The most important differences
arise from the fact that human capital is (at least currently) not

normally bought or sold short; that is, even if I know that you are
overvalued, I cannot sign a contract to sell your services next
period, announce the true value of your prcductivity, and then,
next period having arrived, buy your services from you at the now

much lower price. Nor can I buy a fraction of your human capital

for later resaleJ Thus, in our discussions of screening of
individuals, we assumed that it was the individual who made the

decision about whether to have himself screened. Since in the
capital market, through speculation, every individual is a potential
owner of every firm, there is the possibility, at least, that it
might be in the interests of someone other than the original owner

to certify the characteristics of the firm. Our analysis has
suggested that so long as the screening industry is competitive, the
returns to screening will be captured by the original owners of
the security, and thus it is they who--as in the education market-have the incentive to provide the screening.

In the education market, it is natural to assume (although not
necessarily the case) that individuals know more about their own
ability than anyone else. Similarly, in the context of the capital

market it is natural to assume that the individuals who do have
more information about the security are the original owners of
the firm.2

LThese statements are not quite correct. There are firms which
attempt to find "undervalued" individuals, screen them, and then sell
their labor services at a higher price, and some individuals do
incorporate themselves, in effect selling a portion of their human
capital. But these instances are more the exception than the rule.

2i is, of course, possible that others have more information
about the prospects of the firm than the original owners. In that
case these individuals may take over the firm, and have the firm
provide the information. But if the original owners know that this
is the motive for the takeover, they will be unwilling to sell.

35.

VIX.4 Relationship between the social and private returns to information
In the previous.subsection, we showed how certain
aspects

of

as

the problem of information on the capital market can be

recast

problems

in the-economics of screening. Wefcan thus borrow some
results from the general theory of screening. We obtain the
following two important conclusions:

(a) The returns to the provision of information which changes the
market value of firms is captured primarily bythe original owners
of the shares
is accordingly they who have an economic incentive

it

to

provide the information.

(b) The private returns to
aenera1correnJ

the provision of

information

to thsociaet just

do not, in

as in the case of

screening of individuals. There is likely to be excessive

spending

on "hierarchical screening," i.e. in screening for characteristics
whicfftindiviauals value in the same way, and too little spending

on "matching screening", i.e. on screening for characteristics
which individuals value in different ways. The latter can be seen
most easily by considering a case where the provision of

information

leaves the price of the asset unchanged, the increase in the demand
by one group being offset, say, by a decrease in the demand by
another group. Even when there is essentially no cost to providing
this information, and even though there may be a high social return
to doing so, there will be no incentive for the firm to provide
this information.
In the next two sub-sections, we provide

both examples showing

the relationship between social and private returns for hierarchical
and matching information.

36.

The third problem we noted above is that of credibility:
although firms have an economic incentive to provide

iaformatioat.hey_also have an economic incentive to provide
tnLainjorination, just as in the education market individuals have

an incentive to have themselves overrated. In the education
market, an individual who has misrepresented himself is usually
found out, and thus is not able to enjoy the benefits of his

misrepresentation (a higher wage) for long. in the capital market
it may be more difficult to ascertain misrepresentation, and by the

time it is ascertained, the original owner of the security has

already absconded with his gains. This makes it even more necessary
than in the case of the education market for the information to be
certified by "public" outside institutions. These institutions
in thircapital market are the investment consultants, the stock

brokeiage firms, etcJ

1The division between direct production of information and
certification depends, presumably, on comparative costs of producing
different kinds of information and the fact that some information
may be relevant to several different firms. That is, GM may have
an advantage in producing information about the production
characteristics of GM, but a stock brokerage firm will produce
information about the demand for cars in general.

57.

VII.5 An Example of Hierarchical Screening
We assume that everyone is risk averse and evaluates the
portfolio in terms of the mean and standard deviation of the return.
We assume, moreover, that there are enough securities of each type so
that the individual, -

if he completely diversifies, faces essentially no

risk There are two kinds of securities, type 1 with mean 9
and type 2 with mean 2
All securities are known to
l > 2
have the same variance,02. There are equal• .!ners of the two types

of securities. For simplicity, we assume all securities are
independently distributed, and the distribution of returns of each

is normal. All individuals have the same utility function, which
we assume is of the form -e crY where y is income. (constant
absolute risk aversion). Hence, the individual seeks to maximize

a2

-t

(7.l)- where

Y is his mean income

4

is

the variance of his income.

Each individual is endowed initially with one firm. He knows
what kind of firm it is, but does not know what type any other firm

is. He can supply to the market information about the quality of
his firm.

The cost of providing this information is C; we
assume c is neither very small nor very large.1
0-0
—
> c > (eio)(l - 1

0-0

(7.2) (1 -

2ai,.

2

2Qay

1The role of these inequalities will be apparent shortly.

37a.

There are then two equilibria:

(a) The no-information equilibriuni. The relative price of all

securities is unity. The individuals who own

type

one

firms retain a fraction A of the wealth in their own security
and divide the remainder equally among all other shares. A is
chosen to

38.

-

(7.) max © +

2

when 0 is the mean return on all securities soldon the market.
For the moment, we shall assune that the owners of low productivity
firms retain the same fraction of their shares as do the owners of

high productivity firms.1 This implies that the average return to
0 +0
2
a randomly selected share on the market is
If the number of firm
12
is large, we can ignore the effect of the ith firm's
average

(7

action on the

return, so
*

4)

A

= _______
2

Using ( 7.11.) it is clear that for the

a

(

y9
2

—

2 U

1

entrepreneur owning a type 1 firm

0i0)2
aa2

He is slightly better off than the average person; how much
depends on his aversion to risk (cx) and the variance of his own
security.

If he screened, the value of his wealth would go up by an
amount
, and he could then completely
diversify, so

—
(7.8)

cx

2

YcryZ l

assumption will be justified in the next section. The
basic argument is simple: if the fraction of shares retained by
the original owners is an observable variable, if the low productivity.
firms retained a smaller fraction than A ,
would signal to the
market that they were low productivity, and this would have a marked
effect on their market value.
The results would not be significantly affected if we assumed
that the original owners of poor quality firms retain a smaller
fraction of their shares.

it

38a.

Under the assumption of (7.2), it does not pay him to undertake
the screening.

(b) The full information equilibrium. The relative price of the
two securities is

1'2 .

after paying for screening

(-j)

—

2

y.. —-X—.z

and for the lower

c

For the upper group,

39.

(7.10)

—
-

cx2

If an

individual who owns a type 1 firm does not screen, his
expected utility is

(.ii)

-

exp

-

+ 1

______
2
Ga

Thus, it pays the individuals of type 1 to screen. This
example illustrates several of the important aspects of markets
with imperfect information:

(1) There may be multiple equilibria.

(2) Some of these equilibria may be Pareto inferior to others.
In this example, it can be shown that the no screening equilibrium
is pareto superior to the screening equilibrium.
() The type 2 securities owners exert an externality on the

txp.J

secury

owners. If all securities were good (type "1")
the expected utility of the type 1 security holder would be
-exp(o1a)
In both the full information and
no information equilibrium, the
type 1 individuals are worse off. On the other hand, the losses
to the type 1 individuals exceed the gains to the type 2 individuals,

relative to what they could have had if all securities were of type 2.
This is obviously the case in the screening (full information)
equilibrium, where in fact the type 2 security holders are no better
of f than they would have been in the absence of type 1 security

holders, but the latter are unambiguously worse of f:

externality

JaQ.

is purely dissipatjye But even in the no screening

equilibrium, the "income equivalent loss" to type 1 security holders
is

1

(e-)

—
1

2

2

while the gain to type 2 security hDlders is only

- _____
2

for

—

(a

-

+

(e-e)

a net loss of

-r

octo

Matcjg.jcreenig
Tht example developed in some detail above involved one group

of securities being unambiguously better than another group. The
now
example which we/present involves differences in opinions among
different individuals about what states of nature are most likely
to occur; this in turn affects which securities maximize ex ante
expected utility.
Consider a particular firm.

It is known that it either

produces using technique A or technique B. For simplicity we
assume individuals are risk neutfal, but we assume individuals are

not allowed to sell securities short?

1

These assumptions may easily be modified.

There are three groups in the population; type A indiviciuais

believe that, if the firm produces using A, it will have a
very high profit, but if it produces using B, its profits

will be low; conversely, type B individuals believe expected
profits with B are high but with A are low.

Type C

individuals believe that the two techniques have the same
expected profits.

In the absence of information about which

technique is being employed, all individuals assume that there

chance that a particular technique is used.
More precisely, let llA(A be
expected profits if technique
be
A is used in the judgnent of person of type A, and
the aggregate wealth of individuals of type A. There isan alternative investment opportunity (lecurity C) whdse 'epéctéd rettrn
is the sane in everybody's judgment. Then we assume
is

a

fifty—fifty

>

>

A < UA)

>

>

w3 <

<

aC>

t(A)

RB(A)÷1IB(B) <

Thus, in the absence of information, individuals of type A
or type B prefer security C to the given firm. The firm
will be entirely owned by individuals of type C. By
assumption,

their wealth exceeds the value of the firm.

(The value of the firm will be

k2.

q

-

which

is less than the aggregate wealth of type C Individuals)
The remainder of the wealth of type C individuals as well as
the wealth of type A and B individuals is invested in type C
securities. The expected income of individuals of each type
is
EY
-

EY

A
B

A

r*w

-

r*c)B

LYC nr*t,j C
Now assume we have perfect information,

that A was the technique used.

e.g. everybody knows

Then type A individuals would

all purchase securities of the given firm.

Butby assumption,

their aggregate wealth is insufficient to buy all the
securities, so C is the "marginal purchaser".

value

of

the finn is unchanged at

Expected incomes

-

are now given by

Hence the

-

4 = IIA(A)A
r'u >r*caA

LI

11(A)

B

B

RY

r*t3

C
EY

r*u3

-

1••

C

-

-

Thus, there is a Pareto improvement: A is better off
and no one is worse off (in an expected utility sense).
the cost of the inforirtatjon is less than

(RA(A)

fiC(A

it is clearly worth procuring.

If

-

r*t,t

—

J
Note, however, that although

this information has value, there is absolutely no change in
the market value of the firm.

Thus the firm

would have no

incentive to provide the information —— even if it could do
so almost costlessly.

Individuals of type A have an

43.

incentive to get together, to form a "consumer cooperative" to
procure the information; but this is likely to be impossible,
since it is difficult for individuals of type A to identify each

other. (Thus, although there is a natural "producer" cooperative
for providing information by sellers of securities, i.e. the firm
itself, there is no corresponding natural consumer cooperative.)

And even were it possible to identify who was in fact an individual
of type A, there are all the classical public good (free rider)

problems which argue that there is likely to be underinvestment in
this type of information.i

fl.

VIII.

Self-Selection Equilibria

We argued in the previous section that the original owners of
the more productive firms have an incentive to provide information

to the market

establishing their productivity.

There is, however,

a fundamental problem of credibility:

information supplied by
(or paid for by) the firm is not likely to be
believed. It is well

known that actions speak

louder than words; in the recent literature
on screening, actions which
convey information (e.g. about the
productivity of the firm) are referred to as Uf-seictiona;ic

(Stiglitz (1982). An entrepreneur who is willing to hold
on to a
large fraction of the shares of his
company may be conveying
information that he believes the market is
undervaluing his firm.
Of course, if investors come to believe this, then firms
which
are not productive may attempt to imitate the more
productive firms;
the share of the firm retained by the original
owners would not
then convey information. This discussion should make clear
that
analysis of self-selection equilibria is a fairly complex
question.
Indeed, as we shall see, it may not even be clear what the
appropriate

notion of equilibri should be.
The essential Property of a self-selection device is
that the relevant
cost curves (indifference curves) for one group differ from those of the
other. An increase in the share of thE firm retained by thE original ownen
has a cost in the reduced
diversification (increased risk) which the
entrepreneur must bear. If, however, the market undervalue5 the

security, there is a gain: mean income

will increase as the fraction

retained increases. Thus, the aQt cost to the more productive
firms is lower than to the
less productive firms, and it is this
difference which in some
circumstances may enable the fraction of
shares retained by the original owners to serve as
a self-selection
device.

245.

To see this more formally, we return to the simple model of

section 7.5. Let

p

denote the price at which an owner of a firm

of type i can sell his shares. The mean return of shares purchased
on the market is normalized at unity. In figure

7.1 we have

depicted the individua]. indifference curves in (A,p) space
(where A is the fraction of the shares
retained)) Clearly,
d
>
>.
< 0 as A<M(p)

where A*(p) is the optimal value of A.

(See, e.g. equation 7.14.)

Moreover,

The owners of the less productivity (type 2 firms) require a larger
increase, in the price to compensate them for an increase in the

fraction of the firm they retain.
Pooling equilibrium

Assume first that A is observable. Consider the no information
equilibrium, when A1 = A2 (Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) refer to this a

a pooling equilibrium). Clearly, in equilibrium, p=l, and the optimal
value of A (from the point of view of the more productive firms) is
just A1

is this, however, an equilibrium? Clearly, the good firms
would
like to signal that they are good. What would happen if one such
firm

were to announce that it was willing to sell a fraction A. at

a price p greater than 1, with the point (,p), located in the
shaded area in figure 7.1
i.e. below type 2 individualsl
,

indifference curve, but above type 1 individuals, indifference curve.

An investor might be tempted to infer that only a type 1 entrepreneur,

