NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION, CAPITAL TAXATON
AND t4NETARY POLICY

Martin Feldstein

Working Paper No. 680

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

May 1981

Prepared as part of the NBER's project on Inflation and program in
Economic Fluctuations, supported by the National Science
Foundation, and presented to the Conference on Inflation,
Washington, D.C., October 10, 1980. The opinions expressed are
those of the author and not of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the National Science Foundation or Harvard University.

NBER Working Paper #680
May 1981

Inflation, Capital Taxation and Monetary Policy

ABSTRACT

This paper discusses the effects of the interaction between inflation
and the taxation of capital income. The principal conclusions are:

(1) Inflation substantially increases the total effective tax rate on
the income from capital used in the nonfinancial corporate sector.
The total effective tax rate has risen from less than 60 percent in
the mid—1960's to more than 70 percent in the late 1970's.
(2) The higher effective tax rate reduces the real net rate of return to
those who provide investment capital. In the late l97Os, the real
net rate of return averaged less than three percent.
(3) The interaction between inflation and existing tax rules contributed
to the fall in the ratio of share prices to real pretax earnings,
or, equivalently, to the rise in the real cost to the firm of equity
capital.
(4) By reducing the real net return to investors and by widening the
gap between the firms' cost of funds and the maximum return that they
can afford to pay, the interaction between tax rates and inflation
has depressed the rate of net investment in business fixed capital.
(5) The failure to consider correctly the effects of the fiscal structure
has caused observers to underestimate the expansionary character of
monetary policy in the past two decades.
(6) The goal of increasing investment while maintaining price stability
can be achieved with tight money, a high real interest rate, and
tax incentives for investment. A high real net—of—tax interest rate
could reduce residential investment and other forms of consumer
spending while the tax incentives offset the monetary effect for
investment in business capital.

Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 868—3905

NBER CONFERENCE PAPER SERIES

Papers Available

from the Conference

INFLATION

Washington,

D.C.

October 10, 1980
Conference
Paper
No.

CP 90
CP 91

'The Ends of Four Big Inflatfons," by Thomas J. Sargent
'U.s.

Inflation

and the Choice of Monetary Standard," by

Robert J. Barro
CP 92

"Inflation, Capital Taxation and Monetary Policy," by
Martin Feldstein

CP 93

"Public Concern about Inflation and Unemployment in the United
States: Trends, Correlates and Political Implications," by
Douglas A. Hibbs, Jr

CP 94

'Adapting to Inflation in the United States Economy," by
$tanley Fischer

CP 95

"The Anatomy of Double Digit Inflation in the 1970's," by
Alan S. Blinder

Copies of these papers may be obtained by sending $1.50 per copy
to Conference Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,
MA 02138. Please make checks payable to the National Bureau of Economic
Research, Prepayment is required for orders under $10.00

Inflation, Capital Taxation and Monetary Policy
Martin Feldstein*

The interaction of inflation and isiting tax rules has
powerful effects on the American economy

Inflation distorts

the measurement of profits, of interest payments and of capital

gains. The resulti ng mismeasurement of capital income has caused
a substantial increase in the ef
come from capital employe d in th e nonfinancial corporate sector.
At the same time, the deci ucti bil ity of nominal interest expenses

has encouraged the expans ion of consumer debt and stimulated the
demand for owner—occupied housing. The net res ult has been a

reduction of capital accumu lation.
These effects of the fiscal structure have been largely
ignored in the analysis of monetary policy

As I explain in

this paper, I believe that the failure of the m onetary authorities
to recognize the implicati on of the fiscal str ucture has caused
them over the years to und erestimate just how expans ionary mone—

tary policy has been. Nor eover, because of our fiscal structure,
attempts to encourage investment by an easy—money po licy have
actually had an adverse impact on investment in plant and
equipment.

*

Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic
Research. This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on
Inflation, 10 October 1980. The views expressed here are the
author's arid should not be attributed to the NBER. This paper
draws on articles published previously in the American Economic
Review and the National Tax Journal as well as on remarks presented to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
at an Academic Consultants meeting earlier this year.

2

In the first three sections of this paper, I review some
of my own research on the impact of inflation on effective tax

rates, share prices, and nonresidential fixed investment. The
fourth section discusses how ignoring the fiscal structure of
the economy caused a misinterpretation of the tightness of

monetary policy in the 1960's and 1970's. The paper concludes
by commenting on the implications of this analysis for the
mix of monetary policy, fiscal policy and the tax structure.

3

1.

Inflation, Effective Tax Rates and Net Rates of Return
Our tax laws were written for an economy with little or

no inflation. With an inflation rate of six percent to eight
percent or more, the tax system functions very badly. The
problem is particularly acute for the taxation of income from

capital. Despite reductions in statutory rates over the past
two decades the effective tax rates on the income from savings
have actually increased sharply in recent years because infla-

tion creates fictitious income for the government to tax. Savers
must pay tax on not only their real income from savings but also
on their fictitious income as well.

Without legislative action or public debate, effective tax
rates on capital income of different types have been raised

dramatically in the last decade. This process of raising the
effective tax rate on capital income is hard for the public at

large or even for most members of Congress to understand. What
appear to be relatively low rates of tax on interest income, on
capital gains, and on corporate profits as measured under current
accounting rules are actually very high tax rates, in some cases
more than 100 percent, because our accounting definitions are
not suited to an economy with inflation.

As anyone with a savings account knows, even a 12 percent
interest rate was not enough last year to compensate a saver
for the loss in the purchasing power of his money that resulted

from the 13 percent inflation. The present tax rules ignore this

4

and tax the individual on the full nominal amount of his interest

receipts. An individual with a 30 percent marginal tax rate
would get to keep only an 8.4 percent return on an account that

paid 12 percent. After adjusting this yield for the 13 percent
inflation in 1979, such an individual was left wi th a real after—

tax return of minus 4.6 percent! The small saver was thus penal—
ized rather than rewarded for attempting to save.

The effect of inflation on the taxation of capital gains

is no less dramatic. In a study published in 1978 (Feldstein
and Slemrod, 1978) ,

Joel

Slemrod and I looked first at the ex—

perience of a hypothetical investor who bought a broad portfolio
of securities like the Standard and Poors' 500 in 1957, held it
for twenty years and sold it in 1977.

An investor who did that

would have been fortunate enough to have his investment slightly

more than double during that time. Unfortunately, the consumer
price 1ev el also more than doubled during that time.

In terms

of actual purcha sing power, the investor had no gain at all on
his inves tinen

t.

And yet of course the tax law would regard him

as having

double d

a tax liab

ility

his money and would hold him accountable for

on this nominal gain.

After seem g this experience for a hypo thetical investor,

we were ea ger

to

know what has been happening to actual investors

who have realized taxable capital gains and loss es. Fortunately,
the

Internal Revenue Service has

produced

of data: a computer tape with a sample

a very

interesting set

of more than 30,000 in—

5

dividual tax returns reporting realized capital gains or losses

on corporate stock in 1973. While the sample is anonymous, it
is the kind of scientific sample that can be used to make accurate
estimates of national totals.

The results of this analysis were quite astounding. In
1973, individuals paid tax on $4.6 billion of capital gains on

corporate stock. When the costs of those securities are adjusted
for the increase in the price level since they were purchased,
that $4.6 billion capital gain is seen correctly as a loss of

nearly one billion dollars. Thus, people were paying tax on
$4.6 billion of capital gains when in reality they actually
sold stock that represented a loss of nearly a billion dollars.

Moreover, although people paid tax on artificial gains at every
income level, the problem was most severe for those investors
with incomes of less than $100,000.

While the lower capital gains tax rates that were enacted
in 1978 reduce the adverse effects of inflation, lowering the

tax rate does not alter the fact that people will continue to
pay taxes on nominal gains even when there are no real gains.

They now pay a lower tax on those gains but they still pay a
tax on what is really a loss.
Although interest recipients arid those who realize nominal

capital gains are taxed on fictitious inflation gains, by far
the most substantial effect of inflation on tax burdens is the
extra tax paid because of the overstatement of profits in the

6

corporate sector.
and Surnniers, 1979

In a paper published last year (Feldstein
Lawrence Summers and I found that the mis—

measurement of de preciation and mv entories raised the 1977
tax burden on the income of non—f inancial corporations by more
than $32 billion.

This repr e

sen ts

a 50 percent increase in

the total tax paid on corpor ate so urce income by corpora tions,
their sha rehol der

s

and their cr editors.

Some lawyers and econom ist s have prey lously argued that
inflation does not increase the effective tax rate on real

corporate income because firms deduct nominal interest payments
(rather than real inter est payments) in calcu lating taxable
profits.

Equivalently, corporations are not taxed on the fall

in the re al value of th eir debts that results from inflation.

Although thi S argument is valid if one looks only at the taxes
paid by the corporation

it is wrong when one considers the

taxes paid by creditors and shareholders. As our calculations
show, the extra tax paid by the creditors on the inf lated

interest p ayments is as large as the tax savings by corporations

and their owners. Debt can ther efore be ignored in evaluating

the net impact of inflation on the total tax burden on corporate
capital.

More recently, James Poterba and I have updated these
Ca icu lations

and extended the analysis to include the taxes

paid to state and local g overnments on the capital used by

nonfi nancial corporations (Feldstein and Poterba, 1980) .

We

7

found that the 1979 effective tax rate on the total real
capital income' of the nonfinancial corporate sector was 74

percent. Thus, taxes now take three—fourths of the total real
capital income on corporate capital. This represents a return
to the tax level of the mid—1950's before accelerated depreciation and the investment tax credit began reducing the total

tax burden. Even if attention is limited to Federal taxes,
our calculation shows that by 1979 the Federal government
taxes on corporations, their shareholders and their creditors
equaled 65 percent of the total real capital income of the
nonfinancial corporations net of the state and local taxes
paid by corporations.

The implication of a 74 percent total effective tax rate

on corporate income is clear. Since the real rate of return
on corporate capital before all taxes was 9.1 percent in 1979
(Feldstein and Poterba, 1980) ,

the net rate of return was only

about one—fourth of this, or 2.3 percent.

1This includes both economic profits and the return to
creditors.

8

2.

1

Inflation, Tax Rules and Share Prices

A potentially important way in which inflation can alter
the rate of real investment is by changing the cost to the firm
of equity capital
pretax earnings.

i.e., the ratio of share value per dollar of

In a smoothly functioning economy with no dis-

tortionary taxes, inflation should have no effect on the cost

of equity cap ital: both the earnings per share and the share
price should increase over time at a faster rate because of

inflation but their ratio should be unaffected. In fact, taxes
interfere wit h this neutrality and a iter the ratio of the share
price to the pretax earnings.
In

think ing about the relation between inflation and share

prices, it is crucial to distinguish between the effect of a
high constant rate of inflation and the effec t of an increase
in the rate of inflation expected for the future. When the
steady—state rate of inflation is higher, share prices increase

at a faster rate. More specifically, when the inflation rate
is steady, share prices rise in proportion to the price level
to maintain a constant ratio of share prices to real earnings.
In contrast, an increase in the expected future rate of inflation
• causes a concurrent fall in the ratio of share prices to current

earnings. Although share prices then rise from this lower level

'This section is based on Feldstein (1978a, 1980c)

9

at the higher rate of inflat ion, the ratio of share prices to
real earnings is permanently lower. This permanent reduction
in the price—earnings ratio occurs because, under prevailing
tax rules, inflation raises the effective tax rate on corporate
source income.

An important reason for the lower ratio of price to pretax—
earnings is that an increase in the permanent rate of inflation
raises the effective tax rate on equity capital. The magnitude
of this increase reflects the role of historic cost depreciation,
the use of FIFO inventory accounting and the extent of corporate

debt. A numerical calculation with realistic values will indicate
how these separate effects are combined. Consider an economy
with no inflation in which each share of stock represents the
ownership claim to a single uni t of capital (i.e., one dollarts

worth of capital valued at its reproduction cost) and to the
net earnings that it produces.

The marginal product of capital

(net of depreciation), f, is subject to a corporate income tax

at effective rate t1. In the absence of inflation, this effective
rate of tax is less than the statutory rate (t) bec ause of the
combined effect of accelera ted depreci ation and the investment

tax credit. The corporation borrows b dollars per unit of
capital and pays interest at rate r. Since the se interest
payments are deducted in calculating corporate income that
is taxed at the statutory rate t, the net cost of these borrowed

funds is (l-t)br. The net return to equity mv estors per unit
of capital in the absence of inflation is (l-t1)f' —

(l—t)br.

10

What happens to this net return when the inflation rate

rises? For simplicity, consider an instantaneous and unantici—
pa ted

increase to inflation at rate i that i

forever. Under existing U.S . tax law, inflation raises taxable
profits (for any fixed level of real profits) in two ways.

First, the value of deprecia tion allowances is based
original or "hi 5 tor i
current value.

c"

the

cost of the asset rather than on its

When pr ices rise, this h 1 s

tori c

cost method

of depreciation causes the real value of depreciation to fall
and the real value of taxable profits to rise. Second, the
cost of maintaining inventory levels i s understated for firms
that use the first-in/first-out (FIFO) method of inventory

accounting. A linear approximation tha t each percentage point
of inflation increases taxable profits per unit of capital by
X implies that the existing treatment of depreciation and
inventories reduces net profits by tx per unit of capital.

When there is a positive rate of inflation, the firms'

net interest payments ((l-t)br) overstate the true cost to

the equity owners of the corporations' debt finance. Against
this apparent interest cost it is necessary to offset the re-

duction in the real value of the corporations' net monetary

liabilities. These net monetary liabilities per unit of capital
are the difference between the interest-bearing debt (b) and
the non—interest—bearing monetary assets (a)

11

Combining the basic net profits per unit of capital, the
extra tax caused by the existing depreciation and inventory
rules, and the real gain on net monetary liabilities yields
the real net return per unit of capital,
z =

(1)

(l—t)br

—

(l—t1)f'

—

txi

+

(b—a)i.

The effect of inflation on the real net equity earnings per
unit of capital (z) depends on the response of the interest

rate Cr) to the inflation rate (1). In general, the change
in equity earnings per unit change in the inflation rate
(dz/di) depends on the tax and finance parameters and on the
effect of inflation on the interest rate (dr/di) according to:
=

(2)

—(l-t)b

-

tx

+

(b-a).

Econometric studies indicate that the nominal interest rate has
risen approximately point-for-point with the rate of inflation.

Assuming
(3)

that dr/di =

tx

=

—(l—t)b

=

t(b-x) - a.

Thus, equity owners:

rise

implies

1

—

(1)

+ (b—a).

gain tb (per unit of capital) from a

in inflation because nominal interest expenses are deducted

in calculating taxable income; (2) lose tx because of the understatement of cost due to the use of historic cost depreciation
and FIFO inventory accounting; and (3) lose a because they hold
non—interest bearing monetary assets.

12

Recent values of these parameters imply that dz/di
is negative and therefore that inflation would reduce the
equity earnings per share.

In 1977, nonfinancial corpora-

tions had a total capital stock of $1,684 billion and owed net
interest—bearing liabilities of $509.7 billion,1 implying that

b=0.302. The monetary assets of the NFCs had a value of $54.8

billion, implying that a=0.033. Since the corporate tax rate
in 1977 was t=0.48, these figures imply that dz/di=0.1l3-tx.

While it is difficult to calculate x as precisely as t, b
and z, it is clear that tx exceeds 0.113 and therefore that

dz/di is negative. Recall that xi is the overstatement of
taxable profits per dollar of capital caused by inflation at

rate i. Feldstein and Summers (1979) estimate that in 1977
inflation caused an overstatement of taxable profits of $54.3
billion of which $39.7 billion was due to low depreciation and

$14.6 was due to artificial inventory profits. Thus in 1977
xi=54.3/1684=O.032. The implied value of x depends on the rate

'The capital stock, valued at replacement cost in 1977
dollars, is estimated by the Department of Commerce. The net
liabilities are based on information in the Flow of Funds tables.
Feldsteiri and Summers (1979) report the net interest—bearing
liabilities of NFCs as $595 billion. For the appropriate debt
measure in this work, the value of the net trade credit ($72.7
billion) and government securities ($12.9 billion) must be
subtracted from this $595 billion. The subtraction of net trade
credit reflects the assumption that the profits of NFCs include
an implicit interest return on the trade credit that they extend.
The new information is from the Federal Reserve Balance Sheets
of the U.S. Economy.

13

of inflation that was respo nsible for these additional taxable

profits. For the inventory compon ent of the overstated profits,
the relevant infla tion rate is the one for the concurrent year;
for the depreciation component, the re levant inflation rate is

a weighted average o £ the inflation ra tes since the oldest re—
maining capital was acquired but with greater weight given to
inflation in more re cent years.

The consumer price index rose

6.8 percent in 1977, an average of 7.2 percent in the preceding

five years, and 4.5 percent and 1.9 percent in the two previous

five year periods.1 An inflation rate of 7.0 percent is therefore a reasonable upper bound for the relevant rate and 5.0
percent is a reasonable lower bound. A value of i=0.06 implies

that x=0.53 and therefore that tx=0.256, even at the upper bound
of i=0.07, x=0.46 and tx=0.22.

Both of these values are clearly

above the critical value of 0. 113 required for dz/di to be
negative.

By itself, the fact that the inflation-tax interaction
•

lowers the net of tax equity earnings tends to depress the

price—earnings ratio. This is reinforced by the fact that the
nominal increase in the value of the corporation's capital stock

'The index of producer prices for finished goods rose 6.6
percent in 1977 and an average of 5.9 percent for the previous
decade, essentially the same as the CPI.

14

induces a capital gains tax liability for shareholders. But
the net effect on the share price level depends on the effect
of inflation on the investors' opportunity cost of investing

in stocks. Because households pay tax on nominal interest
income, inflation lowers the real net yield on bonds as an

alternative to share ownership. At the same time, the favorable
tax rules for investment in land, gold, owner—occupied housing,
etc. imply that the real net opportunity cost of shareholding

does not fall as much as the real net yield on bonds and may
actually rise.' In considering these interactions of inflation
and tax rules, it is important to distinguish households and

non—taxable institutions and to recognize that share prices
represent an equilibrium for these two groups.

In Feldstein (l980c), I evaluated the effect of inflation
on the equilibrium share price, using a very simple model with

two classes of investors. That analysis shows that if the
opportunity cost that households perceive remains unchanged
(at a real net—of—tax 4 percent) , a rise in the inflation rate

from zero to 6 percent would reduce the share value by 24 percent.2
A one—fourth fall in the households' opportunity cost of share

1This point is developed further in Feldstein (1978b, l980d)
and in Hendershott (1979), Hendershott and Hu (1979) and Poterba
(1980)

2Th• makes no allowance for the effect of the induced reduction of the capital stock on the subsequent pretax return.
Summers (1980) shows explicitly how that would reduce the fall
in the equilibrium share value.

15

ownership (from 0.04 to 0.03) would limit the fall in the

equilibrium share value t o only 7 percent.
The real net cost of equity funds rose from about 7 per—
cent in the m id 1960's to about 10 percent in the mid—l970's.
On balance, I believe that the

nteraction of inflation and

the tax rules is responsible for part, but only part, of this

very subs tantial rise in the real cost of equity capital.
Inflation may also depress share prices because of a perceived
increase in risk (as Malkell has stressed) or because investors

confus e nominal and real returns (as Modigliani has emphasized)
These additional explanations are not incompatible with the

tax effect but lie outside the scope of this paper.

16

3.

Inflation, Tax Rules and

Investment

The rate of business fixed investment in the United
States has fallen quite sharply since the mid-1960's. The
share of national income devoted to net nonresidential fixed
investment fell by more than one-third between the last half

of the 1960's and the decade of the 1970's: the ratio of
net fixed nonresidential investment to GNP averaged 0.040
from 1965 through 1969 but only 0.025 from 1970 through 1979.
The corresponding rate of growth of the nonresidential capital

stock declined by an even greater percentage: between 1965
and 1969, the annual rate of growth of the fixed nonresidential
capital stock averaged 5.5 percent; in the 1970's, this average
dropped to 3.2 percent.

An important reason for this decline has been the interaction of the high rate of inflation and the existing tax rules.

As the discussion in the previous two sections hasmade clear,
the nature of this interaction is complex and operates through
several different channels.

I have investigated this effect in

Feldstein (1980a) by estimating three quite different models of

investment behavior. The strength of the empirical evidence
rests on the fact that all three specifications support the same
conclusion.

17

The simplest and most direct way relates investment to
the real net return that the providers of capital can earn on

business capital. As I noted in section 1 of this paper, the
combined effects of original cost depreciation, the taxation of
nominal capital gains, and other tax rules raises the effective
tax rate paid on the capital income of the corporate sector and
thus lowers the real net rate of return that the ultimate sup-

pliers of capital can obtain on nonresidential fixed investment.
This in turn reduces the incent lye to save and

distorts

flow of saving away from fixed nonresidential

investment.

without specifying

the mechanism by wh ich

the

Ev en

the financial marke ts

and mana gerial deci sions
tions in investment

changes in the real

achieve this reallocation, the varia—
during the past d ecades can be rela ted to
net rate of return.

The real net r ate of return varied around an avera ge of
3.3 percent in the 1950's, rose by the mid—1960's to 6. 5 percent

while averaging 5.0 percent for the 1960's as a whole, and then
dropped in the 1970's to an average of only 2.8 percent. A
simple econome tric model (relating net fixed business investment
as a fraction of GNP to the real net rate of return and to
capacity utili zation) indicates that each percentage point rise
in the real net return raises the investment—GNP ra tio by about

one-half a percentage point. This estimated effect is quite
robust with respect to changes in the specification

sample period,

and method of estimation. It implies that the fall in the real

18

net rate of return between the 1960's and the 1970's was large
enough to account for a drop of more than one percentage point
in the ratio of investment to GNP, a reduction that corre spond s
to more than one- third of the net investment ratio in the 1970's.

This general conclusion is suppor ted by two quite different

alternative models of investment.

The first of these relates

investment to the d ifference between the max jmum potential ra te

of return that the firm can afford to pay on a "standard" pro ject
and the actual cost of funds. The second is an extension of the
Hall-Jorgenson (196 7) investment equation th at incorporates all

of the effects of I nflation and the user cost of capital. Al—
though none of the three models is a "true" picture of reality,
the fact that they all point to the same conclusion is reassuring
because it indicates that the finding is really "in the data
and is not merely an artifact of the model specification.

19

4. The Fiscal Structure and Effects

of

Monetary Policy

The intellectual tradition in monetary analysis has caused
the effects of the economy's fiscal structure
Whatever the

spec ialists

monetary

it has clean
have

appropriateness

of this division

to be ignored.
of labor between

and tax specialists in earlier decades,

y been inappropriate in more recent years. As I

argued e lsewhere (Feldstein, 1976, 1980b), the fiscal

structure

of

our economy is a key determinant of the macro—

economic equ ilibrium and

policy.

The

therefore of the effect of monetary

failure to take fiscal

caused a mis interpret ation 0f

the

effects into acc ount has
expansionary and

di s tortive

character of monetary policy in the 1960's and 197 0's.
During the dozen years after the 1951 accord between the

Treasury and the Fed, the interest rate on

Baa bo nds

only in the narrow ra nge between 3½ percen t

and 5

varied

percent. In

contrast, th e past 15 years have seen the Baa rate rise from
less than 5 percent in 1964 to more than 12 percen t at the end

of 1979. It is perhaps not surprising therefore that the monetary authori ties, other government officials, and many private

economists h ave worried throughout this period that interest

rates might be getting "too high". Critics of what was perceived as

ight money" argued that such high interest rates

would reduce investment and therefore depress aggregate demand.

Against all this it could be argued, and was argued, that

the real mterest rate had obviously gone up much less. The
correct measure of the real interest rate is of course the

20

difference between the nominal interest rate and the rate of

inflation that is expected over the life of the bond. A
common rule of thumb approximates the expected future inflation by the average inflation rate experienced during the

preceding three years. In 1964, when the Baa rate was 4.8
percent, this three—year rise in the GNP deflator averaged 1.6
percent; the implied real interest rate was thus 3.2 percent.

By the end of 1979, when the Baa rate was 12.0 percent, the
rise in the GNP deflator for the previous 3 years had increased
to 7.8 percent, implying a real interest rate of 4.2 percent.

Judged in this way, the cost of credit has also increased significantly over the 15 year period.

All of this ignores the role of taxes. Since interest
expenses can be deducted by individuals and businesses in
calculating taxable income, the net—of—tax interest cost is very

much less than the interest rate itself. Indeed, since the
nominal interest expense can be deducted, the real net—of—tax
interest cost has actually varied inversely with the nominal

rate of interest. What appears to have been a rising interest
rate over the past 25 years was actually a sharply falling real

after—tax cost of funds. The failure to recognize the role of
taxes prevented the monetary authorities from seeing how expansionary monetary policy had become.

The implication of tax deductibility is seen most easily
in

the

case of owner—occupied housing. A married couple with

a $30,000 taxable income now has a marginal federal income tax

21

rate of 37 percent.

The 11.4 percent mortgage rate in effect

in the last quarter of 1979 implied a net-of—tax cost of funds

of 7.2 percent. S ubtracting a 7.8 percent estimate of the
rate of inflation (based on a three year average increase, in
the GNP deflator) leaves a real net—of-tax cost of funds of

minus
_____ 0.6 percent.

By comparison, the 4.8 percent interest

rate for 1964 translates into a 3.0 percent net—of-tax rate
and 'a 1.4 percent real net—of—tax cost of funds

Thus, although

the nominal interest rate had more than doubled and the real
interest rate had also increased s ubstantially, the rel eva

n t

net—of-tax real cost of funds had actually fallen from 1.4
percent to a negative 0 .6 percent.

(See f igure 1.)

As this example shows, taking the eff ects of taxation
into account is particularly impor tant bec ause the tax rules
are so non—neutral when there is inflation
were completely indexed, the eff ect
con duct of monetary policy would

of the

If the tax rules

•

tax system on the

be much 1 ess

significant.

But with existing tax rules, the movements of the pretax real
interest rate and of the after—tax real interest rates are

completely different

I think that monetary policy in the

last decade was expa nsionary because the monetary authorities
and others believed that the cost of funds was rising or
steady when in fact it was falling significantly.

—4

_•:.

4

GO

p.'

_p
—

r52

__•—
—

54

'S

55

_

—5.-

.5'

S

Mortgage

'a

5

70

aSs
'a_ S S •
'—I

S a

r-'.S

I

S

Real

72

r'4

Nominal

1960—79

Real Net

S

Rates,

Figure 1

I
%

/
/

S

rh

S..

I

I
/

S

I

S

S

—

23

The fall in the real after-tax interest rate has caused
a rapid increase in the price of houses relative to the general
price level and has sustained a high rate of new residential

construc tion (Poterba, 1980) .

There were, of course, times

when the ceilings on the interest rates that financial inst i

tu -

tions cou id pay caused disintermediation and limited the Lund s
available for housing. To that extent, the high level of
nominal i nterest rates restricted the supply of funds at the

same time

that the corresponding low real after—tax interest

cost incre ased the demand for funds. More recently, the raising
of certain interest rate ceilings and the development of mort—
gage—backed bonds that can short—circuit the disintermediation

process have made the supply restrictions much less important
and have therefore made any interest level more expansionary
than it otherwise would have been.

The low real after-tax rate of interest has also encouraged
the growth of consumer credit and the purchase of consumer

durables. It is not surprising that, with a n egative real net
rate of interest, house mortgage borrowing has soared to over
$90

billion a year, more than double the rate in the early

1970's. More generally, as I noted in section 1, even house—
holds that do not itemize their tax deductions are affected by
the low real after—tax return that is available on savings.
Because individuals pay tax on nominal interest income, the
real after—tax rate of return on saving has become negative.

24

It seems likely that this substantial fall in the real return
on savings has contributed to the fall in the personal saving
rate and the rise in consumer demand.

The evidence summarized in the first section shows that
the analysis is more complex for corporate borrowers and in-

vestors because inflation changes the effective tax rate on
investments as well as the real net—of—tax interest rate.
Nore specifically, because historic cost depreciation and in-

ventory accounting rules reduce sub stantially the real af ter—
tax return on corporate investments, an easy—money policy

raises the demand for corporate capital only if the real net
cost of fu nds falls by more than the return that firms can

afford to pay

•

This balance between the lower real net interest

cost and the lower real net return on investment depends on the
corporation t s debt—equity ratio and on the relation between the

real yields t hat must be paid on debt and on equity funds.

It

is difficul t to say just what has happened on balance. In a

preliminary s tudy, Lawrence Summers and I concluded that the

rise in the nominal interest rate caused by inflation was

probabiy slig htly less than the rise in the maximum nominal
interest rate that firms could afford to pay (Feldstein and

Summers, 1978). However, that study made no allowance for the
effect of inventory taxation or for the more complex effects
of inflation on equity yields that I discussed in section 2.

25

My Current view, based on the evidence reviewed in section 3,
is that, on balance, expansionary monetary policy reduced the
demand for business investment at the same time that it increased
the demand for residential investment and for c onsumption goods.
It is useful to contrast the conc lusion of this section

with the conventional Keynesian analysis. According to the
traditional view, monetary expansion lowers interest rates which
reduces the cost of funds to investors and t herefore encour ages
the accumulation of plant and equipment. In the context of the
U.S. economy in recent years, this statement is wrong in thr ee

ways. First, a sustained monetary expansion raises nominal interest
rates. Second, although the inter est rate is higher, the real
net—of—tax cost of funds is 1ower.

And, third, the lower CO St

of funds produced in this way encour ages investment in hou s i

ng

and consumer durables (as well as gr eater consumptio n in general)
rather than more investment in plant and equipment.

Indeed,

because of the interaction of tax rules and inflation, a monetary
expansion tends to discourage saving and reduce investment in

plant and equipment. The low real net—of—tax rate of interest
on mortgages and consumer credit is an indication of this mis—
allocation of capital.

Perhaps the problems of misinterpretation and mismanagement
might have been avoided completely if the monetary authorities
and others in the financial community, as well as the Congress

26

and the economics profession, had ignored interest rates completely and focused their attention on the money supply and

the credit aggregates. Presumably, under current Federal
Reserve procedures, there will be more of a tendency to do

just that. But since the temptation to look at rates as well
is very powerful, it is important to interpret the rates cor-

rectly. What matters for the household borrower or saver is
the real net—of—tax interest rate. A very low or negative real
net—of--tax rate is a clear signal of an incentive to overspend

on housing and on other forms of consumption. What matters
for the business firm is the difference between the real net—of—tax
cost of funds (including both debt and equity) and the maximum

return that, with existing tax laws, it can afford to pay. The
difficulty of measuring this difference should be a warning
against relying on any observed rates to judge the ease or
tightness of credit for business investment.

27

5. The Mix of Monetary and Fiscal Policies
There is widespread agreement on two central goals for
macroeconomic policy:

(1)

achieving a level of aggregate demand

that avoids both unemployment and inflation, and (2)

increasing

the share of national income that is devoted to business invest-

ment. Monetary and fiscal policy provide two instruments with
which to achieve these two goals. The conventional Keynesian
view of the economy has led to the prescription of easy money
(to encourage investment) and a tight fiscal policy (to limit

demand and prevent inflation). Our low rate of investment and
high rate of inflation indicate that this approach has not

worked. It is useful to review both the way such a policy is
supposed to work and the reason why it fails.

Keynesian analysis, based on a theory developed during
and for the depression, is designed for an economy with sub-

stantial slack and essentially fixed prices. This Keynesian
perspective implies that real output can be expanded by increasing
demand and that the policy mix determines how this increased output is divided between investment, consumption and government

spending. In this context, an increase in the money supply
favors investment while a fiscal expansion favors consumption
or government spending.

There is a way in which a policy mix of easy money and
fiscal tightness could in principle work in our relatively

fully—employed economy. The key requirement would be a per—

28

sistent government surplus. Such a surplus would permit the
government to reduce the supply of outstanding government debt.
This in turn would induce households and institutions to substitute additional private bonds and stocks for the government

debt that was removed from their portfolios. The result would
be an increased rate of private capital accumulation. Under
likely conditions, this substitution of private capital for
government debt would require a lower rate of interest and a
relative increase in the stock of money.1
Unfortunately, the traditional prescription of easy money
and a tight fiscal position has failed in practice because of
the difficulty of achieving and maintaining a government

surplus.2 As a result, the pursuit of an easy money policy
has produced inflation. Although the inflationary increase in
the money supply did reduce the real after—tax cost of funds,

i-See Feldstein (1980b) for a theoretical analysis in which
this possibility is considered.

21t might be argued that the inflationary erosion of the
real government debt means that the government has in fact had
real surpluses even though nominal deficits. But such an inflation
adjustment also implies an equal reduction in private saving, indicating that private saving has in fact been negative. The conventional government deficit should also be augmented by the offbudget borrowing and the growth of government unfunded obligations
in the social security, and civil service and military service
pension programs.

29

this only diverted the flow of capital away from investment in
plant and equipment and into owner—occupied housing and consumer
durables.

By reducing the real net return to savers, the easy

money poi icy has probably also reduced the total amount of new
saving.

The traditional policy mix reflects not only its optimistic
view about the feasibility of

g ov er nm en t

surpluses but also its

overly narrow conception of ther ole of fiscal policy. In the
current macroeconomic tradition, fiscal policy has been almost
synonymous with variations in the net g overnment surplus or
deficit and has generally igno red the p otentially powerful in-

centive effects of taxes that infiuence marginal prices.
An alterna tive policy mix for achi eying the dual goals of

balanced demand and increased

bus i ness

investment would combine

a tigh t—mon ey policy and fisca1 incentives for investment and
saving.

A tight-money po1 icy would preven t inflation and would

raise the real net—of—tax rate of interest.

Although the higher

real rate of interest would tend to deter al1 forms of residential
and nonresidential investment, specific incentives for investment in
plant and equipment could more than offset the higher cost of

funds. The combination of the higher real net interest rate
and the targeted investment incentives would restrict housing
construction and the purchase of consumer durables while increasing

the flow of capital into new plant and equipment. Since housing and

30

consumer durables now account for substantially more than half
of the private capital stock, such a restructuring of the investment mix could have a substantial favorable effect on the
stock of plant and equipment.

A rise in the overall saving rate would permit a greater

increase in business investment. The higher real net rate of
interest would probably induce such a higher rate of saving.
This could be supplemented by explicit fiscal policies that
reduced the tax rate on interest income and other income from
saving.

In short, restructuring macroeconomic policy to recognize
the importance of fiscal incentives and of the current interaction between tax rules and inflation provides a way of both
reducing the rate of inflation and increasing the growth of the
capital stock.

Bibliogrp
"Inflation, Income Taxes and the Rate of

Feldstein, Martin S.,
Interest:

A Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review, 1976
"Inflation and the Stock Market," Am eric an

Economic Review, forthcoming, NBER Working Paper No. 276, 1978a.

"The Effect of Inflation on the Prices of
Land and Gold," Journal of Public Economj, forthccxig, NBER

Working Paper No. 296, 1978b.
Inflation, Tax Rules and Investment:

S orne

Econometric Evidence," the Fisher-Schultz Lecture of the

Econometric Society, forthcoming as an NBER Working Paper, 1980a.
"Fiscal Policies, Inflation and Capital Formation,"

American Economic Review, 1980b.
"Inflation, Tax Rules and the Stock Market,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, 1980c.
"Inflation, Portfolio Choice, and the Prices of
Land and Corporate Stock," American Journal of Agricultural

Economics, forthcoming, NBER Working Paper No. 526.
and Joel S lemrod, "Inflation and the Excess

Taxation of Capital Gains on Corporate Stock," National Tax
Journal, 1978

and Lawrence H. Summers, "Inflation, Tax Rules

and the Long Term Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, 1978.

"Inflation and the

Taxation of Capital Income in the Corporate Sector," National

Tax Journal, 1979.

Feldstein, Martin S., and James Poterha, "State and Local Taxes
and the Rate of Return on Non—Financial Corporate Capital,"
NBER Working Paper No. 508, 1980.

Hall, Robert E., and Dale W. Jorgensen, "Tax Policy and Investment
Behavior," American Economic_Review, 1967.

Hendershott, Patric, "The Decline in Aggregate Share Values: Inflation
and Taxation of the Returns from Equities and Owner—Occupied
Housing," NBER Working Paper No. 370, 1979.
—' and Sheng Cheng Hu, "Inflation and the Benefits

from Owner—Occupied Housing," NBER Working Paper No. 383, 1979.

Poterba, James, "Inflation, Income Taxes and Owner—Occupied Housing,"
NBER

Workinq Parer No. 553.

Summers, Lawrence H., "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Valuation and
Accumulation
forthcoming.

of Capital Assets,"

American Economic Review,

