                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ALTERNATIVE TAX RULES AND PERSONAL SAVINGS
                 INCENTIVE5 MICROECONOMIC DATA
                   AND BEHAVIORAL SIMULATIONS

                        Martin Feldstein
                         Daniel Feenberg
                      Working Paper No. 68i




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachssetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            May 1981




This paper was presented at the NHER Conference on Behavioral
Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis on January 26—27, 1981,
in Palm Beach. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation, and project in Tax Simulation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                               NEER CFE:FhNCE PAPER SERIES
                          Papers Available from the Conference on
                         SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX POLICY AJALYS1S
                                    Palm Beach, Florida
                                   January 25—27, 1981
Con ference
  Paper
   No.

 WP )-97      "Alternative Tax Treatments of the Family: Simulation Methodo1o
              and Results," by Daniel Feenberg and Harvey S. Rosen
              "Stochastic Problems in the Simulation of Labor Supply," by Jerry Hausman
              "Alternatives to the Current Maximum Tax on Earned Income," by
              Lawrence B. Lindsey
              "The Distribution of Gains and Losses from Changes in the Tax
              Treatment of Housing," by Mervyn King
 WP 682       "Simulating Nonlinear Tax Rules and Nonstandard Behavior: An
              Application to the Tax Treatment of Charitable Contributions,"
              by Martin Feldstein and Lawrence B. Lindsey
              "Issues in the Taxation of Foreign Source Income," by Daniel Frisch
 WP 583       "Modeling Alternative Solutions to the Long—Run Social Security
              Funding Problem," by Michael Beskin, Marcy Avrin, and Kenneth Cone
              "Domestic Tax Policy arid the Foreign Sector: The Importance of
              Alternative Foreign Sector Formulations to Results from a General
              Equilibrium Tax Analysis Model," by Lawrence Goulder, John Shoven,
              and   John Whalley

 WP 613       "A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in General Equilibrium Models,"
              by Don Fullerton and Roger Gordon

              "A General Equilibrium Model of Taxation with Endogenous Financial
              Behavior," by Joel Slemrod

 WP 681       "Alternative Tax Rules and Personal Savings Incentives: Microeconomic
              Data and   Behavioral Simulations," by Martin Feldstein and Daniel Feenberg

              "National Savings, Economic Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation,"
              by Alan Auerbach and Laurence Kotlikoff

              "Tax Reform and Corporate Investment: A Micro—Ecorometric Simulation
              Study," by Michael Salinger and Lawrence Suimners

It is expected that the papers resulting from      this conference will   be published
in a volume edited by Martin Feldstein.

Copies of these conference papers may be obtained by sending $1.50 per copy to
Conference Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138.
Please make checks payable to National Bureau of Economic Research. Advance
payment is required on orders totaling less than $10.00
                        List of Participants
            SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX POLICY AHALYSIS

                      The Breakers, Palm Beach
                         January 25—27, 1981
Name                                       Affiliation

Henry J. Aaron                  The Brookings Institution
Alan J. Auerbach                Harvard University
Martin J. Bailey                University of Maryland
Michael J. Boskin               Stanford University
Daniel H. Feenherg              National Bureau of Economic Research
Martin Feidstein                Harvard University and NBER
Daniel J. Frisch                University of Washington
Don F'ullerton                  Princeton University
Harvey Galper                   U.S. Department of the Treasury
Roger H. Gordon                 Bell Laboratories
Lawrence H. Goulder             Stanford University
David G. Hartman                Harvard University
Jerry A. Hausman                Massachusetts Institute of Technolor
James J. Heckman                Unversity of Chicago
Fatric Hendershott              Purdue University
Thonas 0. Horst                 U.S. Department of the Treasury
Mervyn A. King                  University of Birmingham, England
Laurence J. Kotlikoff           Yale University
Lawrence B. Lindsey             Harvard University
Charles E. McLure, Jr.          National Bureau of Economic Research
Peter Mieszkowski               University of Houston
Joseph J. Minarik               The Brookings Institution
Richard A. Musgrave             Harvard University & the University
                                  of California at Santa Cruz
Joseph A. Pechnnn               The Brookings Institution
Michael Salinger                Massachusetts Institute of Technolo
Robert J. Shiller               University of Pennsylvania
John B. Shaven                  Stanford University
Joel Slemrod                    University of Minnesota
Joseph E. Stiglitz              Princeton University
Lawrence H. Summers             Massachusetts Institute of Technolo
John rnalley                    University of Western Ontario
David Wise                      Harvard University
                                                 NBER Working Paper 11681
                                                              May 1981



            klternative Tax Rules and Personal Savings incentives:
                 Microeconomic Data and Behavioral Siriulat ions


                                       SUWIARY



          This study examines the potential effects on personal savings of
alternative types of tax rules. The analysis makes use of two extensive samples
of information on individual savings and financial income: the 1972 Consumer
Expenditure Survey and a stratified random sample of 26,000 individual tax
returns for that year.

          The first type of tax rule that we consider would permit all tax-
payers to make tax deductible contributions to individual savings accounts.
The interest and dividends earned in these accounts would also accumulate
untaxed. A potential problem with any such plan is that Individuals could in
principle obtain tax deductions without doing any additional saving merely by
transferring pre—existing assets into the special accounts. The evidence that
we have examined indicates that this Is not likely to be important in practice
since most taxpayers currently have little or no financial assets with which to
make such transfers. For example, a plan permitting contributions of 10 percent
of wages up to $2000 a year would exhaust all the pre—existing assets of 75 per-
cent of households in just 2 years. Our evidence also shows that a ceiling on
annual contributions of 10 percent of wages still leaves an increased saving
incentive for more than 80 percent of households since fewer than 20 percent of
households currently save as much as 10 percent a year. Specific simulations of
a variety of such proposals show that even when income and substitution effects
balance for a representative taxpayer (implying no change in his consumption)
aggregate saving would rise considerably.
          The second type of tax rule that we examine would increase the current
$200 interest and dividend exclusion. In 1972, among families with incomes of
$20,000 to $30,000, 55 percent had more than $200 of interest and dividends; for
those with incomes of at least $30,000, 82 percent had more than $200 of
interest and dividends. For such families, the $200 exclusion provides no
incentive for additional saving. Our analysis considers four ways of
strengthening the saving incentive while limiting the reduction in tax revenue:
(1) a limit of $1000 on the interest and dividend exclusion; (2) a 51) percent
exclusion of interest and dividends up to a $1000 limit; (3) exclusion of
interest and dividends in excess of 5 percent of income over $10,000 with an
exclusion limit of $1000; and (4) exclusion of 20 percent of interest and divi-
dend income without any limit. The revenue effects of all of these opt ions were
found to be quite smalL. But even with quite modest elastici ties of current
consumer spending with respect to the relative oris of present and future con-
sumption, these plans could increase   saving    by signi f icuntly more than the
reduction in tax revenue.
                                             Martin Feldstein
                                             Daniel Feertherg
                                             National Bureau of Economic Re search
                                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, ft-issucliusetts 1)2138
                                             (617) 868—3905
              Alternative Tax Rules and Personal Savings Incentives:
                   Microecoriomic Data and Behavioral Simulations

                                  Martin Feldstein*
                                  Daniel 1eenburg*


            Personal   saving has traditionally accounted for more than half of

all real net private saving in the United States. Incentives that increase the

personal saving rate therefore have a potentially significant effect on the

total rate of capital formation.' The purpose of the current paper is to pre-

sent some new Tricroeconomic evidence that is relevant to evaluating alternative

changes in the personal tax treatment of savings and of interest and dividends.

           There are, of course, many factors in addition to the personal tax

rules that contribute to the low rate of' saving in the United States, including

consumer credit rules, the Social Security system, the taxation of 'business

income,   and the tax treatment of personal interest expenses. Our    focus   on the
personal   tax treatment of savings and the income from savings should not be

misinterpreted as an indication that we believe that personal tax rules alone

are responsible for the low U.S. saving rates. We do believe, however, that

changes in these tax rules are a potentially useful way of increasing savings.

           There has nevertheless long been resistance among both economists and

government officials to changing the tax rules to encourage    saving. 2   The oppo-
sition to encouraging savirid has in art been a vesti.e of the Keynesian fear
that a higher rate of savin might only increase unempioyient. Thatever' the
relevance of this concern in earlier decades, oversavind is no lonLer reardel
as a potential problem. A further source of opposition to modifying the tax
rules to encourage saving has been a concern that any such change would thwart
the egalitarian thrust, or ax policy. This in turn reflected a helief that the
                                       —2—


incentive effects of tax changes would be negligible, implying that tax policy

could only encourage saving by redistributing disposable income from lower

income   taxpayers with low marginal propensities to save to higher income tax-
payers with high marginal propensities to save.
           In contrast, there is now strong professional and political interest
in   tax changes that could encourage personal saving.3 This reflects in part a

reassessment of the earlier studies that had concluded that saving is not sen-

sitive to the rate of return and therefore also not sensitive to the tax treat-

ment of that return. Because those studies used nominal rather than real

interest rates, the interest rate coefficient was biased in a way that made it

appear to be insignificant or even to have the reverse sign (Feldstein, 1970).

New studies that relate saving to an estimate of the real net rate of return

have suggested that savings do respond positively to this more appropriate

measure of the return (Boskin, 1978; Feldstein, 1981). Unfortunately, the

problems of measuring the relevant real expected return are such that the econo-

metric evidence   is never likely to be conpelling. It is important, therefore,
that the general theory of consumer behavior implies directly that a compensated
increase in the real net rate of return necessarily induces individuals to post-
pone consumption. The effect on savings of a change in the taxation of capital
income therefore depends on the timing of tax payments and on the response of
government spending.1' If government spending in each year remalns unchanged,
national saving must rise.   If the comnensating changes in the tax keep tax
liabilities in each year unchanged, private saving must also increase. 5
             Tax changes that reduce the difference between the pretax and post—

tax returns on capital may be worthwhile even iF the saving rate does not
respond positively to •tle. et rate of return. A gap between the pretax and]
                                         —3—


post—tax rates of return implies a loss of welfare no matter what the uncompen—

sated savings response. Of course, since the revenue lost by reducing the tax

on   savings could alternatively be used to reduce some other distorting             tax, the

desirability    of reducing the tax on saving is not unambiguous. Nevertheless,
recent    investigations in the theory of optimal taxation do suggest            that the tax

rate   on the income from saving should probably be lower, and perhaps             very much

lower, than the tax rate on labor income.        If the marginal rate         of substitution
between current consumption and future consumption is independent of the quan-
tities of leisure consumed, the optimal tax rate on the income from savings is

zero (Mirrlees, 1976). Substantial departures from this separability assumption

still leave it optimal to tax capital income less than labor income. Indeed, if

subsidizing retirement consumption reduces the distorting effect of the labor

income tax on preretirement work effort, it may be optimal to "tax" the income

from saving at a negative rate, i.e., to subsidize it. Explicit calculations of

a simple model using empirically plausible but conservative parameter values

(i.e. ,   assuming that the coripensated supply responses of both labor and savinr
are zero) imply that there may be a substantial potential welfare gain asso-

ciated with reducing the tax on capital income and making            up the lost revenue by
an increase in the tax on labor income (Feldstein, 19713;            see   also Green and

Sheshinski, 1979 and Summers, 1980). More generally, the potential gain from

reducing the tax on capital income depends on the extent of the exisLin wedge

between the pretax and net—of—tax rates of return.           It is    significant therefore

that   in recent years personal, business and     property    taxes have taken more than
two—thirds of the real pretax return on       capital   used by   nonfinancial     cor-
porations    (Feldstein and Poterha, 1980).
.4




                         Although economists have generally been concerned with reducing this

             source of welfare loss, the public and Congressional discussion has focused on

                      aggregate savings. Moreover, the recent proposals to encourage
             increasing

             saving emphasize the incentive effects of a higher net rate of return and not a
             redistribution     of disposable income from lower income to higher incore groups.

             Indeed, a principal reason for using personal tax changes in addition to changes

             in business tax rules is to permit a targeting of the tax reduction benefits on

             middle income taxpayers rather than on all taxpayers in proportion to their

             existing wealth.

                         A further reason for directly encouraging an increase in personal

             saving is to reduce the inflationary pressures that might otherwise accompany a

     •
             tax—induced increase in the demand for investment.      Although the total rate of

         •
             capital accumulation is constrained by the rate of saving, capital accumulation
             can be increased without altering the personal tax rules if the corporate tax
             rules are changed to increase the rate of return after the corporate income tax.
             This   in turn raises the net return to savers and encourages increased saving.

             If   the savings response were rapid enough, the econorrpT would shift to a higher
             rate of investment with no increase in the rate of inflation. In practice,
             however,   the corporate tax changes would probably raise investment demand more

             rapidly    than the supply of savings. The result would he an increase in infla-
             tionary pressure.7 Direct tax noentiVes to save can prevent these inflationary
             pressures by causing the increase in saving to occur at the same tine as the
             increase    in investment demand.

                          Two   dynamic aspects of saving are particularly important. First,
             because saving represents an adjustment of the stock or wealth, a relatively
                                         —5—




small   change in the desired level of wealth can induce a relatively large

increase in the rate of saving. Second, because the desired level of wealth

depends on the expected future net rates of return, an anticipated reduction in
the future rate of tax on investment incone can induce a rise in current saving.
Thus there can be   an increase   in saving without any concurrent government
deficit.8
            There is surprisingly little econometric evidence about individual

saving behavior and the likely magnitude of response to alternative tax rules.

In particular, there is no evidence that deals explicitly with such things as

the anticipated rate of return, the effect of the tax rate per se, or the impact

of nonlinear rules like the naxirincri levels of deductible savings for the current

Individual Ftirement Accounts. Although we cannot fill these gan in thc

current paper, we believe that we can provide some useful inforrtntion on thc

current distribution of saving, wealth and investment incone in relation to tax

rates and total income. This evidence can be used to evaluate the potential

impact and revenue cost of alternate tax rules in a way that is just not

possible    without detailed microeconomic evidence.   In particular, we focus
attention on the conflict between the desire to linit the individual delucticon
or exclusions (in order to reduce the total revenue lcs and to focus the bene-
fits on middle income taxpayers) and the possibility that such Units would e i —
minate    any marginal incentive for most taxpayers.
            Our analysis uses to bodies of microecoriomic data. Te principal
data source is the Treasury '5 public use samsi e of individual tax returns. We
use a stratified random sample of 26,63 individual tax returns for 1972 (a
one—in—four random sample of the full puhlic use sample) in cunjunct ion with the
                                            -6-


NBER TAXSIM model9     which computes tax liabilities and tax rates based on the tax
law as of 1912 and the alternative modifications. This data set provides

detailed   information on current     interest and dividends, lahor income and total

taxable income for each individual. A special advantage of the 1912 data is

that the exact age of each taxpayer is included (based on I.R.S.       examination   of

Social Security Administration records for each individual). Our second body of

data is the 1972 Consumer Expenditure Survey of the Bureau of Ihor Statistics.

Although the sample of 1,195 observations is inferior to the TAXSIM data in a

number of ways,-0 it     has   the unique advantage of containing information on indi-

vidual financial saving. Since the TAXSIM sample used in this paper is also for

1972, results obtained with the two data sets are generally comparable.

            Although   a great many specific proposals to encourage saving have been
made, all of them have in common the purpose of increasing the net rate o
return on saving or, equivalently, of increasing the amount of future consump-
tion that can be obtained per dollar of current consumption that is foregone.
The proposals that are particularly concerned with saving and that form the
focus of our analysis can usefully be divided into two types: (1) those that
allow the taxpayers to exclude ome amount of saving from taxable income and (2)
those that allow the taxpayer to exclude some amount of interest and dividend
income from taxable income.-- Before examining the specific saving proposals,
we comment briefly on some more general tax proposals that also night encourage
saving.
           The most general of these proposals is to replace the income tax with a
tax on consumer spending.12 In coarison to the income tax, a consumption tax
in   effect allows   a deduction for all saving. A more modest partial move in the
                                        -7-


direction of a consumption tax would be to adopt a value added tax to replace

part of the current tax structure. This again would he like the deduction

method because income that is saved would avoid the value added tax.

            Several general proposals that would reduce the effective tax rate on

interest and dividends have also been actively discussed. Some form of

integration of the corporate and personal taxes (presumably by giving indivi-

duals a credit for corporate taxes in proportion to dividends received) would

raise the net rate of return on equity investment and therefore encourage equity

finance as well as increased saving. The same would be true of a proposal to

permit individuals to exclude a limited amount of dividends that are reinvested

in new issue corporate stock.     Adjusting the measurement of interest income to

exclude   some or all of the effect of inflation on interest rates would encuurarP
the   use of debt as well as increased saving. The proposals to reduce the maxi-

mum marginal tax rate to 50 percent or to tax "personal services income" and

"investment income" on two separate schedules would raise the net return on all

forms   of capital.
            Although these general proposals might he useful in encouraging
saving,   we shall not explore theth further in the paper in order to concentrate

on the simpler and more direct deduction and exclusion proposals. Section 2

examines the deduction approach and considers the consequences of such a

change in both the short—run transition and the londer run. The next section

then analyzes the short—and long—run consequences of interest and dividend

exclusion proposals. There is a brief concluding section.
                                        —8—




2.    Deductions for Saving

           Under existing law, an individual who is not a participant in an

employer—sponsored   pension plan13 can establish an Individual Retirement Account
(IRA) and contribute up to 10 per cent of his wage and salary, with a limit of
$1500 per year. These contributions are deductible from total income in calcu-
lating taxable income and the earnings on the assets in the IRA are not subject
to   tax. A penalty is imposed if the funds are withdrawn from the IRA befnre

the individual-reaches age 59.    Withdrawals   after that age are taxable as ordi-

nary employment income. The IRA is thus similar to a consumption tax with

respect to the eligible amount of saving.1

           The   saving incentive provided by the IRA could he increased in three
ways:    (1) by raising the percentage and/or dollar ceilings on contrihut] ons;
(2) by extending the IRA option to everyone with wage and salary income and not
just to those who are not already participating in a pension plan; and (3) by
increasing the liquidity of the IRA accounts by permitting withdrawals after as
little as (say) four years. To the extent that IRA participants are effec-
tively constrained by either the 10 percent or $1500 limits, the IRA does not
provide any marginal incentive to save more.     In the present paper we compare
some of the implications of 10 percent and 15 percent limits with ceilings of
$2000 and $3000. Because higher limits increase the revenue cost of these
plans, we also consider a combination eta higher ceiling and partial deduo—
t ibility, e.g. , alloying an individual to contribute iS percent of earnings up
to $3000 but deduct only half of this amount. ouch partial deduction plans
increase the range of margi cal effectiveness although, for previously istra—
marginal contributions , they reduce the incentive as we.l as the cost.    ( ReceHe
                                           —9—


the 1972 tax return data do not separate the earnings of husbands and wives, all

of the proposals are defined in terms of the taxpaying unit rather than the

individual.

             The current rule that limits eligibility for an IRA to those who do

not participate in employer pension plans eliminates approximately 50 percent of

all employees.15 Moreover, those employees without pension coverage tend to be

those who are least likely to save and least likely to be affected by tax

cobsiderations; they have low incomes and are frequently quite youngJ6 The

current eligibility limit thus eliminates substantially more than 50 percent of

those who would be encouraged by saving deductibility if it were         generally
available. The current paper examines a savings       deduction plan i n which all
individuals with wage and salary income      may participate. 17
            Finally, the restriction that funds most remain        in the IRA until the
individual reaches age 59    (or   he subject to a special    withdrawal tax and other
penalties) substantially reduces the liquidity of the         IRA savings. For many
individuals, this reduction in liquidity may      outweigh the higher net—of—tax
return    that the IP offers. An individual at age           nay be unwilling to connit
funds for 19 years even in exchange for a higher rate of return. This illi—
quidity could be eliminated by allowing individuals to choose at the end of a
short   period like four years between withdrawing the       funds in the account (and
paying tax on the amount) or "rolling o\rer" the funds for another four year
period.    In practice, individuals who are reluctant to count funds for a very
long period may decide sequentially to leave the funds in the IRA account rather
than pay the tax on the withdrawal. Although we have no way to examine this
issue with the existing data, fbi s possibility for noticing IRA accounts none
A
                                                     —10—



            attractive should 'he borne in mind when considering the likely responses to

            extending the IRA option to all individuals.

                        If   the savings deduction is judged   as an incentive to a higher rate of

            saving,18 there are three potential problems. First, during a transition
            period after the tax law is changed, individuals can reduce their tax liability
            without any increase in saving by transferring previously accumulated assets
            into   the special account. Under an IRA—type plan with a ten percent limit, an

            individual with assets equal to one year's earnings could obtain the maximum

            saving   deduction for a decade without doing any additional saving. Indeed, for

            such an individual, the tax change would provide no marginal incentive to save

            while the tax reduction for previous saving would increase disposable income and

    •       therefore presumahl..y cause an increase in     consumer spending. 19     extent to
        •
            which this is a prOblem depends on the amount of financial, assets (relative to
            earnings)   that individuals have available and on their willingness to sacrifice

            the liquidity of those assets by committing then to an IRA.20 We shall examine

            in   detail the amount of financial assets that iodivi duals have and the potential
            revenue effect if these assets were transferred to a special savings account
            during a transition period after the introduction of a savings deduction rule.
                        The second potential problem with a savings deduction plan is that,
            even after the transition period in which individuals merely transfer pre-
            existing assets into a special. savings account, there would he some individuals
            for whom a saving deduction with dollar and percentage limits would provide
            either no marginal incentive or a marginal incentive that is small relative to
            the intramarginal tax reduction. Thus an individual earning $10,000 and saving
            $900 might increase his saving by    $100   to the $1000 maximum allowed by a 10 per—
                                                   —11—


         cent ceiling but would receive a tax reduction on the entire $1000 amount.          With

         even a 20 percent marginal tax rate, the tax cost would be double the induced

         saving.   We   shall investigate the potential importance of the problem by examin-

         ing the current distribution of saving relative to wage and salary income and

        the potential savings and revenue effects if individuals respond in different

        ways to the change in tax rules.

                     The third problem is that individuals nay not be very responsive to

        the change in the net rate of return implied by the saving deduction. Because

        we are uncertain about the likely response, we shall present results for several

        different behavioral assumptions. At one extreme, we assume no behavioral

        response. At the other, we assume that all individuals take maximum advantage of

•
        the potential deduction. We also investigate a response described in terms of
    •
        the elasticity of current consumption with respect to the marginal       rate of

        transformation     between   current and future consumption.

                     Before looking at the specific results, four notes of caution are

        appropriate. First,      our analysis is only a partial equilibrium one. We    assume

        that   interest rates and other faotor incomes remain unchanged. Second, the onhy
        behavioral    response that we consider is saving. Since a higher net rate of

        return improves the trade—off between current work and future consumption, some

        individuals     may respond by working more. Their savi of: would increase even if
        their saving rate remained unchanged. Of course, for some individuals thu
        income effect would domi nate and work effort would be dcc ceased. 21 We Ign ore
        any such change in work effort and labor income. Third, we do not adopt an
        explicit life cycle framework for our      analysis.   This implies that we do not
                                            —12--



 take age explicitly into account in calculating the response to tax rules22 and

that we do not deal separately with the increased saving of the saving cohorts

and    their subsequent increased dissaving. Analyzing the complex dyrnimics 01'
explicit intertemporal optimization would require much better data than
currently exist. Moreover, there is no agreement on the extent to which indivi-

dual    saving   does correspond to such   rational life—cycle optimization. Finally,

we consider only limited tax consequences; in particular, we ignore the effects

of' increased accumulation on corporate tax revenue.

2.1 Asset Transfers during Transition

            We begin our analysis by examining the extent to which individuals

could   respond to an expanded TEA     program by transferring preexisting assets

into the special saving accOunts. The data that we present show that this is a

relatively unimportant     problem   except perhaps for those with       relatively   high

incomes -

            Table 1 presents the cuiiulative distribution of gross financial assets

in each income class based on the 1912 Thx Model. Although              the tax returns do
not report financial assets as such, the gross financial assets can be
estimated from the reported interet and dividends. For this rurpose, we have
used a uniform dividend yield of three percent for all taxpayers and             a   uniform
interest rate of 1.5 percent.23 It may be useful to hear in mind that in 1912
per capita disposable personal income was $OROT           and   by 1980 it had somewhat more
than doubled (in current prices)       to $8010. The popuLation       to which this tahula—
tion refers includes all faniUes and unrelated individuals, except those
headed by   someone aged 65 or older. Note that among those with incomes under

$10,000 (approximately     $20,000 t   1980   level) ,   19 percent had less than or equa'
                                            —13—




                                        Table      I




                Cumulative   Distribution of Gross Financial Assets


                                    Income Class
                -               (Thousands of Dollars)


Gross Financial
    Assets               0—10        10—20             20—30   30+        All


     $0                   69          38               16        6         55
   $1000                  79          514              27      10          66
   $2000                  83          63               3)4     13          72
   $5000                  89          75                       20          80

  $10,000                 93          8)4              62      28          By

  $20,000                 96          91               714     39          92
  $14o,ooo                98          96               85      5)4         95




Source: 1972 Tax Model.      Dividend and interest are cap.itaJized at 0.03 and o.o
           respectively. Ind vi duals over age 6 are exe ludeci.
                                      Table 2

    Cumulative   Distribution of the Number of Years of Transferable Assets


                                   Income Class
                              (Thousands of Dollars)


  Years of
Trans ferable          0—10        10—20         20—30      30+
   Assets


     1                  79          6o            39        27          69
     2                  82          69            147       31          75
     3                  814         73            514       314         18
     14                 85
                        86
                                    780           60        36          80
     5                                            611       38          82
     6                  87          82           68         110         83
     7                  88          811          70         81          85
     8                  89          8            73         1111        86
     9                  90          888          11         86          8
    10                  90                       76         hy          88
    11                  91          89           79         149         88
    12                  91          89           79         50          89
    13                  91          90           81         52          89
    111                 91          91           82         53          90
    15                  91          91           82         58          90
   16                   91          92           82         55          90
   17
   18
                        92          92           8          55          91
                        93          93           811        57          92
   19                   93          93           85         58          92


   Source: 1972 Thx Model.
   Cumulative percentaqe of taxpayers without the indicated number of years
   worth of financial asset s to finance an IRA equal to l0 of waqes, with a
   ceiling of $2000, soLely from those assets. Individuals over ae 65 are
   excluded. Dividends and interest are capitalized at .03 and .0115
   respectively.
                                                    —15—


        to $1000 of gross financial assets. Only 11 percent had as much as $5000.

                    Since our concern is with the extent to which individuals could use

        existing    financial assets to contribute to an IRA—type plan without doing any
        new saving, we have also restated these estimates of gross financial assets in
        terms   of the number of years that they could be used to fund the maximum IRA—

        type contribution for which the individual is eligible. For example, with an

        allowable IRA—type contribution equal to 10 percent of income with a maximum of

        $2000, an individual earning $15,000 with $1000 of gross financial assets would

        have enough to finance somewhat more than 4 years of maximum IRA contributions.

        Table 2 shows the cumulative distribution of "potential years" for taxpayers

        grouped by income class based on IRA's equal to the lesser of $2000 and 10 per—

•
        cent of wage and salary income. These data exclude taxpayers over age 65 and
    •
        apply the IRA rule to taxpaying units rather than separately to each individual.

        Note that in the class with adjusted gross incomes of less than $io,ooo, 79 per-

        cent did not have enough financial assets to finance even a single year's

        maximum IRA contribution. Since this under $10,000 group contained 60 percent

        of all taxpayers below age 65,   it   is    clear that for the great majority of tax-

        payers there is little problem of     a    substantial revenue loss while these indivi-

        duals finance IRA—type contributions out of previously accumulated assets.

        Even in the higher incone group with 1972 adjusted gross incomes oC $io,000 to

        $20,000, 60   percent lacked even one year's worth of IRA contributions at, tHe
        maximum allowable rate. Only about 15 p'rcent of taxpayers with ACT' s hclov
        $10,000 and 20 percent with AOl's betwcen $10,000 and $20,000 had enongh finan-
        cial   assets to finance as much as five years' of contributions.
             Table 3 presents the aggregate implications of this potential asset

transfer for a saving deduction plan that allows contributions of 10 percent of

income with a $2000 annual maximum. The table shows thai; the rnaxion'rnr cord; rthir—
tion that individuals could legally deduct totalled $56.1 billion or slightly
more than $800 per taxpayer. By contrast, the maximum amount that could be
financed by transfers from existing assets in the first year was only $26.9
billion.    It should be emphasized that this maxirmim transfer would occur only if

all taxpayers were prepared to lose the liquidity of these assets in order to

obtain   the higher net—of—tax return.   (Note that because of the $2000 ceiling
approximately    four—fifths of this deduction accrues to those with incomes below

$20,000 and nearly all of it to those with increases below $30,000.)

            The distribution of assets in Thles 1 and 2 implies that this first

year transfer would exhaust much of the available assets of most taxpayers. The

final column of Table 3 confirns the importance of this by tabulating the amount

of preexisting assets that could be transferred, in the third year of such a new

tax rule. The total anunt of transferable assets is reduced from $32 billion

to   only $ii billion, or less than one—third of the maximum potential
contribution in that year.
           In   interpreting the revenue losses associated with asset transfers, it

is important to bear in mind that they represent a one—tine fixed cost of tran-
sition to a new system. The true economic cost of this revenue lee;; is not the
revenue loss itself but the such smaller excess burden that would he incurred in
making up this lost revenue or that oth'rwise could have been avoidnd if the
lost revenue had instead been used to reduce some other distortingr tax. The
                                          —17—




                                         Table   3




                            Aggregate Effects of Alternative

                                 Savings Deduction Plans



              MU-lions of                  Maximum
Class                                                           Contributions    from
                Returns                 Contribution                   Assets
 ($1000)
                                                                Year 1           Year 3
                                         ($   billion)     (5   bIllion)        ($   billion)
0—10            2.2                           17.9              5.1                   3.1
10—20           22.2                          28.6             i8.                    8.1
20—30            i.l                           .2               5.2                   3.6
30+              1.6                           2.i              2.1                   1.9
All             70.0                          56.1             26.9                  16.8

Source:    1972 Tax Model

Potential reductions in taxable income with
The maximum deduction is 10 percent of waesthe introduction of a universal IRA.
                                            with a cejHn of 2QQQ.
Individuals over age age 65 are excluded.
                                             —iB—


 corresponding gain is the present value of the perpetual reduction in the excess

 burden caused by the incorrect x of taxes on capital and labor incomes.

 Because this is a comparison of a one—tine cost with a perpetual gain in a

 growing econorr', the one—time transition cost is likely to he relatively small.

 2.2 Marginal and Intrainarginal Saving After the Transition
          After the transition period, an individual can have          a tax deduction

 only for net saving that actually adds to individual wealth and the national

 capital stock.2 Of course, some of this saving would have been done anay.

 Moreover, for those individuals who would in any case have saved more than the

 maximum deductible amount, the deductible saving would         be intramarginal and the
tax   rule would influence saving only by an income effect. For such individuals,

 since some of the tax reduction would he spent, the net effect would he an

increase in consumption. But for those         individuals   who would otherwise   have
saved less than the deductible amount, the new rule would provide a marginal

incentive to save. If however, the saving would have been close to the limit,
the increased saving may be constrained to be less than the tax reduction.
            To shed some light on this issue, we have exanineil the distribution of'

existing saving   rates   relative to wage   and salary income.    For this purpose, we

use the 1912 Consumer Expenditure Survey and define saving as the 'change in
nominalnet financial assets, excluding the appreciation of portfolio assets.'
We use this definition of saving (rather than say the change in net worth)
because this defines the kind of saving for which the tax deduction wo1d he
allowed. We then use this information to calculate the aoount of ir1trnnarLIna1
saving   and other preexisting saving for which taxpayers would receive deductinrir
                                           —19—


 and compare this to the potential increases in saving that might be induced

 under different assumptions about the behavioral response of taxpayers. The

 effects on tax revenue are also calculated.

             Table     presents the cumulative distributions of the ratio of net

 financial saving to wage and salary income for four income classes as well as

 for households as a whole.      It is clear that a 10 percent limit on deductible

 saving would be a binding constraint for only a small fraction of all

households. Among those with income below $10,000, only 1)4 percent saved 10

percent    of their income in the form of financial asset accumulation. The frac-

tion is essentially the same for those with incomes between $10,000 and $20,000.

Among those with incomes over $20,000, the $2000 limit on saving deductibility

becomes     the constraint instead of the 10 flercent limit. This implies that
deductibility would be      intramarginal for a larger fraction of these taxpayers.

But    the figures for the $20,000 to $30,000 class imply that         only about   one in
five    would otherwise be at or above the deductibility limit.

             Another   striking feature of Table )4 is    the very high fraction of

households who report no change in      their   gross   financial assets. Some 2)4 per—
cent of all households indicate some reduction          in financial assets during the
year nd an additional 37 percent       indicate nei ther saving nor dissaving. Only
39 percent    report positive saving. A tax rule        allowing deductibility of saving
would    provide an unambiguous incentive to save       fore   to the (0 percent with zero
or negative saving since there would hr no        offsetting     income effect associated
with    preexisting saving (Feldstein and Psiang,       19GB).

         We have prepared simulations to compare the effects on saving and tax
revenue of four alternative saving deductions and several different posib]e
                                      —20—




                                     Table


                    Cumulative Distribution of the Ratio of
            Changes in Net Financial Assets to Wage and Salary Income



                                            Income Class
                                        (Thousands of Dollars)

Ratio of Change
in Financial Assets        0—10        10—20        20—30        30+    All
to Wage and Salary
Income


                            15          16          18           12      15
—0.02                       19          20          18           15      19
 < 0                        23          26          28           20      28
   0                        69          51          89           8i      61
 0.02                       '76         69          59           58      To
 0.08                       80                      68           63     77
 o.o6                       83          81                              80
 0.08                       85          88          '1'          69     83
 0.10
 0.12
                            86
                            88
                                        888         79
                                                    86
                                                                 '72
                                                                 '73
                                                                        85

 0.15                       89          90          86           77
 0.18                       90          91                       18     90
 0.36                       98          96          98           88     95



Source:   1972 Consumer Expenditure Survey

Tabulations exclude households with no wage or salary income
-a
                                                  —21--



     behavioral responses. The two basic savings deductions are 10 percent of earn-

     ings with a $2000 limit and 15 percent of earnings with a $3000 limit. A more

     restricted     alternative that reduces the revenue loss without changing the seL of
     taxpayers for whom the deduction provides a marginal incentive would limit the
     tax deduction to only half of the contribution to the saving plan; i.e. , a tax-
     payer with earnings of $15,000 could contribute up to $1500 but would receive a

     tax deduction for only $150. The earnings on all the assets in the fund would,

     however, be untaxed. The final option presented in this table is designed to

     offset the fact that higher income taxpayers already save a larger fraction of

     their income than low income taxpayers. For taxpayers with incomes over

     $10,000, it restricts the deduction to the excess over a "floor" equal to 5           per-
     cent of the earnings over $10,000. For example, a taxpayer with earnings            of
     $20,000     could only deduct savings contributions in excess of $500.        Such a tax-
     payer   could contribute an additional $2000 hut would receive a deduction only of

     $2000 for the $2500 contribution. This would have no adverse incentive effect

     on anyone who would save at least five percent under existing tax rules.

     Moreover, even the initial five percent has some incentive effect associated

     with   it   since the income on all   the   assets in   the fund is untaxed. Indeed, for
     some high income     taxpayers for whom the $2000 ceiling is a binding limit, the

     ability to contribute an additional five percent of nondeductible earnings nay

     be an incentive to     save.25
                  For each of the four alternative plans, we have calculated the in -:
     in   savings and   decrease in tax revenue implied by      several   alternative hehaviora
     response assumptions. The first assumption, that there is no change in saving,
                                        —22—




provides   a reference standard for comparing the tax revenue implications of

alternative behavioral responses. At the opposite extreme would be the assump-

tion   that taxpayers increase their saving to the    maximum amount of the allowed

deduction.     It seems very unlikely, however, that individuals   who currently do

no saving would suddenly switch to this maximum amount. We have therefore exa-

mined two alternatives that are much more conservative. The first assumption is

that only those who currently have positive saving would switch to the maximum,

with no change in the behavior of nonsavers. The alternative assumption is that

taxpayers with positive assets would take the maximum deduction while those with

no assets would not respond at all. A fourth assumption is an arbitrary inter—

mediate response:     each taxpayer who has positive saving increases his saving

halfway from his actual 1972 level to the maximum amount. For example, a tax—

payer with $15,000 of earnings and $500 of preexisting annual savings would,

with the 10 percent plan, increase his saving to $1000.

             The other three behavioral response calculations reflect the assurnp—

tion that consumer spending responds to the income and substitution effects of a

deduction rule with constant partial price and income elasticities. The basic

concept in this calculation is the relative "price of current consumption in

terms of foregone future consumption. Consider an individual who decides bet-

ween spending a dollar now or saving it and spending the principal and accumu-
                                               Let the nominal interest rate he L,
lated interest at the end of T years.26

the inflation rate he v, and the individual' s marginal tax rate he 0.       Under

current    law, the individual chooses between spending $1 now    and spending

(1+    (1_0)f)T dollars in year T. The real value of that T—th year spending is
(l±(l_O)i)T/(l±r)T, or, ignoring terms that are of second order, (l÷(l_0)ia)T.
e shall call this rate of      fornation R0. If the individual could instead
                                       —23—



deduct   the dollar of saving, by foregoing one dollar of current consumption he

could add 11(1—0) dollars to his current savings. If the saving accumulates

untaxed, this grows to (l+i)TI(l_0) dollars at the end of T years. The indivi-

dual pays tax on this nominal value, although presumably at a lower tax rate

(o'<   0) because he is then retired. The net of tax accumulation is thus (i—o')

(1÷1)T/(1e)•     In real terms this is (again ignoring second order terms)

   = (1—0') (l+i_r)T/(l_0).2T

           Note that if 0' = 0, the combination of deductibility and the non—

taxation of the interest on the saving acccount is equivalent to having no

deduction and then allowing the saving to accumulate completely untaxed (i.e.

with no tax when funds are disbursed from the account). This is equivalent to

consumption tax treatment and removes the distortion in the individual's choice

between early and late consumption. JIoever, the distortion between leisure and

consumption (both present and future) remains and presumably biases the

individual's decision in favor of leisure. At the alternative extreme in which

withdrawals from the fund at retirement are untaxed (0' =       0),   the individual

chooses between one dollar of current 000sumptlOn and (i+i_r)T/(l_0) dollars of

consumption in year T. This represents a more favorable tradeoff between

current and future consumption than a consumption tax and thus distorts consump-

tion in favor of the retirement years. But because it permits the individual           t

transform a dollar of pretax earnings into retirement consumption at the real

rate of interest, such treatment offsets the bias     against   working that is
Inherent in the consumption tax. Indeed, with 0        0 this method is equivalent
to no tax at all as far as the trade—off between current leisure and future con-
sumption is concerned.
           For the purpod   of the simulations,   we approximate the change in con.-
 sumptiori as the sum   of   a price effect and an income effect:



                                      DC               DC
 (2.1)                       dC =               dR +         dY
                                      DR               DY

 where C is consumption, H is the price of current consumption (in terms of

 foregone future consumption) and Y is disposable income. From 2. 1 it directly
 follows that

 (2.2)                  dCH DCdR Y DCdY
                        C         C        DR      P        C DY         Y


                        =    ap       dR
                                       H               Y

where ap and ay arc the price and income elasticities. We shall assume that

these partial price and incone elasticities are locally constant.

            We use this approximation to calculate the level of consumption under

the deduction rule (C1) as a function of the initial consumption level (C0), the

two related price values (H1 and H0) and the income effect of the tax change

(dY). For simplicity, we shall describe this in the case where the individual

initially has a positive level of saving (00 > 0) but in which the deduction

limi is never binding (i.e., both 00 and the level of saving under the deduc-

tion rule, S1, are less than the limit, L).                  In this ease, the relative price

increase   caused by the deduction rule is dR/H =                  (HJ   —
                                                                             R0)/H0.   rftle income eftect
depends on the change in income caused l the deduction rule at the initial
level of saving. Recall that under current tax law the individual who saves
S0 "buys" future consumption of S0R0. With the deduction rule, this same level
of future consumption can be bought at the lower current cost, R009/R1 . The
difërence between these to is the increase in income at the initial consl:ip—
                                              —25—



tion pattern. Thus dY = Sj —                   = s0(R1    —
                                                              R0)/R1.    Substituting these

expressions into equation 2.2 we obtain:


                   cl—co                                  So(Rl—Ho)
(2.3)            ________   —
                                a5   —R1—R0
                                        _____
                                              +cty   _________
                   Co                                         Y051

              It is clear that equation 2.3 is only an approximate measure of the

change in consumption. We use the linear approximation of                  equation 2.1 and
evaluate it at the initial values of R0 and                    We define   consumption   to

include all uses of income other than financial saving and taxes; in par—

ticular, we include mortgage repayments in consumption. Moreover, we look only

at a single year in isolation. In a full life cycle model, the price effects

would be more complex, the income change would reflect the discounted value of

the price changes in future years as well, and the initial level                 of income (Yp)
would be replaced by a discounted value of future incomes.                  (Note however that
if   the   individual's saving rate remained relatively constant             over a number of
years,     the use of 50/Y0 instead of a ratio of two discounted             values would not
change the result appreciably.)

             The magnitudes of the income and substitution effects determine

whether the switch to a deduction rule raises or lowers consumption. The effect

on saving can then be calculated from the change in consumption and the change

in tax revenue:

(2J1)                       (s1—s0) +   (cc0)   + (TT—TO) =

where    Tp is the individual's tax liability under current tax law and T1 is the
tax liability under the deduction rule. Fur an individual whose final level of
savings is below the deduction limit, T1 —           Tg
                                                          =   —OS1,   i.e., the individual's tax
liability is reduced by the jroduct of his marginal tax rate ( o)               and Iii s savi ro H
                                                  —26—


 deduction Cs1). Note that equation 2.1-i implies that even if the income and

 substitution effects on consumption balance so that consumption remains

 unchanged (01 — C0 = 0)         ,   saving will increase if the tax liability falls
       —   o>0    if T1 — T0 C        0).   Of course, the income effect could dominate the

 price incentive and cause consumption to rise by enough to leave savings lower.

 To evaluate this in the current case, we need values of a5 and czy and the micro—

 economic distributions of tax rates, savings, and incomes.

            Befote discussing the values of a5 and czy, we may comment briefly on

 three special cases where saving is negative, zero or above the limit. If mi—

tial saving is negative (5 c 0), there is neither an income effect nor a price

effect. Both consumption and saving remain unchanged.               With zero initial

 saving, there is a price effect but no income effect; consumption falls and

saving rises. For an individual whose initial saving exceeds the deduction

limit       >    L),   there is no price effect (since R1 = o) and an income effect

given by L(R1 — Rü)/51; consumption rises and savings may             rise   or fall.

Finally, for an individual whose initial level of savings is below the ceiling

(o C L) but for whom equation 2.3 and 2. imply that l exceeds the ceiling, we
take   savings to be either the limit or, if it is greater, the value of savings

irrqlied by the income effect alone.

             all of our simulations, we assume a unit elasticity of consumption
            In

with respect to disposah].e income: °y = 1. Since we lack reliable econometric
evidence on a, we perform simulations for a range of values. At one extreme ic
the case of a =        0,   i.e. ,
                             substitution effect. In this implausible limitinu
                                     no

case, the only response to the tax change is the income effect and therefore an
increase in consumption. More generally, 5R < 0 and the response of consooptioc
depends on the relative p ngth of substitution and income effect-s. Since
                                                        —27—


intuition about consumer behavior is in terms of the uncompensated price elasti-

city rather than the pure pribe effect, we derive sinu1ation values of a0 from

assumptions about the uncompensated response cf consumption for a "reprecentative"

taxpayer with disposable income of Y0 = $10,000, savings of 00 = $200 and a

marginal tax rate of 0 =              0.25.     To calculate the values of E0 and 01, let i =

0.10    be the nominal interest rate and it                  = 0.08 be the rate of inflation. Assume

that the time to retirement consumption is T = 15 years and that in retirement

the individual's marginal tax rate will be half what it is now:                            0' =   0.500.

Then     0o = (1 +     (l—0)i     —    )T     = (1 + .075 —       .08)15   =   0.93 and El = (1—0')

(l÷i_ii)T/ (1—0) =      0.875 (l.02)-5/0.75 = 1.57.                 Thus El/Ho = 1.69.

            Consider first the case in which a change in the net rate of return

has no effect on consumption: 01 = C0.                         Equation 2.3 then implies that



                                       El—Ho                   So(Ri—Ho)
(2.5)             0a0                               +   ay        1001


or, with a- =    1,

                                 _____         00
(2.6)                 aR =   —

                                  10           Hi

These specific assumptions for our representative taxpayer then imply a0 =

—0.0118.    Frote that although this value of a0 implies that the income and

substitution    effects balance and leave consumption unchanged for the
"representative" taxpayer, someone with a lower initial saving rate will have a
smaller income effect and will, therefore, he induced by the deduction rule to
reduce consumption while someone with a higher initial savings rate will he
induced to increase consumption.
            We also present imulations based on the annirnpt ion that an increaoc
                                                —28—


in the net rate of return would cause our representative taxpayer's consumption

to decrease, i.e., that the substitution effect outweighs the income effect.

More specifically, we approximate the consumption response of this type of

"representative" taxpayer to deductibility as a two percent decrease in consimip—
tion. Equation 2.3 then implies

(2.7)         —0.02 =        1.57    —
                                         0.93    +   0.02(1.57 — 0.93)
                                    0.93                   1.57
or aR =
            The   relation between these responses of         a   "representative" individual
and   the aggregate responses that we obtain in the simulations reflects the

distribution of initial saving rates and price changes and the effects of the

deductibility ceilings. We should again emphasize that these calculations are

not precise estimates but are approximations for a broad range of pararvter

values. A more complete analysis would instead derive each individual's con-

sumption response with the help of an explicit utility function in a life cycle

context. Realistic life cycle calculations would have to take into account

bequests and inheritances as well as family structure, private pension henefit,

Social Security, etc. Liquidity considerations and the possibLe favorable

misunderstanding of the deductibility should also be considered. At this time,

there is just not enough information to perform such a calculation.

           In the simulations we calculate two different measures of the             effect
of   the deduction on tax revenue. The first of these is the short—run effect

that results from the immediate deduction oC the savings deposited in the spe-

cial account. This is approximately equal to the product of the individual's
                                         —29—


marginal tax rate and the lesser of savings (s1) and the ceiling on the

savings deduction. In fact, we use the Tax Model to calculate more precisely

the effect of the savings deduction in a way that takes into account the non-

linearity of the tax schedule and other features of the tax law. Of course, for

taxpayers with negative savings, there is no change in tax revenue.

              Because withdrawal of funds from the savings account requires paying

tax, the initial deduction is in part only a postponement of the tax liability.

Indeed, if the tax rate in retirement is equal to the tax rate when working

(0' =   0),   the initial deduction is fully offset by the subsequent withdrawal

tax. The advantage of the deduction account is then only that the income on the

assets accrues without tax. More generally, the long—run reduction in tax reve-

nue reflects both the lower tax rate when funds are withdrawn (O'< 8) and the

exclusion from taxable income of the interest and dividend income on the amount

of savings that would have been done under the old law (since the income on the

induced saving would not otherwise exist).

              We calculate the long—run revenue loss by noting first that the ini-

tial level of saving S grows under current law to R0S0 before it is consumed

while, with the deductions, it grows to            The entire difference, (51—R0)50,

is the accumulated value of the lower taxes that the governrent collects on

2o   and on the resulting interest and dividend income. The present value of that
difference  as of the initial date, discounting at the real pretax rate of
returns, is (51_50)S5/(l+i_n)T. This is the present value of the revenue loss
associated with the initial level of savings. The additional saving causes an
additional revenue loss to the extent that the tax rate in retirement (3') is
less than the tax rate at the time that the deduction is taken. If S1 is i ens
                                           —30—


than the deduction limit, the initial revenue loss on the induced saving is

e(s1—s0). The induced saving grows over time to (S1—S0) (i+i_ir)T and yields a

tax revenue of O(s1_s0)(l+i_)T/(l+i_)T = e'(S1—s)).           The net revenue lo; on

the induced saving is thus (O—O')(S1---S0). The full long—run reduction in

revenue (associated with the single year's saving) thus has a present value of

(Rl_o)so/(1+i_u)T + (o—o')(s1—s0).         The simulations modify this formula in the

appropriate way in the cases where initial saving is negative or where the limit

on deductibility is binding 29 and use the full tax simulation calculations
instead of just the marginal tax rate.
            Table 5   summarizes   the results of these simulations. Consider first
the    effects of the alternative plans on tax revenue if    taxpayers do not adjust
their saving at all. A savings deduction limited by 10 percent of          wages and

$2000 would have an immediate revenue cost of $i9. The present value of the
full    long—run tax effect is slightly larger, $60,    implying   the exclusion of the

interest and dividends outweighs the recouping of part of the initial deduction.

Increasing the limits by 50 percent (to 15 percent of wages -and $3000) increases

the initial cost by proportionally less hut increases the long—run deduction by

almost 50 percent. This indicates that the primary value to          taxpayers   of the

higher limits is in the implied interest and dividend exclusion. Finally, note

that while cutting the     deduction   in half obviously halves the short—run revenue

loss,   the long—run revenue effect is much less.
            Consider now the effects of the al terrative saving responses to the 0
percent deduction limit,      if taxpayers who already do some saving increase their
saving   to take   full advantage of the deductions, average saving would rise by

$158. The deduction of this saving would increase the revenue ions by $36,             free
                                                                                TpbLe   5.



                                                 Simulations of DIfferent Behavioral Responses to Alternative


                                                      Saving Deduction Rules:   Mean Changes in Saving and Taxes


                                                                                                                           Deduction with floor:
                                                                                        Partial Deduction:             10 Percent Deduction, $2000 Limit,
                                10 Percent Deduction,        iS Percent Deduction     One—half of 15 Percent              Floor of 5 Percent of Income
                                     $2000 Limit                  $3000 Limit         Deduction, $3000 Limit                      over $101000
                                    Chance in                   Change  In                                  in
                                                                                                   Change                       Change in
                                          Tax Revenue      Saving     Tax Revenue                      Tax Revenue         Saving   Tax Revenue
                                         Short   Long                Short    Long                    Short   Long                 Short   Long
                                          Run    Run                  Run      Run                    Run        Run                Run     Run

So       rips   Unchanged       0        49      60            0       61        86           0          31       67          0         37       24

Savings increase to
Maximum if                      158      85      78         298       125       HO       289             64       83         97          57      34
Saving > 0

                                                                                                                                                            -S
Savings Increase to
ilaximum If                     129      79      75         240       116       114      240             61       82         79          53      32
Assets > 0


Savings Increase
Half Way to                     79       67      69          144      94        102      144             94       99         48          47      29
Maximum if
Saving > 0

Representative
Consumption                     58       47       57          57       54        82          28          29       66         26          32      22
Unchanged
(cx=—D.D 118)

Representative
Consumption                     10       37       51           5      43         77          —8          25       64          10         30      21
 n creased
          =
     R

Representative
Consumption                     157      69       68          168      79        94          111         39       71         68          40      26
Ce or Era sad
(a =—U.C4l)


Sonrce:          Simulations based on 1972 Consumer Expenditure Survey.
                                      —32—




$49 to $85. The present value of the long—run revenue loss would also rise, but
by proportionately less since the increase reflects the differences between the

initial   deduction and the present value of the extra revenue obtained when    the


funds are withdrawn. The corresponding figures when the response is limited to

those who initially had positive assets or when the size of the response is

halved are similar although obviously somewhat smaller.

           The partial price elasticity associated with unchanged consumption for

the representatiie taxpayer (aR = —0.0118) causes saving to rise by an average

of $58 per taxpayer. The immediate revenue loss associated with this is $47 and

the long—run revenue loss is $57. Thus in this case, the increased personal

saving exceeds the immediate reduction in personal tax revenue and is approxima-

tely equal to the long—run tax reduction. If the incentive to postpone consump-

tion does cause a fall in consumption, the   increase   in saving exceeds the short—

run and long—run loss of tax revenue.

            Since all of these figures are means per taxpayer and there were 70

million taxpayers in 1972, these estimates imply that the immediate revenue cost

of a 10 percent deduction plan is a minimum of $3.5 billion (at 1972 levels)

with no saving response. Beyond that, each dollar of induced saving reduces

revenue by only about 20 cents. With consumption unchanged, the revenue loss is

$3.5 billion and the increased saving is $4 billion. With consumption reduced by

two percent, the revenue loss is somewhat less than $5 billion and the saving

increase is about $10 billion.

            Tables 6 and 7 analyze the effects of a savings deduction by income

class.    Table 6 accepts the conservative assumption of unchanged   consumer
                                                                           Table 6



                         Distributional Implications of Alternative Savings Deduction with No Change       in   Consumption


                                                       lean Changes   in   Saving and Taxes




                                                                                                                 Deduction with floor:
                                                                                    Partial Deduction:      10 Percent Deduction, $2000 Limit,
                          10 Percent Deduction,       15 Percent Deduction        One—half of 15 Percent       Floor of 5 Percent of Income
                               $2000 Limit                 $3000 Limit            Deduction, $3000 Limit             over $10,000
                              Change in                   Change in                     Change In                       Change in
Income                  Saving      Tax Revenue      Saving     Tax Revenue        Saving   Tax Revenue            Saving   Tax Revenue
Class                              Short   Long                Short   Long                Short   Long                    Short   Long
                                    Run    Run                  Run     Run                 Run     Run                     Run     Run

Less   than
$10,000                              9         9      11        10           15      6         5      12             12       9      9


510,000                  60          53      70       58        61           96      28       33     79              26       38    35


520,000                 166         143      168     146       160          273      67       88    221              69       88    38


$30,000÷                444        310     329       521       387          427      282      193   291             172       175   16


All                      58         47       57       57        54           82       28      29     66              26        32   22




Source:    Simulations based on 1972 Consumer Expenditure Survey.
           Al I f ioures are means and are expressed in 1972 dollars.
                                                                                Table 7


                               Distributional Aspects of Alternative Behavioral Responses to a 10 Percent Savings Deduction:


                                                                 ean      Changes in Saving and Taxes



                                        Change in Saving                                  Short Term Change in Taxes                 Lon   Run Changes in Taxes
                                          Income Class                                            Income Class                             Income Class
                            Less than                                         Less than                                    Less than
                              $10,000    $10,000—   $20,000—    530,000+     $10,000   $10,000—    $20,000—      $30,000   $10,000     $10,000—    $20,000—   $30,000


                                 0            0          0            0          9         58        155         260         9              73       174          307
Savings Unchanged

Savinns    Increase    to       44        251          353        267           16        110        252         371         12             99       223          362
Maximum    if
Saving    > 0


Savings Increase       to
Maximum If                      25        207          320        253           14        101        243         366         11             95       218          360
Assets > 0


Savings Increase
                                          126          177        134           13         84        204         319         11             86       199          336
Half Way to                     22
-laxi mum f
Saving > 0

Representative
                                           61          166        444            9         53        143         310          9             70       168          329
.Oonsunption                    13
On   c HOng ed
(a5        -0.0118)                                                                                                -
Representative
                                                        41        112            7         43        115         194          8             65        154         272
Consumption                      2            5
 ncroosed
(a        0)



5oprescn5a ye
                                                       462        691             13        77          210      452         11             82       202          400
Consumption                               194
Oe crcas ed

(a       —c.o41)


Emu-ce:        Si mu   ions   besod on 1072   Consor   Expend   uru   Survey.
                                         —35—


spending and examines the impact on saving and taxes of alternative deduction

plans. It is clear that the basic deduction of 10 percent of wages with a $2000

limit induces proportionally more response at each higher level of income.

Note that switching from a 10 percent, $2000 limit to a 15 percent, $3000 limit

has virtually no effect except in the highest income group. Table I focuses just

on the 10 percent, $2000 deduction limit but examines the responses in each

income class associated with different types of behavior. One point worth

noting is that the effect of different price elasticities on the amount of

saving is proportionately greater for low income taxpayers than for high income

taxpayers. Note also that, regardless of the price elasticity, there is little

tax reduction below $10,000 and that above $10,000 the tax reduction rises at

least in proportion to income.


3. Exclusion of Interest and Dividends

            Until 1980, an individual taxpayer could exclude the first one hundred

dollars of dividend income from adjusted gross income and therefore from taxable

income. A couple could exclude twice that amount. The law was modified in 1980

to double these exclusions and to extend them from dividends to both dividends

and in1erest. For anyone with interest and dividend income below the limit, the

exclusion effectively eliminates the tax on such income at the margin and there-

fore has the full neutrality of a consunption tax.

            The principal problem with the current exclusion is that the limit nay

be too   low. For a couple with more than tOO    of interest and dividends, the

exclusion   is   intramarginal and has no effect on the taxation of additions to

wealth. With today's interest rates, a couple with as little as $11000 of wealth
                                      —36—


could easily find that the income that results from any additional saving would

be fully taxed. This section considers alternative proposals to raise the limit

on the exclusion. To reduce the cost of such an increase, we also consider two

partial exclusion plans (the first plan excludes 20 percent of all interest and

dividend income while the second plan excludes one half of the first $1000 of

interest and dividend Income)30 and a plan with a floor (individuals with inco-

mes in excess of $10,000 can only exclude interest and dividend income to the

extent that it exceeds five percent of the income over $10,000 and then only up

to a limit of $1000).


          From the taxpayers' point of view, the interest and dividend exclusion

has two advantages over a savings deduction that implies the same real net rate

of return. First, because the interest and dividend exclusion is not restricted

to a separate account, there is no loss of liquidity to counterbalance the

increase in yield. Second, there are no additional accounting or record keeping

requirements. Both of these features suggest that, all other things equal,

individuals are likely to be more responsive to an exclusion than to a savings

deduction. Against this might be balanced the "psychological effect of the

savings deductions In focusing attention on an immediate tax reward for saving.

We know of no evidence on the basis of which this can be evaluated.

          The dividend and interest exclusion also has the advantage that there

is no transition problem comparable to the transfer of existing assets that

occurs with a savings deduction, Of course, the interest and dividend exclusion

has an analogous problem since taxes are reduced immediately on the interest and

dividends earned on preexisting wealth. But this problem does not just apply
                                                —37—


         during the transition. Rather, with the interest and dividend exclusion, there

         is no real distinction between the initial "transition" tax reductions and the

         subsequent   "steady state" reduction in taxes that result from assets that would
         have existed even without the exclusion.
                     The principal issue in judging   the potential usefulness of the
         interest   and dividend exclusion is the amount of additional saving that is

        generated per dollar of foregone tax revenue. Of course, there is no revenue

        loss directly caused by the increased accumulation of wealth induced by the new

        tax rule. The interest and dividends that go untaxed would not have existed

        otherwise and therefore obviously would not have been taxed. All of the revenue

        loss is due to the exclusion of interest and dividends or wealth that would have
•
        existed in any case.3- This revenue loss therefore depends on the distribution
    •

        of existing interest and dividends, the limit on the exclusion, and the fraction

        that is excluded if less than a full exclusion. Section 3.1 presents evidence
        on this distribution.
                    In evaluating the likely response to an interest and dividend
        exclusion, we give particular attention to those who currently have zero
        interest and dividends. As the data in section 2 on the distribution of gross
        financial assets implied, this is a very sizeable group. Asong taxpayers as a
        whole, 46 percent had no interest and dividends. The concentration of indivi-

        duals at zero reflects a kink in the intertemporal budget constraint. Even in

        the absence of taxes, the budget constraint would be kicked at the point of     zero
        saving,   reflecting the fact that the borrowing rate exceeds the rate that indi-

        viduals receive on deposits. Since most taxpayers do not itemize their
                                         —38—


deductions, the tax rules leave the borrowing rate unchanged hut reduce the net

lending rate even more.32

            Because of the kink, individuals with different preferences wii.l have
the same behavior. Because the reason that a particular individual has zero
interest   and dividends in equilibrium cannot be determined from the available data,

the likely effect of a tax change is ambiguous as well. Figure 1 illustrates

this ambiguity in a two—period model of income and consumption. In both parts

of this figure,line ABC represents a constant interest rate budget line between

current and future consumption. At point B, the individual neither borrows nor

lends. The tax on interest income shifts the lending segment of the budget

constraint from BC to BE. The higher interest rate on borrowing than on lending

shifts the borrowing segment from AR to DR.

            In figure IA,   the individual faced with the constant interest rate
budget   line ABC would choose to save and therefore to consume at point X.    But

with the kinked budget line DBE, the individual chooses point B with no

borrowing and lending.      In figure lB, the individual faced with line ABC would

choose   to borrow and therefore to consume at point Y. But with the kinked budget
line   DBE, this individual also chooses point B. The exclusion of interest and

dividend income would raise the savings segment of the budget line from BE to

BC. In figure IA, this induces the individual to save and shifts the

equilibrium from B to X; in contrast, in figure lB this has no effect on the

individual's behavior. Because we only observe that the individual is now at

point B and cannot distinguish between the IA and lB situations, the effect of

the tax change is ambiguous.
                          —39—




                        4gire 1

     The Kinked Interteniporal Budget Constraint


Future
Consumption
                    C
                                                     Figure lA


                    E
                             x




                                   D             A

                           Current Consumption



 Future
 Consump Lion
                C
                                                 Figure lB


                E




                                       Y




                                  D          A

                          Current Consumption
                                       —4o—




           We   might in principle reduce the uncertainty by distinguishing be-

tween those individuals with zero interest and dividends who also borrow and

those who do not. The borrowers are in equilibrium on segment BI) and   would   not.


be influenced by a shift in the lending line from BE to BC. The ambiguity would

therefore pertain only to those who were truly at point B with no borrowing as

well as no lending. There are two difficulties with this line of reasoning.

The first is a practical one: information on borrowing is only available for

itemizers and is. therefore not available for the majority of taxpayers and for

an even larger share of the group without interest and dividends since itemizing

of deductions is relatively uncommon in this group. But even if information on

borrowing were available, there would he a problem since many individuals both

borrow and lend. Since the borrowing is generally at a higher interest rate

than the lending (typically consumer credit and savings accounts), the observed

behavior reflects considerations of liquidity and convenience and therefore can-

not be reconciled with the simpler analysis of figure 1.

          Since the prospective behavior of those who currently have no interest

or dividends is inherently ambiguous, we present simulations based on two alter-

native assumptions about this grOup. The first type of simulation makes the

very conservative assumption that all individuals would prefer to be borrowing

and therefore do not change their saving in response to an interest and dividend

exclusion rule. The alternative sets of simulations assume that all indivi-

duals respond by increasing their wealth to take at least some advantage of the

exclusion; no distinction is made between those who initially have interest and

dividend income and those who do not. This behavior is consistent with figure
                                          —4l—


1A (although with the individual switching from B to a point that may      induce
less saving than at X if the exclusion limit is binding). Further information

about the simulation method as well as the simulation results will be presented

in section 3.2

3.1 The Distribution of Interest and Dividend Income

           The current distribution of interest and dividend income determines

the tax revenue effects of various exclusion limits and the extent to which

changes in the limits can have marginal incentive effects.        In considering the

data presented in this section, it is important to bear in mind that the 1980

level of per capita income was approximately double the 1972 level and therefore

that the typical taxpayer in 1980 had approximately twice the amount of finan—

cial assets. Moreover, the level of interest rates and the dividend—price ratio

also doubled between 1972 and 1980. Thus, a taxpayer who had $200 of interest

and dividends in 1972 probably had about $800 in 1980.

           Table 8 presents the cumulative frequency distribution of interest and

dividend income by AGI class. Note that 6 percent of all taxpayers had no

interest and dividend income and that an additional 25 percent had between $1 and

$200 of such income. Introducing.a $200 exclusion would thus provide an increase

in the marginal real net interest rate for 11 percent of taxpayers while giving

a tax reduction with no marginal incentive effect to the remaining 29 percent.

Extending the exclusion fran $200 to $10O would add an additional 1 percent to

the   number of   taxpayers   with a higher real net return and would double the

intramarginal tax saving for the 22 percent of taxpayers with more than $Io0 of

interest and dividends.
                                      Table 8




           Cumulative   Distributions of Interest and Dividend Income

                        by Adjusted Gross Income Classes




Interest and                                Adjusted Gross Income Class
Dividend Income                               (Thousands of Dollars)

                        0—10        10—20          20—30        30+       All



   $0                    58          37                          5

   $ 200                 77'         70                         18

   $liOO                 82          80              59         26

   $800                  8y          81              13         )40        85

   $1600                 91          93              82         5)4        90




1ta:   1912 Tax Model Data



Numbers indicate cumulative percentages of taxpayers with less than the indi-
cated amount of interest and dividend income.
                                             _)4 3—




                 Since the vast majority of 1972 taxpayers had AGPs below $10,000, the

 overall pattern also describes the distribution of interest and dividend income

 in that income class. The pattern is also similar among those with A0Is            be-
 tween $10,000 and $20,000. Only in the very small class of taxpayers with

 higher incomes (less than 10 percent of 1972 taxpayers had flOPs over $20,000)

 did the interest and dividend distribution differ substantially from this

pattern. For example, among those with AOl's between $20,000 and $30,000 of

 income,   only t45 percent had less than $200 of interest and dividend income. For

that income class, a $200 exclusion would be intramarginal for 55 percent of

taxpayers.

             Table    9 shows   that the distribution of interest and dividend income

also differs substantially by age. While 71 percent of all taxpayers had less
than or equal to $200 of interest and dividends, more than 90 percent of those
less than 29 years old and 8o percent of those aged 30 to i9 fell into this
category. By contrast, only 32 percent          of    those over age 6 had as little as
$200. These figures indicate that a $200 exclusion in 1972 would have had a
marginal incentive effect for a relatively large fraction of preretirerent tax-
payers    and that, for those olderthan 65, the exclusion would he largely an

intramarginal reward for earlier saving.

3.2 Simulations of Alternative Exclusion Rules

             We    now present the results of simulations of alternative exclusion
rules. These simulations use the Taxsin nodel for 1972; the baseline simulation
therefore includes a $200 dividend exclusion. For cost reasons, we have
reduced    the   sample by a one—in—three random selection, yielding a simula-

tion   sample of 8881 taxpayers.
                                          _14 4




                                         Table 9



               Cumulative Distributions of Interest and Dividend Income

                                     by Age Class




Interest and                                 Age Class
 Dividend
  Income

                                 22—29            30_119   50_611         6i+   all

      o                            65               51                    18


$ 200                              91               8o       59           32     71


$   1400                           95               87       69           39     78


$8o0                              97                93       78           50


$i600                             98                914      89           63




ta:        1972 Tax   Model.


Numbers indicate cumulative percentage of taxpayers with less than the specifici
amount of interest and dividend income, 1iy age category.
                                       —45—


           The effect of an exclusion rule on tax revenue depends only on the

 parameters of the exclusion rule and not on the taxpayers' behavioral response.

 This reflects the fact that no revenue is lost on the induced increase in saving

 and the resulting increase in interest and dividend income.

           Because the exclusion rules refer to the income earned on the stock of

 financial assets and not to annual savings, we simulate the behavioral response

in terms of the stock of financial assets (or "assets for short).    We estimate

each taxpayer's initial level of assets by assuming that the interest income

reflects an interest rate of 4.5 percent and that the dividend income reflects

a dividend—price ratio of 3.0 percent. On this basis we estimate an initial

average level of gross financial assets of $ 8,230 for each of the 77.5 million

tax returns.

          Table 10 presents the simulated effects on tax revenue and on assets

of the six exclusion plans:   (1) exclusion of the first $200 of interest and

dividend income; (2) exclusion of the first $400; (3) exclusion of the first

$1000; (4) exclusion of half of the first $1000; (5) exclusion of interest

and dividend income in excess of a floor equal to 5 percent of income over

$10,000 subject to a limit of $1OOO; and (6) exclusion of 20 percent of interest

and dividend income without limit. These simulations are based on all tax-

payers, including those over age 65.   The first row shows the effect of each

exclusion rule on the mean annual tax liability per taxpayer. Under the

existing law, the mean 1972 tax liability was $1,247. Exclusion of the first

$200 of interest as well as dividends would reduce this by $13 to $1234. This

very small change in tax revenue reflects the fact that most taxpayers have much

less than $200 of interest and dividends. With 77.5 million tax returns, the
                                                                   Table 10



                                                 Simulated Effects of Alternative Dividend end


                                         Interest Exclusions with Different Behavioral Responses:


                                                    Mean Changes in Tax Revenues and Assets




                                       $200 Limit     $400 Limit   $1000 Limit     $1000 Limit;     $1000 Limit       Mo Limit
                                                                                  50 Exclusion      with floor*    20   Exclusion

1. Decrease in Tax Revenue                               $21          $37             $19              $30              $34



Increase in Assets
                                                                                                                                    .5.-


2.   Maximum Response                    $3284         $7122       $19646            $19646          $14390

3.   Half—way Response                   $1642         $3561         $9823            $9823          $7195

4.   Maximum Response for
     those with Positive                  $727         $2008         $6861                           $4639
     Initial   Financial
     Assets Only


5.   Constant elasticity,                  $98           $219         $546            $270            $369              $1539



6.   Constant elasticity,                 $191           $429        $1069            $543            $733               $3283
           fl= 2



Source:   Simulations based on 1972 TaxSirn Data.

*The floor restricts the interest and dividend exclusion to the excess of interet and dividends over five
                                                                                                          percent of their
 incone over $10,000.
I
    reduction          of $13 per return implies a total revenue loss of $1.0 billion.

                       Increasing      the exclusion from $200 to $1i00   reduces mean tax revenue by

    $8 per       return, i.e., a doubling of the exclusion raises the revenue loss by
    about 60          percent.       Similarly, raising the exclusion by 150 percent from $1400 tO
    $1000 only raises the revenue loss by about 75 percent                 or $16 per return.
    Limiting          the exclusion to 50 percent of the first $1000 cuts the revenue loss in

    half; i.e. ,            the   total revenue loss with this rule is $19 per return or about the

    same as for a full exclusion of               the first $1400   of interest and dividends.

    Limiting the exclusion to the excess over a floor of 5 percent of income over

    $10,000 cuts the revenue loss from $37 to $30. Finally, the 20 percent

    exclusion without limit reduces tax revenue by $314 per return.

                       Four types of behavioral responses are simulated. The first assumes

    that each taxpayer increases his assets enough to take full advantage of the
    exclusion. Thus for the $200 exclusion each taxpayer accumulates a total of
    $1414145    of    assets since we asume an interest rate of L.         percent.   Although the
    average          initial value of assets is $8,230 the distribution of these assets is

    such that most taxpayers have substantially less than $14000; as Tahie 8

    indipated,          Il percent of taxpayers had less than $200 of interest and dividendn.

    The first number in the second row of Table 10 indicates that the average

    increase in assets if each taxpayer accumulated enough to take advantage of the

    full $200 exclusion would he $3,2814.

                      The second sinajiation reduces the fuil response in an arbitrary way

    assuming that everyone moves half way from his existing assets to the full

    $1414145.        Thus   someone who currently has $3000 of assets increases them by $772.
                                              —8—



This   response is of course equivalent to assuming that half of the taxpayers do

not respond at all while half respond fully, or to any other distribution of

individual    responses that    averacs   a   half—way   response.
            The   third simulation makes the very conservative assumption that all
those taxpayers with no dividend and interest income in 197'2 would not respond
at   all to the exclusion. All     other taxpayers increase their      assets to take full

advantage of   the   exclusion. The result, shown in the third row of Table 10, is

an increase in rean assets of

             The final simulation also begins with the conservative assumption that

those taxpayers who initially have no assets would continue to have no assets.

Moreover, those with a relatively small initial amount of assets are assumed to

show a correspondingly small, increase in wealth.            In particular, we assume that

their behavior is governed by a constant elasticity response of assets to the

relative "costs" of present and future consumption.




                           A1
(3.1)
                           Ap
                                  \\RQ )
where A0 is the actual assets with the existing law, Al is the assets with the

exclusion, and B and 2 are the rates of transformation with the current and

alternative tax rules. With an exclusion hut no deduction, Pp =             (l+i_)T   and,

as   before, Pp = (1(l_0)j_1j)T;    for any individual whose interest and dividend

income already exceeds the exclusion, R2Pç) and there is no change in assets.

We are fllly aware that this is a very rough model of behavior that does not

capture the life cycle character of the induced change in consumption and that

quite arbitrarily assumes that,     all those       who currently have no assetr are either
myopic or would prefer to be net borrowers even if there were no tax on interest

income. We nevertheless illustrate this constant elasticity asset response by

simulating with two alternative values: n = 1 and n = 2.31   A unit elasticity

implies, for example, that an individual with a marginal tax rate of 20 percent

and initial assets of $2000 would increase his assets by $692; an elasticity of

2 would imply an increase of $1623. The result of these simulations are shown

in rows 5 and 6. With a $200 limit and a unit elasticity of response, the

average increae in assets would be $98; an elasticity of 2 inrplies a mean asset

increase of $191.

          Although the results for the other exclusion limits in Table 10 are

self—explanatory, three comments are worth making. Note first that increasing

the exclusion limit raises the potential asset accumulation by more than a pro-

portionate amount.even though the revenue effect rises less than propor-

tionately. Second, the floor reduces the revenue cost of a $iooo limit exclu-

sion by $1 or somewhat less than 20 percent. In contrast, the increase in

assets in every behavioral simulation fell by a greater percentage. Third, the

20 percent exclusion has by far the largest behavioral effect both absolutelLy

and per dollar of revenue loss.

          It is clear from the wide range of possible responses that we have

tabulated in Table 10 that our uncertainty about the effect of a dividend and

interest exclusion is very substantial. The 1980 legislation, introducing a

$ 4OO interest and dividend exclusion, will provide a natural experiment from

which we can hope to learn more about the nature of the individual savings
                                            —50—


response. Of course, the evidence on even the first year's experience will not

be available in usable form until about l984 and the political process many want

to make decisions about savings incentives before then. It is perhaps

reassuring therefore that the simulations reported in Table 10 indicato that               the
alternative exclusion plans involve quite little revenue loss. Moreover, even

these revenue loss figures overstate the net impact of an interest and            div i den ci


exclusion to the extent that the additional capital is invested in the corporate

sector   and results in increased corporate tax revenue.


    Conclusion
           The public's increased awareness of the low rate of personal saving in

the United States and of the high effective tax rate on          the    income from per—

sonal saving has generated     a growing interest in changing the individual income
tax rules to stimulate saying.     Although there are many specific plans, there
are two principal options:      (i) deductions from taxable income for savings depo—
sited in special accounts    where interest then accrues untaxed until the funds

are withdrawn and (2) the    exclusion    of interest and dividends from taxable

income. The revenue loss that would result from such deductions or exclusions

can be limited by restrictions on the maximum amount of          the    deduction or exclu—

sion or by allowing only a partial        deduction as exclusion. The problem with
any such ceiling or floor,     however,    is that it may   eliminate   marginal incentives

(for   those with savings or   investment    income above the ceiling or welL below        the

floor) or severely restrict the size of the incentive effect (for those who are

near the ceiling). The desirability of any saving plan depends critically on

its ability to limit the revenue loss without destroying the marginal

incentives.
                                        —51—


         Analyzing   the effects of limits and floors requires microeconomic data
on saving, financial assets, and interest and dividend income. The present
paper uses such data from individual tax returns and from the Consumer

Expenditure Survey to estimate the potential effects of alternative tax rules.

Because the likely response of households to new tax rules is not known, we pre-

sent simulations for a variety of different behavioral assumptions.

          Although the savings deduction and the interest exclusion are fun-

damentally very similar, they are likely to have quite different effects during

a rather long period of transition because they treat active savers very dif-

ferently from those who previously saved and are currently dissaving. Moreover,

potential savers may   be   influenced by the liquidity differences between the two

methods or by the appearance that the immediate deduction confers a greater

benefit. Because individuals differ in their situations and perceptions, a

combination of both plans might be more effective in raising saving than an

equal—cost reliance on either plan alone. The paper therefore presents separate

analysis for both types of plans.

          The evidence that we present is not adequate for choosing the best

combination of these options or eyen for deciding whether either option should

be chosen. We do not have sufficient information about savings behavior to pre-

dict the response of capital accumulation to these plans. Moreover, the design

of an appropriate tax policy involves not only the savings response but more

general aspects of excess burden and the fair distribution of the tax burden.

          But the analyses in this paper are sufficient to demonstrate that some

of the potential problems that have been raised as objections to the savings

proposals are not very serious. First, although some of any savings deduction
                                     —52—


would merely reward saving that would have occurred in any case, even with a

deduction limited to 10 percent of wages and salaries (with a ceiling of $2000)

there would be very few savers for whom the incentive was intramarginal.

Similarly, at 1972 levels of wealth and interest rates, a $1400 exclusion of

interest and dividends would provide a marginal incentive for more than 75 per-

cent of taxpayers.

          The second basic fact that emerges in our study is that the reduction in

tax revenue caued by an exclusion or deduction plan would he relatively nodest.

With the exclusion plans, the revenue loss does not depend on the taxpayers'

response to the changed incentive. In 1972, a $1400 interest and dividend exclu-

sion would have entailed a revenue loss of only $21 per taxpayer or an

aggregate of less than $2 billion. Increases in the $to0   linit   involve substan-

tially less than proportionate increases in the revenue loss. The revenue

effect of a savings deduction plan does depend on the reaction of savers to the

new incentive. Although some preexisting assets would be transferred into the

special accounts in the years immediately after a savings deduction plan was

introduced, the potential transfer amounts and associated revenue loss are rela-

tively small for the vast majority of taxpayers. After the transition period,

if there were no increase in saving, a deduction limited to 10 percent of wage

income (with a ceiling of $2000) would entail a revenue loss at 1972 levels of'

only $14 billion.33 Any actual increase in saving that is induced by the deduc-

tion would then substantially exceed the associated loss of tax revenue.14
                                        —53—



                                      —Footnotes—


*   Martin FeiLdstein   is Professor of Economics, Harvard University and President

of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Daniel Feenberg is a Postdoctoral

Research Economist at the NBER. This paper was presented at the NBER

Conference on Behavioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis on January

26—21, 1981. The views expressed here are the authors' and should not be attri—

buted to any   organisation.

1 Total capital formation depends also on government saving and international

capital flows. Government saving has always been small and, in the majority of

years since 1950, has been negative. Feldstein and Horioka (1980) show that

U.S. net international capital flows have averaged less than one percent of

saving   and, for the OECD as a whole, are not responsive to domestic differences

in saving rates.


2 Some would say to "reduce the features that discourage saving." The dif-

ference depends on whether one takes "income" or "expenditure" as the

appropriate object of taxation. We need not comment on this issue in the

current paper.


    See, for example, Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1981), Becker and Fullerton (1980),

Boskin (1918), Bradford (1980), Feldstein (1917,       1918a), Fullerton   et. al.

(1979), King (1980), McLure (1980), Summers (1918) and Von       Furstenhurg   (1980).


    This sentence and the following two    sentences   are explained in Feldstein

(l9'T8b).
                                     _514_


5 The proposed changes in the tax treatment of saving are compensated changes

if not reducing the tax on saving would imply that some other tax would be

reduced.


6 We use the expressions "tax on saving" and "tax on the income from saving"

interchangeably.

7 The inflationary pressure could of course be checked by a tighter monetary

policy, allowing the money rate of interest to rise relative to the Wicksellian

natural rate of interest during the transition. But such exclusive reliance on

monetary policy in the transition is not without substantial real costs in our

economy with many long—term fixed interest contracts.


   These ideas about the timing of tax changes are discussed briefly in

Feldstein (1980) and developed more fully in Auerbach and Kotlikoff

(1981).


9 The economists who have participated in the development of TAXSIM are Daniel

Feenberg, Martin Feldstein, Daniel F'risch, Larry Lindsey, and Harvey Rosen.


10 The Consumer Expenditure Survey contains fewer observations on high incone

families, is aggregated into family units rather than taxpayer units and does

not contain a precise measure of taxable income.


11 These two methods can be equivalent in the sense that they define the same

lifetime budget constraint for an individual and therefore induce the same

consumption choices. This equivalence is violated to the extent that these are

bequests or that the individual's marginal tax rate varies over time. Moreover,

in practice these proposals would differ for a very long transition period
                                     —55—

because different cohorts of taxpayers are affected differently, e.g. ,   the   bene—

fits of deducting saving have little effect on those who are already retired

while an interest and dividend exclusion does; more generafly, on the noneqihva—

lence in the transition generation of consumption taxes (that a].low a savings

deduction) and labor income taxes (that exclude capital income) see Feldtein

(19'18b).


12 This proposal has a long and venerable pedigree that is discussed in Kaldor

(1955) and Musgrave (1959). See also Bradford (1980), Feldstein (1976), Fisher

(1937), Kay and King (1978), The Meade Commission (1918) and the U.S. Treasury

(1977).


13 Individuals with self—employment income are eligible for a similar program.

Anyone can contribute up to 15 percent of self—employment income to a Keogh

Plan, with a maximum of $7500. The contribution is deductible and the income

of the plan is untaxed. Withdrawals are taxed as ordinary employment income.


    A "participant" in such a pension plan need not have or he accruing any

vested benefits.


15 On the extent of private pension coverage, see President's Commission of

Private Pensions (1980).


16 The number of IRA plans indicates that only about 5 percent of those who are

eligible have actually established an IRA; see Lubick (1980) p.l4.


11 The Canadian government introduced such a plan in 1972.
                                         —56—

18   As opposed to judging it in terms of removing the tax wedge between the pre—

tax and post—tax rates of returns or of switching the tax base to avoid what

some regard as an unjust double taxation of income that is saved.


19 This would, of course, be offset by a reduction in other consumer spending

caused by the increase (or lack of decrease) in some other tax.


20 Individuals might in priciple borrow and use the borrowed funds to finance

their IRA contributions, thus earning tax free interest in the IRA and paying

tax deductible interest on the borrowed funds. We ignore the possihillty of

borrowing on the assumption that most individuals have little opportunity to

borrow without collateral and that the expanded IRA (like the existing IRA and

Keogh) could not legally be accepted as collateral for a loan. Individuals

might borrow 'by   enlarging   their house mortgage but this would be discouraged by

the need to hold most of the proceeds of such borrowing for several years before

it could be contributed to the IRA.


21 If the change in the saving rule is a compensated change, the income effect

could be ignored. Of course, the alternative tax change might also affect

current work and thus current saving.


22 In some calculations, however, we assume that taxpayers over the age of 65

are not eligible to participate.


23 The 1972 mean dividend price ratio for the Standard and Poors corporate

index of 500 stocks was           percent. The maximum interest rate that could be

paid on time deposits was 4.5 percent.
                                        —57—



24   Unless the individual borrows to finance these contributions. See footnote

20 for the reasons why   this   is not likely to be a significant problem.


25 Individuals might, of course, seek to circumvent the floor by bunching their

saving into alternate years but this would be worth doing only if the ceiling

is not binding.


26 In reality, there would not be single year but a probabilistic interval

with probabiliti.es that reflect survival probabilities.


21 If only a fraction A of the contribution is deductible but the subsequent

tax is limited to the same fraction of withdrawals, the rate of tranformation

becomes B1 = (1—Xe') (l+iTr)t/(l_XO); with a binding level of deductibility, the

plan has no effect on marginal saving and therefore R1R0.


28 Recall that for the representative taxpayer the real net rate of return rises

from —0.005 to 0.020; including the deductibility effect implies that the

current opportunity cost of consumption rises from 0.93 to 1.57.


29 This measure of revenue loss does not reflect the extra corporate tax reve-

nue that would be collected on the additional capital.


30 Different combinations of the "exclusion limit" and the "exclusion

fraction" correspond to the same loss of tax revenue but    have different
incentive effects. The incentive effect depends on the distribution of existing

wealth and on the sensitivity of saving to the net return.     It would be

interesting to use the information on the distribution of assets and alternative

assumptions about the savings response to examine the implication of alternative

combinations of the limit and the exclusion fraction.
                                             —58—
.:    31 At first, this seems to be in sharp contrast to the savings deduction plan

      where a deduction is given for induced saving as well as for the saving that

      would have occurred in any case. But the deduction itself is relevant only to

      the extent that the marginal tax rate of the saver exceeds his marginal

      tax rate when funds are withdrawn. Even when this is true, it is not a reason

      for preferring one plan over the other without knowing more about the response

      of individuals to this aspect since schemes with equal reveue loss could

      obviouslr be designed.



      32
           In 1972, all interest income was taxable. Although a $200 exclusion applied

     to dividend income, most taxpayers did not have any dividend income.


      33 This short n revenue loss is based on the existing saving distribution and

     excludes asset transfers; see section 2.1 for evidence on the modest one—time

     revenue cost of allowing deductions for asset transfers. The corresponding long

     run revenue loss, which reflects also both the loss of the subsequent tax reve-

     nues that would have been collected on the interest and dividends on these

     savings and the gain in tax revenue that would eventually he collected when the

     funds are withdrawn, would be about $5 billion.


     35 Recall that if the revenue loss on this additional saving is measured by the

     immediate consequence of the deduction, an extra dollar of saving reduces tax

     revenue by only about 20 cents. This tax reduction is partially recovered (in

     a present value sense) to the extent that the individual's tax rate is as high

     when the funds are withdrawn. Although no tax is collected on the interest and

     dividends earned on the extra capital, this is not a revenue loss since it would

     not otherwise have existed. Indeed, the corporate income tax on this add—

     tional   capital could more than offset the loss in personal tax revenue.
                                          —59—

                                     Bibliography


Auerbach, Alan and Kotlikoff, Laurence. 1981. National Savings, Economic

     Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation. Paper prepared for the National

     Bureau of Economic Besearch conference on Simulation Methods in Tax Policy

     Analysis.

Becker, Charles and Fullerton, Don.       1980. Income tax incentives to promote

     saving. National Bureau of Economic Reearch Working Paper No. 187.

Boskin, Michael .J.     1978. Taxation, saving, and the rate of interest. Journal

     of Political Econony. 86: S3—S27.

Bradford, David F. 1980. The economics of tax policy toward savings. In Von

     Furstenburg, George, ed. , The government and capital formation. Volume II in th

     series on capital investment and saving. Cambridge: Prnerican Council of

     Life Insurance.

                        1980. The Case for a personal consumption tax.         In Pechman,

     Joseph ed. , What should be taxed: Income or Expenditure? 75—113.

     Washington: Brookings Institution.

Feldstein, Martin. 1970. Inflation, specification bias and the impact of

     interest rates. Journal of Political Economy. 78: 1325—39.

                        1976. Compensation in tax reform. National Tax Journal.

          XXIX:    2:    123—130.

                        1977. Does the United States Save Too Little? American

     Economic Review. 6: 1:         116—121.
                 •
                                                 —6o—



                       •     1978 a.     The welfare cost of capital income taxation.

      Journal of Political Economy. 86                  2: S29—S51.
I

                       •     1978 b. The rate of return, taxation and personal savings.

      Economic Journal, 88:            82—87.

 __________________•         1980.     Thx incentive without deficits. Wall Street Journal.

      July 25, 1980.

 __________________•         1981.     Saving and the real net rate of return. Forthcoming.
      Cambridge: national Bureau of Economic Research.
 Feldstein, Martin and Horioka, Charles. 1980. Domestic Savings and
      International Capital Flows. Economic Journal. 90:3l4—329.

                           and Poterba, James. 1980. State and local taxes and       the rate

      of   return on       non—financial   corporate capital. W.P.    508H. Cambridge:

      National Bureau of Economic Research.

________________ and Tsiang, S.C. 1968. The interest rate, taxation and the

      personal savings incentive. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 82:                4l9—34.

Fisher, I.     Income in theory and income taxation in practice. Econometrica, 5:

      1—55.

Fullerton, Don A., King, John B., Shoven, John B., and Whalley,            John.    Static

      and dynamic resource allocation effects of corporate and personal tax

      integration in the U.S.: A general equilibrium approach. W.P.                337.

      Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Green, Jerry R. and Sheshinski, Eytan.             (1918) Optimal capital—gains taxation

     under    limited      information. Harvard Institute of Economic Research

     Discussion Paper No. 60)4.

Kaldor, N. 1955. An Expenditure Tax. London: Allen and Unwin.
                                    —61—



                                                               Oxford: Oxford
Kay, J.A. and King, Mervyn A. 1978. The British Tax System.
    University Press.
                                            W.P. 128.   Cambridge:   The National
King, Mervyn. 1980. Savings and taxation.

     Bureau of Economic Research.

Lubick, Donald



McLure, Charles E., Jr. 1980. Taxes, saving, and welfare: Theory.and evidence.

     W.P. 5O1. .Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.


Meade Committee. 1978. The Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation. Undon:

    Allen and Unwin.

Mirrlees, J.A. 1976. Optimal tax theory: A synthesis. Journal of Public

    Economics. 6:327—358.

Musgrave, Richard A. 1959. The Theory of Public Finance. New York:

     McGraw—Hill

President's Commission on Private Pensions. 1980. An Interim Report of the

     President's Commission on Private Pensions. Washington D.C.: Government

     Printing Office.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1978. Tax policy in a life cycle model. W.P. 302.

     Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.

U.S. Department of the Treasury. 1977. Blueprints for basic tax reform.

     Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

von Furstenherg, George M.   1980. The government and capital formation.

     Cambridge: Ballinger.
