                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         SIMULATING NONLINEAR TAX RULES AND NONSTANDARD
         BEHAVIOR: AN APPLICATION TO THE TAX TREATMENT
                   OF CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS

                        Martin Feldstein

                        Lawrence Lindsey

                      Working Paper No. 682




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF EXONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                           May 1981




This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on Behavioral
Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis on January 26—21, 1981,
in Palm Beach. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation, and project in Tax Simulation. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #682
                                                                May 1981



                                     Summary



            Simulating   Nonlinear Tax Rules and Nonstandard Behavior

        An Application to the Tax Treatment of Charitable Contributions



         This paper examines how the tax simulation method can be extended to

incorporate nonlinear budget constraints and nonstandard economic behavior. We

simulate the effect of extending the charitable deduction to nonitemizers and

study the effect of alternative "floors".

          The specific simulations indicate that the econometric evidence on

charitable giving implies that extending the charitable deduction to nonitemi—

zers would raise individual giving by about 12 percent of the existing total

amount or $)4.5 billion at 1917 levels.   The extension would reduce tax revenue by

slightly less, about $I.i billion. A floor of $300 or 3 percent of AGI would

reduce the revenue loss by 30 to L0 percent, even if there is significant

bunching. The effect of the floor on increased giving depends critically on

whether taxpayers' behavior is guided by conventional demand principles or by

the net altruism rule. A reasonable conclusion is that a floor would reduce

giving by less than the increased revenue but that the difference between them

would not be very large.


                                               Martin Feldstein
                                               Lawrence Lindsey
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                               (6ii) 868—3905
            Simulating Nonlinear Tax Rules and Nonstandard Behavior
        An Application to the Tax Treatment of Charitable Contributions

                                 Martin Feldstein*
                                 Lawrence Lindsey*

        The effect of existing tax rules on charitable contributions has been

the subject of several econometric studies in recent years.' The present paper

uses the results of those studies as the basis for examining the potential

effects of alternative tax rules that might be applied in extending the

charitable deduction to nonitemizers.2 Our focus is on the effect that such

changes in tax rules would have on charitable contributions, on tax liabilities,

and on the distribution of these effects by income class.

        Our methodological emphasis is on simulating behavioral responses to

nonlinear tax rules, e.g., a rule that allows noniterrizers to deduct charitable

gifts in excess of $300 per year. We examine three types of response to such

nonlinear rules. The first is based on conventional demand analysis with a

nonlinear budget constraint. The second recognizes that individuals have an



*
    Martin    Feldsteiri is Professor of Economics at Harvard University and
President    of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Lawrence Lindsey is a
Teaching    Fellow at Harvard and a Research ?nalyst at the National Bureau of
Economic  Research. They are grateful to the members of the Tax Simulation
Project, and especially to Daniel Feenberg and Daniel Frisch, for helpful
discussions, to the NBER and National Science Foundation for support of this
research, and to Harvey Galper for valuable comments on the previous version.
The views expressed here are the authors' and should not be attributed to any
organization.

    See Boskin and Feldsteiri (1971), lotfelter (1980), Clotfelter and     Steuerle
(1980), Feldstein (1975), Feldstein    and   Clotfelter (1976), Feldstein and Taylor

2 A variety of proposals to extend the charitable deduction have been made
over the years, especially when other tax changes reduce the fraction of tax-
payers who itemize their personal deductions. One recent proposal is contained
in the bill introduced in the House of Representatives by Congressmen Fisher and
Moynihan and Packwood (S. 219, 96th Congress, 2nd session). For a copy of the
bill and further analysis, see "Hearings before the Subcommittee on Taxation and
Debt Management generally and the Committee on Finance, United States Senate,
January 30 and 31, 1980."
                                      —2—


incentive to respond to a floor by "bunching" their contributions over time,

e.g., by contributing only in alternate years to reduce the fraction of total

contributions that are below the floor and therefore that do not receive the tax

benefit. The third approach departs from the usual utility maximization model

of demand to consider a quite different type of altruistic behavior that may be

appropriate for studying charitable contributions. The essential feature of

this approach is that it assumes each individual wishes to make charitable gifts

with some fixed net—of—tax cost; changes in tax rules alter the gross amount of

giving to maintain this net cost.

        All three approaches are generally consistent with the available sta-

tistical evidence. The behavior of taxpayers under existing rules does not

allow a choice among the three rrdels; in statistical terms, the model is

underidentified. This underidentification does not affect predictions of the

effects of alternative linear tax rules, e.g., substituting a credit for the

existing deduction. Although the predicted effects of an alternative linear tax

rule does not depend on which of the three models is assumed to be

correct,3 with nonlinear tax rules the three models can have very different

implications. Predictions of the effects of nonlinear tax rules must therefore

be regarded as conditional on the model specification and any user of our analy-

sis must "weight" these conditional predictions by his own subjective probabili-

ties of the appropriateness of the model.




3 The choice between the third model and the first two does have some effect
on the estimated response to changes in tax rules, but the size of the effect
is relatively small.
                                     —3—



        The simulations are all made with the National Bureau of Economic

Research TAXSIM Model. This computerized model, like the one used by the

Treasury and the Joint Committee on Taxation, bases its calculations on the

large stratified random sample of individual tax returns that are provided for

this purpose by the Internal Revenue Service. But unlike these other models,

the NBER TAXSIM model is specifically designed to take into account the response

of taxpayer behavior to changes in tax rules. The version of the model used in

the present paper is based on the tax law for 1977 and uses a sample of 23,111

individual tax returns for that year.5

        The first section of the paper summarizes the previous econometric evi-

dence on charitable giving that forms the basis for the parameter values used in

the current simulations. Section 2 describes the alternative tax rules and the

three models of behavior that will be simulated. Some technical aspects of the

simulation procedure, including the imputation of contributions to nonitemizers

and the calculation of the effective cost of charitable gifts, are discussed in

section 3. The simulation results are presented in sections 4 and   5.   There is

a brief concluding section.




  The economists who have participated in the development of the TAXSIM model
are Daniel Feenberg, Martin Feldstein, Daniel Frisch, Larry Lindsey, and Harvey
Rosen.

5 These 23,111 returns are a random 25 percent sample of the 1971 Treasury Tax
Model Public Use Sample.
                                          _)4

1.   Econometric Evidence on Charitable Giving

            Since this paper will not present any new econometric evidence on

charitable giving, it is useful to review the previous econometric research.

The current tax law allows any taxpayer who itemizes his deductions to subtract

the value of charitable contributions in calculating taxable income. The

"price" of one dollar's contribution to a charitable organization in terms of

the foregone disposable income of the donor therefore varies inversely with his

marginal tax rate. Of course, for anyone who does not itemize his deductions,

the price of one dollar's contribution is one dollar of foregone disposable

income. 6

            The key parameter that determines the effect of the existing charitable

deduction and of alternative linear tax rules is the price elasticity, i.e., the

elasticity of the individual's gross (pretax) charitable gift with respect to

the price of giving. The appropriate value is of course the partial elasticity,

holding constant the level of income and such other demographic characteristics

that might be associated with the price. Several studies in recent years, based

on quite different bodies of data, have concluded that the price elasticity of

giving is between —1.0 and —1.5. There is a striking degree of consistency and

relative precision in these estimates even though they are based on different

years and different types of data.

            Feldstein (1915) used the data published by the Internal Revenue Service

on the mean level of charitable giving and the mean level of disposable income




6 This ignores the special problem of gifts of appreciated property, a subject
to which we return later.
                                           —5—


 in each of 27 adjusted gross income (AGI) classes for the alternate years be-

tween 19148 and 1968. These data refer only to individuals who itemized their

deductions. A constant elasticity specification was      estimated:

 (i)                ln Gjt    b0 +   b1   in it +   b2 in Yit +   ejt

where Git is the mean charitable gift of individuals in AGI class i in year t,

Pt is the price calculated at the mean taxable income in that class, and

Y.t is the mean disposable income in that class. The changing tax rates as well

as the differences in the rates among classes were used to estimate the price

elasticity. The basic estimate in this study, with the sample restricted to

taxpayers whose AGI's were between $14,000 and $100,000 at 1967 prices, was —1.24

with a standard error of 0.10. Including all income classes in the sample

raised the elasticity to —1.146 with a standard error of 0.08.

         Feldstejn and Clotfeiter (1976) used individual household data collected

by the Census Bureau in 1963 and 19614 for the Federal Reserve Board's Survey of

Financial Characteristics of Consumers. Their sample of 1,1406 individuals pro-

vided information on wealth and demographic characteristics as well as on income

and charitable giving. The data made it possible to estimate for each household

the price of charitable giving and a measure of disposable income defined as the

total income received minus an estimate of the tax that would be due if no

contribution were made. The basic price elasticity estimate in this study was

—1.15   (standard   error 0.20). Several variants of the basic equation showed that

the estimated price elasticity was not sensitive to the measurement of permanent

income or the inclusion of a variety of other demographic and economic charac-

teristics.
                                        —6—


       Feldstein and Taylor (1916) used a similar specification to study a

sample of more than 15,000 taxpayers who itemized their deductions and whose tax

returns were included in the 1970 Treasury Tax File, a stratified random sample

of individual tax returns. The basic price elasticity estimate was —1.29

(standard error 0.06). Repeating this calculation for the 1962 Treasury Tax

file data showed a price elasticity of —1.09 (standard error 0.03). A price

elasticity estimate based on the change in the tax schedule between 1962 and

1970 was —1.39 (standard error 0.19).

        Similar estimates were obtained in several other studies using different

sets of microeconomic data. Reece (1979) used the 1972—13 Consumer Expenditure

Survey of the BLS and estimated a price elasticity of —1.19 using a Tobit esti-

mating procedure. Dye (1977) studied a l974 Michigan Survey Research Center

survey of households with incomes under $50,000 and estimated a price elasticity

of —2.25. Clotfelter and Steuerle (1979), using tax data for 1975, estimated a

price elasticity of —1.25. And Clotfelter (1980), using the unstratified random

sample of tax returns for 1972, obtained a price elasticity of —l.40.

        These estimates refer to the entire population or to all taxpayers who

itemized and not to any particular income class. The present analysis of the

potential effect of extending the charitable deduction to those who do not

currently itemize their deductions makes it particularly important to have an

estimated price elasticity for middle and lower income households; more than 90

percent of 1977 nonitemizers had adjusted gross incomes of less than $20,000.

Although separate estimates for each income class cannot be made as precisely as

for the sample as a whole, the evidence generally indicates that the relevant

elasticity for this group is as high as for the population as a whole.
                                          —7—


        The pooled data by year and income class (Feldstein, 1915) was analyzed

in separate regressions for different income groups. For the 64 observations

with mean real income (in 1967 dollars) between $4,000 and $10,000, the esti-

mated price elasticity was —1.80 (standard error =       0.56).   Among taxpayers with

real incomes between $10,000 and $20,000, the corresponding estimate was —1.04

(standard error =   0.76,   with 27 observations).

        Despite the small samples, these data had the advantage of tax schedules

that varied over time. When attention is limited to a single cross section of

individual data, it is more difficult to estimate separate equations in each

income class. This is particularly true in the low and middle income classes

where there is a very high correlation between income and tax rates.7 It is

nevertheless possible to allow the estimated price elasticity to vary with

income or marginal tax rate while estimating the other parameters from the

entire sample.

        The Feldstein and Clotfelter (1976) study found that the price elasti-

city was greatest for those with the highest "price of giving"; the estimated

elasticity was —1.82 (with a standard error of 0.64) for those with a price of

giving in excess of 0.7 and then fell to —1.26 (s.e. = 0.42) for those with a

price between 0.3 and 0.7 and to —1.16 (s.e. =       0.20) for those with a price
below 0.3. The differences are not statistically significant but, if anything,

provide evidence that the current nonitemizing population has a higher elasticity.

        The Feldstein and Taylor (1976) study had a nuch larger sample and could



I In higher income classes, there is nuch more variation in tax rates at each
level of adjusted gross income as well as substantial income variation within
tax brackets.
                                       —8—


therefore obtain estimates with smaller standard errors. The    estimated   price

elasticities varied inversely with income, from —2.26 (s.e. =   0.2)   for tax-

payers with incomes below $10,000 and —1.82 (s.e.    0.2)4) for taxpayers with

incomes between $10,000 and $20,000 to —1.11 (s.e. =   0.09) for those with
incomes between $50,000 and $100,000 and —1.21 (s.e. = 0.06) for those with

incomes over $100,000. An analogous equation for 1962 is not reported.

Estimates of separate price and income elasticities in each income class give

implausible values for the lowest income class (those with AGI between $)4000 and

$20,000): —3.67 (s.e. = 0.145) for 1962 and —0.35 (s.e. = 0.52) for 1970.

         In a separate study designed to measure the price elasticity for the

lower and middle income groups, ]3oskin and Feldstein (1977) used survey data

collected in 197)4 by the University of Michigan Survey Research Center on house-

holds with incomes below $30,000. Because these are survey data rather than tax

return data, they contain information on contributions by nonitemizers as well

as itemizers. This provides much more price variation at each income level.

The Boskin—Feldstein analysis estimated a price elasticity of —2.54 (s.e. =

0.28)   for this group. An additional analysis of these data showed that the dif-

ference between itemizers and nonitemizers could be explained completely by the

price effect without recourse to a separate "itemization" effect.

         Clotfelter and Steuerle (1979) estimated a variety of different specifi-

cations for separate income classes using the Treasury Tax Model for 1975. They

found that the estimated results in the lower income class were quite sensitive

to the particular specification. The basic logarithmic equation implied price

elasticities of —0.9 for incomes of $4,000 to $10,000 and —1.3 for incomes of

$10,000 to $20,000. Estimating a single equation for all income classes but
                                       —9—


using a more general functional form implied lover price elasticities; the esti-

mates ranged between —0.4 and —0.7. But constraining the coefficient to be the

same for all income classes reverses this effect and implies price elasticity of

—2.2 and         In our view, this sensitivity shows the difficulty of trying to

infer separate elasticities for low and middle income groups.

        Before turning to the simulations, it is useful to consider the plausi-

bility of a price elasticity between 1 and 2 for a typical nonitemizing family.

In 1977, families with adjusted gross incomes between $10,000 and $15,000 who

itemized their deductions gave an average of $522. If such a family had a

taxable income of $8000, the price per dollar of giving would be approximately

80 cents. A price elasticity of —1.0 and a price of 0.80 imply that deduc-

tibility raises giving by 25 percent; i.e., by $i0I from $1.18 to $522.

Similarly, a price elasticity of —2.0 would imply that deductibility raised

giving by 56 percent or by $188 from $33) to $522. Changes of this magnitude

are not contrary to intuition or to any other evidence.

           To be conservative, the estimates developed in this paper will

generally be based on a price elasticity of —1.3. Some additional estimates

using price elasticities of —0.7, —1.0 and —1.6 will also be presented.


2. Extending the Contribution Deduction to Nonitemizers


        The basic proposal to be analyzed in this paper allows all taxpayers to

deduct charitable contributions in the calculation of taxable income. !iore spe-

cifically, taxpayers who itemize other deductions would continue to include

charitable contributions as part of deductions as they presently do. Taxpayers

who do not itemize other deductions would be allowed to subtract their chari—
                                       -.10—



table contribution from gross income in the same way that they now subtract
an amount for each exemption. In this way, there is no change in adjusted gross
income or in any of the amounts that depend on it.
          This basic scheme might he modified by limiting the charitable deduction

of nonitemizers to the excess over some dollar amount or some percentage of the

taxpayers adjusted gross income. A rationale for such a "floor" is that the

standard deduction implicitly recognizes some minimal or typical charitable gift

so that individuals should get an explicit deduction only for the excess over

that amount.8 An alternative rationale for a floor is that it can reduce the

loss of tax revenue and, to the extent that contributions exceed the floor

amount, the reduction in revenue loss would have no impact on the marginal

incentive to give. For example, in 19T1 taxpayers with AGI's between $15,000

and $20,000 who did not itemize made charitable gifts averaging nearly $).OO.

For someone giving an average amount, a $300 floor would have no effect at the

margin on the incentive to give. The current paper analyzes two alternative

floors: the first is $300 and the alternative is 3 percent of adjusted gross

income (AGI).


2.1 The Conventional Demand Model

         The effects of extending the charitable deduction to noniteniizers, and

particularly the effects   of the floors, depends on the type of individual beha—
vior   that is assumed. The most basic behavioral assumption, and the one that


8 The logic of that argument is hardly compelling. If the charitable deduc-
tion is extended to nonitemizers, it would be more appropriate to reduce the
standard deduction by the currently assumed amount of the "typical" gift and
then allow all individuals the full amount of their deduction.
                                        —11—


underlies the specification of the econometrically estimated equations, is that

individual giving responds to a change in price according to the constant

elasticity formula:


(2.1)                             G1 = G0(P1/P0)a

where G1 is the level of annual giving after the "reform," G0 is the level of

annual giving before the reform,9 P0 is the price before the reform,1-°
                                                                           1
the price after the reform, and    is the price elasticity of demand. There is

no need to adjust separately for the change in disposable income since the esti-

mated price elasticity includes the income effect as well as the substitution

effect; i.e., the initial econometric equation defines the disposable income as

AGI minus the tax that would be due if the individual made no charitable

contribution.

        More specifically, equation 2 describes what is essentially the response

of noniteinizers (i.e., those who under existing law are nonitemizers) when they

are allowed to deduct charitable gifts. For most itemizers, the proposal

involves no change in behavior. however, about 6 percent of current itemizers

would cease to itemize if they could then deduct their charitable contributions;

i.e., their itemized deductions excluding charitable contributions is less than




9 The method of imputing an initial level of giving for noniteniizers is
discussed in section 3 of this paper.

10 For nonitemizers, P0 differs from one only because of gifts of appreciated
property. This difference is discussed in section 3. Although as a practical
matter, the difference from one for this group is small enough to ignore com-
pletely, our price calculations do reflect for each individual the average per-
centage of appreciated property in total contributions.
                                     —12—


the standard deduction to which they would be entitled.11 For most of these

"switchers" there is no change in marginal tax rate and therefore no change in

price. However, since an individual only switches if his tax bill is reduced,

there is a small income effect. The giving of a switcher can be calculated

according to the equation:


(2.2)                    G1 =   G0(P1/P0) (y1/y0)

where Y0 is the initial value of total income minus the tax liability if the

individual made no contribution and Y1 is the corresponding value if the indivi-

dual stops itemizing and uses the standard deduction.'2 The difference between

Y1 and Y0 is the tax that the individual saves by switching from itemizing to

using the standard deduction, given that the charitable contribution is deduc-

tible in any case.

        Although the demand behavior implied by equation 2.1 is adequate for

estimation and for simulating alternative linear budget constraints, it is

inadequate for analyzing alternative nonlinear budget constraints. Figure 1

illustrates the nature of this problem in a simple case. The standard deductor

initially faces a budget line INW with a slope of —l between giving (G) and

other spending (c). He chooses point E1. Allowing standard deductors to take

an additional deduction for charitable gifts above a floor (F) puts a kink in

the budget line which becomes UVX.



11 In 1911, the standard deduction was $3200 for a married couple and $2200
for a single individual.

12 An income elasticity of 0.7' is used in the calculations; see Feldstein and
Taylor (1976) for supporting evidence. Because the relevant income changes are
always very small, the results are very insensitive to the choice of this
elasticity.
              —13—



             Figure 1
Alternative Response to Deductibility
          above a Floor



G


 x

    w                           Figure 1A



    F



                     U     C




C


    x

    w                           Figure lB
                                             .4

    F




                     U     C




C




                                 Figure 1C




                     U     C
             In the case shown in Figure LA, the individual was giving more than

the floor even without the deduction. For such an individual, the deductibility

with a floor is equivalent to an ordinary price change except for an offsetting

negative income effect equal to mF where m is the individual's marginal tax

rate. This case could therefore be analyzed using the demand function of

equation 2.2 with appropriate definitions of P1 and Y1.

             In the case shown in Figure 113, the individual was giving less than

the floor. The change in the budget constraint therefore occurs in an irrele-

vant section of the budget constraint and the individual continues to give at

E1. This could also be analyzed using the demand function, since the price is

unchanged for this individual.

            But the choice in figure 1C cannot be analyzed with the demand func-

tion. The individual initially gives an amount less than the floor F. But the

individual's indifference curve cuts the new branch of the budget constraint,

implying that the individual's optimum point is on the new branch. This can

only be determined by an explicit utility comparison.

            In order to be able to deal with situations like figure 1C, we there-

fore continue the analysis with the help of an explicit utility function that

implies the constant elasticity demand structure of equation 2.2. We follow

Hausnan (1979) and write the indirect utility function of individual i as:

                                   l+ct            1—S
(2.3)            Vj (p,y) = —ki           +   31




This    indirect utility function implies a demand function with constant price

elasticity cx and constant income elasticity S .         Since existing law provides a
                                    —15—


linear budget constraint for small changes in giving,13 we can use the price and

income elasticities estimated in previous studies with equation 2.1 to parame—

tize this utility function. The value of ki for individual     can then be calcu-

lated as the value which causes the demand for giving implied by equation 2.3

for individual i to equal the actual observed amount of giving.

         With the help of such a parametized indirect utility function for

each individual, we proceed in the following way to calculate the value that

each individual would give if nonitemizers could deduct gifts in excess of floor

F. (To simplify the description of our procedure, we now ignore gifts of appre-

ciated property and the possibility that giving causes the individual to change

tax brackets.1)

          First, if the initial giving of individual I (Goj) exceeds the floor

(F), we can use equation 2.3 to calculate the new level of giving by reducing

the price from 1 to 1—mi (where m is the individual's marginal tax rate and by

lowering the individual's income by mF. We then use these values to calculate

the new level of giving, G11. This corresponds to figure 1A.

          If G01 is less than th& floor, we consider first the potential

reaction if the individual faces the reduced price above the floor. If with

this price (and the associated income correction) the implied giving is still

less than the floor, we know we are in case lB in which giving is unchanged. If

however, the implied giving is greater than the floor, we are in case C and rrnst


13 There is a nonlinearity for the few individuals whose giving causes them
to switch brackets or to move from nonitemize to itemize. Ignoring the switch
from nonitemizer to itemizer biases the estimated price elasticity toward zero.

l4 The full computer program recogizes both of the possibilities. The
method of dealing with property gifts is discussed in Section 3. Changes in tax
brackets are reflected by using the new marginal price and changing the initial
level of income.
                                        —16—


choose between the possibilities by comparing the irrrplied utilities. Condition-

al on the assumption that the individual will not change his giving (i.e., will

remain at E1 in figure 1C because the indifference curve tangent to the new sec-

tion of the budget line is lower than the indifference curve tangent at E1), we

evaluate the utility at the initial price (pi = 1)15 and unchanged income, say

V0. Then, conditional on the assumption that the individual increases his

giving (i.e., moves to point E2 in figure lC) we take Pi to be the itemized

price        = 1—mi, except for gifts of appreciated property) and reduce income by

m1F.      This implies an increased value of giving Gli and an associated utility

value V. The choice between the two points is then done by comparing V0 and

       for the individual.

            An analogous calculation is used to analyze the possibility that an

individual who is currently an itemizer might switch to using the standard

deduction if he could continue to itemize his charitable gifts. To decide

whether to switch, the individual compares his utility level as an itemizer with

the utility level that he would achieve as a nonitemizer who can deduct his

charitable giving. In practice, about 6 percent of current itemizers would

find that it is desirable to use the standard deductions when charitable gifts

become eligible for a separate deduction.


2.2 The Bunching of Gifts

          The use of a floor provides an incentive for individuals to "bunch"

their charitable giving. With a $300 floor, a nonitemizer who gives $300 each

year would get no tax reduction. By giving $600 every other year, the indivi—



15 In the actual calculations, p is lower than one because of gifts of appre-
ciated property.
                                        —17—


 dual would also have a $300 tax deduction every other year, or a 50 cent deduc-

tion per dollar of contribution. And by giving $900 every third year, the

deduction would rise to 67 cents per dollar of gift. Although the 'logical'

extreme is of course implausible because of the resulting effect on the

individuals' marginal tax rates and because individuals and institutions both

have reasons to favor a steady flow of giving, the presence of a floor seems

very likely to lead to some bunching.

         There is, unfortunately, no experience with charitable deduction floors

that can be used to estimate thier likely effect on bunching. We have however

constructed two alternative simulation models and tested the parametric sen-

sitivity of the results.

         Both models assume that the extent of bunching depends on the potential

tax saving from bunching and therefore on both the size of the contribution and

the individual's marginal tax rate. In both models, the possibility of bunching

is limited to a two year cycle. The first model assumes that each individual

bunches either all of his contributions or none. That is, if he is a "buncher,"

he gives only in alternate years. The probability of being a buncher depends on

the tax incentive. The second model assumes that everyone is a "partial

buncher;" some fraction of his total giving is bunched (i.e., given only in

alternate years) while the rest of his contribution is given every year. We

will now describe these models as they apply to someone who is currently a

nonitemizer.16



16 For
       itemizers, the possibility of switching is again evaluated by comparing
the tax liability as an itemizer with the tax liability as a nonitemizer, but
this time including the effect of bunching.
                                        —18—


        The tax incentive to bunch is a function of the relative cost of giving

with and without bunching. Let Gi be the amount that individual i (a nonite—

mizing taxpayer) would give if charitable gifts in excess of a floor could be

deducted.1-T Let CG11 be the net cost to individual i of making this charitable

gift in a single year, i.e., without bunching. CGi is equal to G1 reduced by

the tax saving associated with the contribution, i.e., the tax saving that

results from deducting the excess of G11 over the floor. Similarly, let

BCG11 be the net cost of making this charitable gift by bunching two years'

gifts into a single year. 18 We assume that the propensity to bunch depends on

the ratio of these net costs: BCG/CG.

           More specifically, the first model assumes that the probability that

individual i will bunch is given by

(2.)                           PROB1 = 1 —   (BcG1/cG1)P
with p >   0.   Note that under current law, with no floor, there is no incen-

tive to bunch19: BCG =    CG   and PROB =   0.   However, a floor on the charitable

deductions implies BOG <   CG   and therefore PROB >    0.   The greater the value of

p ,the more sensitive is the probability of bunching to the relative cost. To

appreciate the order of magnitude of this effect, consider a taxpayer who would

contribute 4O0 dollars without bunching (Gii          1400) and whose marginal tax rate




17 The calculation of Gli was described in Section 2.1.

18 This is calculated by finding the tax reduction associated with contri-
buting 2G11, i.e., the tax saving that results from deducting the excess of
2Gli over the floor, and then subtracting half of this tax saving from Gii.

19 This assumes that the individual connot predict year—to—year changes in his
marginal tax rate. In fact, there is some predictable variation and therefore
some incentive to bunch. Although we believe this is likely to be small, some
investigation with the longitudinal tax rule would be worthwhile.
                                          —19—


is 30 percent. With a 300 dollar floor, the cost of giving is 370 dollars with

no bunching and 325 dollars with bunching. Thus PROB = 1 — (325/370)P        = 1 —

(o.88)P.     If p =   2, PROB = 0.23 while p = 0.5 implies PROB = 0.06 and p = 10
implies PROB =    0.73.    Since econometric evidence about p is unavailable, the

simulations show the sensitivity of the conclusions to alternative values of

           Of course, those individuals who bunch change the amount of their gift

because of bunching. If, without bunching, the individual's gift would be below

the floor while bunching makes the gift (in the year in which it is given)

greater than the floor, there is a reduction in the price of giving and there—

fore an incentive to give more. Among those whose gift would be above the floor

without bunching, bunching has a positive income effect on the amount of the

gift.

           In general, a floor reduces the loss of tax revenue that results from

extending the deduction to nonitemizers and reduces also the incentive to give

associated with such an extension. Bunching increases the revenue loss but,

unless there is complete bunching, still leaves a smaller revenue loss than with

no floor. However, even with bunching the incentive to give is not as great as

without a floor. Whether the floor raises or lowers the tax revenue "loss" per

dollar of induced extra giving is an empirical question that we will examine in

section five with the help of the simulations.

           The alternative "partial bunching" model assumes that all taxpayers

bunch some of their giving if there is a floor and that the extent of bunching

depends on the cost ratio, BCG/CG. The idea of partial bunching is based on the

asymmetry of information between donors and donees. Much giving is done in

response to requests for contributions and is done in a way that the donee orga—
                                           —20—



nization and others know the amount of the donor's gift. The individual who

responds to a request for a contribution by saying "I give every other year and

this is my off year" may not be credible. Individuals may also prefer to appear

more generous, especially for relatively small amounts, by appearing to ignore

tax considerations. And making a contribution may seem better than trying to

explain the tax law to the sellers of Girl Scout cookies or Little League

decals.

          We assume that the specific incentive to partial bunching is of the same

form as equation 2.4:


(2.5)                              =   1     —    (EcGi1/cGi)

where PROPi is the proportion of the charitable gift that individual i     bunches.
The amounts of the gifts in the "low" and "high" giving years depends on the

interaction between bunching, floors and tax saving. For example, if (i —

PROP)Gi     is greater than the floor, bunching does not change the price of

giving in either year but does have an income effect that raises giving to (say)

G2i. In this case, the individual gives (1 — PROPi)G2i in the low year and (1 +

PROPi)G2j     in the high year. Alternatively, if Gi is less than the floor but

(i   + PROP)Gi exceeds the floor, there are both price and income effects in the

"high"    year but only an income effect in the "low" year. We assume that in the
"high"    year the individual in this case gives (1 +    PROP)Gi(Pi/Po)   (1/0)
where P1 reflects the marginal deductability and Y1 differs from Y0 because of

the effects of the floor (which lowers y1) and the bunching (which raises Y1).

Although the income—effect adjustments are not precise, they are relatively
                                          —21—


small and further elaborations or refinements have no significant effects.2°

            There is one further aspect of the partial bunching model that deserves

comment. In the case in which giving without bunching substantially exceeds the

floor, the equation that describes partial bunching might     still   leave giving in

both years at levels above the floor. Since in that case there is no gain from

bunching, we assume that the proportion bunched is actually zero.

            The difference between the effects of the two models of bunching depends

on the taxpayer's initial situation. There are cases in which partial bunching

would save no tax and have no effect on giving while total bunching would do

both. There are other cases in which partial bunching would have a larger total

effect on both giving and tax receipts. The net balance is examined in section

5   with   the help of the simulations.


2.3 Net Altruism

           Although charitable giving can be modelled like other types of consumer

spending, it is worth considering the possibility that charitable behavior is

actually "different." Individuals may make charitable gifts because of a sense

of responsibility, religious devotion, altruism, guilt, or other considerations

that        cause behavior to differ from traditional utility maximization. We

emphasize '" because, even with these motivations, actual charitable giving
might behave just as traditional theory predicts. Certainly the normal price

and income elasticities found in the econometric studies are consistent with

this.

           But individuals might think about charitable giving in terms of their

desire to "sacrifice" or to contribute their "fair share" rather than in terms



20 See footnote 15.
                                             —22—


of the benefits that they can achieve for the donee organization. In this case,

the deductibility of charitable gifts has the effect of reducing the donor's

"sacrifice" or "net contribution." To achieve the initial level of sacrifice,

the donor must increase the size of his contribution. If the individual wishes

to make a fixed sacrifice regardless of the tax law, full deductibility (with no

floor) causes the individual to behave as if he had a price elasticity of —1;

that is, G1 = G0(P1/P0)—1 since this implies a constant net cost of giving,

P101 = P0Gj.

          Although the econometric evidence suggests that the price elasticity is

absolutely larger than one, the possibility of a price elasticity of minus one

cannot be ruled out. If the observed price elasticity were minus one, the

available evidence could not be used to distinguish between the traditional

demand model and the alternative "net sacrifice" or "net altruism" model. With

no floor, the two models are observationally equivalent.

          The presence of a floor causes a substantial difference between the con-

ventional demand model (with a price elasticity of minus one,) and the "net

altruism" model. Consider an individual who, with no deductibility, contributes

$ 400   and whose marginal tax rate is 30 percent. The net cost to such an indivi-

dual is $1400. Allowing deductibility with no floor causes the contribution to

rise to 1400(0.7)- = 571 dollars. With a 300 dollar floor, the conventional

model predicts that giving will fall short of 571 dollars only because of a

small income effect; the extra tax of 90 dollars caused by the floor would

reduce giving by about 5 dollars. But the 300 dollar floor implies that the

"net altruist" must give substantially less than 571 dollars to maintain the

original 1400 dollar net cost. In particular, a total gift of 41-t3 dollars would

have a net cost of 1400 dollars.
                                      —23—


        The possibility that individuals decide on the basis of total net cost

rather than marginal net cost implies that a floor does not reduce the loss in

tax revenue per dollar of induced additional giving. In the example of the pre-

vious paragraph, deductibility with no floor would cause giving to rise by 171

dollars and tax revenue to fall by 171 dollars (0.3 x 571). Deductibility with

a 300 dollar floor would cause giving to rise by )43 dollars and tax revenue to

fall by )43 dollars (0.3 x l43).

        The implications of the "net altruism" model will be considered as part

of the simulations in section 5.



3. Some   Technical Aspects of the Simulation Procedure

        As we noted in the introduction to this paper, our simulations use the

NBER TAXSIM model with the 1977 tax law. Our   sample of 23,111 returns is a one—
in—four random sample from the Treasury's Public Use File of 1977 tax returns.

In simulating the effect of any tax change proposal, we use the model to

calculate consistent values for each individual of the price of giving under the

new law, the amount that that individual gives, and the individual's new tax

liability. The entire TAXSIN model with all features of the tax code are used

in these calculations. By using the sampling weights provided by the Treasury,

we can then aggregate the individual changes in giving and in tax liabilities to

obtain estimates for all taxpayers and for taxpayers in each income class.

        Two technical issues in the simulation deserve special attention: (1)

the calculation of the price of giving, and (2) the estimation of the initial

level of giving of nonitemizers.
                                         —21k—



3.1 The Price of Giving

           The price of giving is defined as the net cost to the taxpayer of a

marginal increase in the charitable contribution. In the simple case of full

deductibility, there would   be   a difference between this "last dollar price" and

the   price associated with the first dollar of giving only if the individual

gives enough to change his marginal tax rate. For most taxpayers, and espe-

cially for those in the income classes that currently do not itemize, the level

of giving is low enough that there would be little or no difference between

the first and last dollar prices. When there is a difference, we use the last

dollar price and adjust the income term for the effect of the difference between

the marginal and inframarginal prices.

           The difference between the first dollar price and the last dollar

price is particularly important when there is a floor. In all cases, the simu-

lation algorithim uses a procedure that converges on the marginal price that is

consistent with the predicted level of giving.

           In calculating the price of giving it is not enough to use the margi-

nal tax rate that the individual faces on additional earnings. There are two

reasons for this. First, a one dollar charitable gift and a one dollar decrease

in earnings can affect the individual's tax      liability differently   for a number

of reasons. The charitable gift can interact with the maximum      tax    on earned

income and the deduction limitation while a change in earnings alters adjusted

gross income and therefore the deductions and limits that depend on AGI. We

avoid these problems by using the TAXSIM model to calculate explicitly the

effect on the tax liability of a one dollar charitable gift.21


21 To reduce rounding error problems, we actually calculate the effect of a
ten dollar gift.
                                       —25—



            The second problem is that individuals may contribute property as well

as cash. When securities or other appreciated property is given to charity, the

taxpayer deducts the market value of the assets and pays no tax on the capital

gain.22     To the extent that the taxpayer uses appreciated assets to make his

gifts, this provision of the law reduces the cost of giving. Moreover, this

aspect applies to nonitemizers as well as to itemizers.

          There are three problems involved in reflecting gifts of appreciated

property in the price variable: (1) What fraction of total giving takes the form

of appreciated property? (2) What fraction of the value of the appreciated pro-

perty is gain that would otherwise be taxed? and (3) What is the relevant

effective tax rate? We follow the procedure used in the earlier econometric

studies from which the price elasticity was derived. We calculate each tax-

payers price as a weighted average of the price of cash gifts and the price (or

cost) of gifts of appreciated property using as weights the average fractions of

both types of gifts in the taxpayer's AGI class.23 If the taxpayer would other-

wise have sold the contributed property immediately, the extra tax saving per

dollar of gift associated with giving the property to charity is the product of




22 This is consistent with the general proposition that a gift of appreciated
property does not constitute "recognition" of the gain and that the recipient of
the property has the same basis as the donor. Since a charity is not taxed
on its own capital gains, the carryover of the basis is irrelevant.

23 The fraction of total gifts that takes the form of property rises from about
3.5 percent for taxpayers with AGI's below $15,000 to more than 70 percent for
taxpayers with AGI's over $100,000.
                                      —26—



the marginal tax rate on capital gains (mc) and the ratio of "gain" to value in

the property that is contributed (g/v). Since the taxpayer also has the option

of postponing the sale of the property or giving the property to another indivi-

dual, the actual tax saving is less than mc(g/v), say A mc(g/v). Although

the capital gains tax rate (mc) can be calculated explicitly for each indivi-

dual, neither A nor g/v is directly observable. In the previous econometric

work (Feldstein and Clotfelter, 1976; Feldstein and ylor, 1976), a maximum

likelihood procedure was used to estimate the product A (g/v) on the assumption

that this was the same for all individuals. The maximum likelihood value of

A (g/v) =   0.50 is used in the current calculation. Of course, since our focus in
this paper is on the low—and middle—income taxpayers who now do not itemize (or

who would stop itemizing if a separate charitable deduction were allowed), gifts

of appreciated property are relatively unimportant and any errors introduced by

our approximation are likely to be very small.



3.2   The Giving of Nonitemizers

       Although the tax return indicates the contributions of all taxpayers who

itemized their deductions, no information is available about the contribution of

nonitemizers under existing law. An initial value of giving, G0, must be

imputed to each nonitemizer before any of the calculations begin. This imputa-

tion is done by matching each nonitemizer to an"equivalent" itemizer and then

assigning to the nonitemizer the itemizer's gift scaled down to reflect the

price difference and any difference in income.
                                       —27'—



          More specifically, our imputation program read in parallel separate

 computer tapes for the nonitemizers and the itemizers. For each noniternizer,

 the program looked at successive itemizers until a record was found with the

 same adjusted gross income class. The giving and the price of the itemizer, GI

 and P1, were then used to calculate a trial value of giving for the nonitemizer

 (GN) according to the formula GN =   GI(PI/PNI)_a(YI/yNI)._.   This in effect

 assigns to the noniteriizer the level of giving that the "matched" itemizer would

have made if he had not been allowed to deduct his contribution, with a further

correction for the difference between their disposable incomes.

           Of course, some itemizers only choose to itemize because they make

large charitable gifts; without their charitable deduction, they would pay less

tax as nonitmeizers. It would be wrong to include these individuals in the

group of itemizers used to impute giving to nonitemizers since the imputed

giving would be too high for a nonitemizer. We therefore deleted this group in

the imputation process.

          Despite this, our procedure can still impute to a nonitemizer a level of

giving which is so high that, if he had made that contribution, he would have

chosen to itemize. We therefore truncate the imputed giving by imposing the

limit that the initial gift of a nonitemizer must not exceed the greater of the

standard deduction reduced by 3 percent of AGI and $500.


)4•   The Basic Simulation Results

            This section presents the simulation results based on the traditional

demand model of charitable giving. The analysis compares the implications of

alternative price elasticities and examines the effects of two different floors

below which non—itemized gifts are not deductible.
                                       —28—


           All of the calculations refer to 1977. The proposed changes are

regarded as modifications in the tax law as of 1977 and all dollar amounts are

based on the sample of actual tax returns for 1911. The calculations are not

forecasts of the short—run effects of a legislative change but simulations of

what 1977 might have looked like if the tax rules relating to charitable gifts

had 'always' been different.2

           Table 1 describes the situation as it actually was in 1977 under the

existing tax rules.25 Approximately 23 million itemizers contributed a total of

nearly $19 billion. Since the tax returns contain no information about gifts

by nonitemizers, their "actual" behavior in 1977 under existing tax rules must

itself be estimated. This estimation procedure has already been described in

section 3.2. The final four columns of Table 1 present estimates corresponding

to four different price elasticities. It is clear that since most non—

itemizers have rather low marginal tax rates, the choice among the price elasti-

city assumptions has relatively little effect on the estimated total giving by

nonitemizers. The range of estimates is from $17.5 billion to $19.1 billion.

          Table 2 summarizes the aggregate effects of alternative ways of

extending the charitable deduction to nonitemizers. These estimates include

not only the response of those who were nonitemizers in 1977 but also the

changes in taxes and in giving among itemizers who would switch to nonitemizer

status if the tax rule were changed.


214   See Clotfelter (1980) on the difference between the long—run and the short—
run   responses to changes in tax rates. The response to a permanent change in
tax   rules might however be more rapid than the response to transitory changes in
tax   rates.

25 Although these figures do not correspond exactly to published IRS numbers
because we have used a sample of returns, the large size of the sample guaran-
tees that errors are very small.
                                        —29—


             Consider, for example, the effect of full deductibility with a price

elasticity of —1.0. The simulations imply that this would increase giving by

$3.5   billion   and would reduce tax revenue by $4.0 billion. For the nonitemi—

zers alone, the price elasticity of 1.0 implies that the revenue loss would

exactly equal the increase in giving. The excess of the revenue loss over the

increased giving reflects the fact that previous itemizers who switch save

substantially more in taxes than the increase, if any, in their giving. The

"budgetary efficiency" estimate of 0.87 is the ratio of increased giving to

reduced taxes implied by extending full deductibility to nonitemizers if the

price elasticity is one.

           A more realistic price elasticity of 1.3 implies a 29 percent higher

level of increased giving but only 2 percent greater revenue loss. The

budgetary efficiency value rises to 1.10, implying that charities receive an

additional $1.10 for each extra dollar of revenue foregone by the Treasury.

           Limiting the deduction of gifts by nonitemizers to the excess over

$300 reduces both the revenue loss and the increased giving. With all these

elasticities, the increase in giving is reduced by much less than the fall in

revenue. With an elasticity of —1.3, for example, the $300 floor reduces the

additional giving by $900 million (from $4.506 billion to $3.608 billion) but

reduces the tax loss by nearly twice as much (from $4.ioi billion to $2.430

billion, a decline of $1.7 billion).

           A floor equal to 3 percent of adjusted gross income instead of a flat

$300 has quite similar aggregate effects. With a price elasticity of —1.3,

giving falls $1.5 billion (from $4.506 billion to $3.039 billion) while the tax

loss is reduced by more than $2.1 billion (from $4.l01 to $1.943). Note that
                                                   Table 1

                          Actual     and Imputed Charitable Contributions




                          Number      ofReturns                 Mean Charitable Gift
Income                   Itemizers     Nonitemizers          Itemizers        Noniternizers: a
Class                      (000)           (000)                         —0.7     —1.0    —1.3        —1.6



Less than $5,000              19)4         23,261               36)4      212       209       206      20)4


 $s,000—$io,00o            i,)486          18,2)49              419       34l       33)4      327      320

$lo,000—$15,000            3,057           io,)488              522       322       307       293      279
                                                                                                              ()
                                                                                                              Q
$15,000-$2o,000            )4,6'ri          7,2)47              509       )415      391       368      3)46


$20,000—$25,000           4,772             3,017               568       366       336       308      282

$25,000—$30,000           3,209             1,191               679       )495      )416      352      298

$3o,000—$50,000           4,193               571               917       62)4      552       )48      )423

over $50,000              1,336                83             )4,029      600       550       497      4)47

All returns              22,916            64,108               819       307'      295       283      273

Total    ($   billion)                                       18,775    19,656    18,881    18,156   i7,486



Contributions of itemizers are the actual mean contributions of individuals who itemized
their returns in 1911.  Contributions of nonitetnizers are imputed using the method
described in section 3 of the text.




                            4-
                                                           Table 2


                                  Aggregate Effects of Extending the Deductibility
                                             of Charitable Contributions




                     Increase in Giving              Reduction in Tax Revenue              Budgetary Efficiency
                             c=
Proposal          —0.7    —1.0    —1.3     —1.6     —0.7     —1.0     —1.3     —1.6      —0.7    —1.0    —1.3     —1.6

                                                                                                                          I-.
Full   De—
ductibility   2.529      3.506    14.506   5.1450   3.991    4.O)42   14.101   14.160    0.63    0.87     1.10     1.31



Floor, $300   2.078      2.879    3.608    14.302   2.3114   2.368    2.1430   2.14814   0.90    1.22     1.148    1.73


Floor, 3
percent of    1.729      2.1409   3.039    3.610    1.835    1.886    1.9)43   2.003     0.9)4   1.28    1.56     1.80
AGI



All amounts are   in billions of 1977 dollars.

These calculations assume conventional demand behavior with no bunching as described               in   section 2.1 of
the text.
                                      —32—


increasing the floor from $300 to 3 percent of AGI actually reduces giving by

more than the saving in taxes; total giving falls an additional $569 million

while the tax loss is cut by only $148i million. The primary reason for this is

that the effect of the percent—of—AGI floor is concentrated more on those tax-

payers with high marginal tax rates for whom the relative reductions are large.

          Table 3 shows the changes in the mean giving and tax liabilities in

each adjusted gross income class and, for reference, the initial levels of

giving and tax liabilities. These figures combine itemizers and nonitemizers.

All of the calculations are based on a price elasticity of —1.3.

          Consider, for example, taxpayers in the $10,000 to $15,000 adjusted

gross income class. Of the 13.5 million taxpayers in this group, 10.5 million

were nonitemizers in 1971. Extending full deductibility of charitable gifts to

all taxpayers would cause giving to increase by an average of $714 and taxes to

fall by an average of $63. A $300 floor would reduce this increase in giving by

$20 but would lower the fall in taxes by $30. Baising the floor to 3 percent of

AGI instead of $300 would reduce giving by an average of $5 and would save an

average of $14 in taxes.

          Note that full deductibility has its maximum effect on the giving and

taxes per return at the income levels between $15,000 and $20,000. Below

$10,000, the relatively low marginal tax rates provide less incentive while

above $20,000 the majority of taxpayers already itemize their deductions.

          Imposition of a $300 floor would have virtually no effect on giving by

taxpayers with AGI's over $25,000 since most such taxpayers would give more than

$300 if deductibility were allowed.    The absolute effect of the $300 floor on

the mean level of giving is also greatest among taxpayers with incomes between
                                                    —33—




                                               Table 3

                        Distribution of' Changes in Mean Contributors
                             and Tax Liabilities by Income Class




                                                   Increases in Giving and Reductions in Taxes
                   Number         Initial            Full Deducti—
                      of           Levels                bility     $300 Floor    3% AGI floor
AGI                Returns     Giving Tax             Giving Tax    Giving Tax    Giving Tax
Class               (000)




Less than $5,000    23,1455     208           11              5    5             5    3       14       14




 $5,000—$lo,000     19,735      33)4        1437        61        524     146        32      52       35

$1o,000—$15,000     13,5)45      31414   1,206          714       63       514       33      249      29

$15,000—$20,000     11,918       1423    2,078          93        814     80         52      65       38

$2o,000—$25,000      7,789       146      3,026         61        59       149       32      29       18

$25,000—$3o,000      24,399      591      14,27)4       61        57       50        3)4     26       16

$3o,000—$50,000      24,763      865      6,879         50        50       146       35      214      15

Over $50,000         1,1419    3,818     29,130         75        70       72        60      )4O      20

All Returns         87,0214      14214    1,913         52        147      141       28      35       22

Total               87.0214   36.931 166.1456        14.506 14.101      3.608 2.1430       3.039   1.9143
($    billion)

All calculations are based on a price elasticity of —1.3 and refer to all taxpayers,
including both current itemizers and noniternizers.
                                      _3)4

$10,000   and $20,000. By contrast, a floor equal to 3 percent of AGI has a verr

substantial effect on the gifts and taxes of relatively high income taxpayers.

A 3 percent floor virtually eliminates any tax saving for those with incomes

over $25,000. Although total giving is lower with a 3 percent of AGI floor than

with a $300 floor, giving by the large number of taxpayers with incomes under

$10,000 is slightly higher.

           Although table 2 suggests that a floor would be an "efficient" way of

modifying the extension of the charitable deduction to all taxpayers (in the

sense that it saves substantially more tax revenue than it reduces charitable

giving), table 3 indicates that a floor would also significantly change the

distribution among income classes of both the increased giving and the reduced

tax liability. Similarly, table 3 makes it clear that the choice between a $300

floor and a 3 percent of AGI floor involves not only aggregate efficiency con-

siderations but also the income class distribution of the changes in giving and

in tax liabilities. Of course, differences in the income class distribution of

giving has significant effects on the types of charities that benefit.


5. Simulating Nonstandard Behavior

            All of the calculations in section )4 were based on the conventional

static utility maximization model of consumer demand for charitable giving. The

more dynamic assumption that taxpayers respond to a floor by bunching contribu-

tions over time will be examined in the current section. The more radical

departure from conventional utility maximization, the net altruism model of

charitable giving, will also be considered.
                                       —35-


5.1 Bunching
         Any floor on the charitable deduction would provide taxpayers with an

incentive to "bunch" their charitable contributions, giving a high level of

contributions in some years and a low level in others. Because the existing law

does not contain such a floor, we have no evidence about the likely extent of

bunching. This section therefore presents simulation results for a rather broad

range of two—year bunching assumptions. The restriction to a two—year cycle is

significant and should be borne in mind in considering the results. All of the

simulations refer to a price elasticity of —1.3.

          When a taxpayer responds to a floor by bunching his contributions, he

reduces the amount of his giving that is not deductible and thereby increases

the tax saving associated with any level of giving. 4oreover, to the extent

that annual unbunched giving would be less than the floor while bunched giving

exceeds the floor, the process of bunching also reduces the marginal price of

giving and thus encourages increased giving. These two effects apply to both

the "total bunching" and "partial bunching" models described in section 2.

          Recall that, with the total bunching model, the probability that indi-

vidual i will bunch is given by

(5.1)                    PROB =   1—   (BcG1/cG1)
where CG1 is the net cost to taxpayer i of giving the amount that he would

choose to give in the presence of a floor if he does not bunch and BCG1 is the

net cost of giving that amount with bunching. Thble 14 presents simulation

results with four different values of the bunching sensitivity variable.

          The striking feature of the results in this table is that bunching

appears to have only a very modest effect on both tax revenue and giving. For
                                                         Table    14




                  The    Effect of   Bunching on Aggregate Contribution and Tax            Liabilities


Proposal                                   Bunching Sensitivity
                 No Bunching             p   0.5           p = 2.0                  p = 10.0            p
                 Changes in            Changes in       Changes in                Changes in          Changes in
                Giving Taxes          Giving  Taxes    Giving Taxes              Giving Taxes        Giving Taxes
                                                                                                                           L)

Full De—        14.506     14.101                 (NoT RELEVANT)
ductib II ity


                3.608      2.1430     3.617'   2.14142   3.6145        2.14147    3.763     2.605        14.079   2.818
$300 Floor


3 percent
of AGI                     1.91414    3.051    1.955     3.089         1.988      3.2146     2.112       3.686    2.3141
                3.039
Floor


Changes in Giving and Taxes are stated in        billions of 1917' dollars.         See    text
for definition of bunching sensitivity.
                                       —31—


example, a $300 floor with no bunching reduces giving by $898 million, from

$)4.506 billion to $3.608 billion. With the bunching described by the moderate

sensitivity value of p =2, the decline in giving is reduced from $898 million to

$861 million. Even with the high sensitivity value of p =10, giving is still

reduced by $7i.3 million. Indeed, even the limiting case in which everyone

who can benefit from bunching does bunch still leaves the extra giving $.21

million lower than without a floor.

            The effect of bunching on tax revenue is limited in a similar way.

Without bunching, the $300 floor reduces the revenue loss by $l.67l billion,

from $L.10l billion to $2.130 billion. Even with the high sensitivity value of

p =   10, the $l.67l billion revenue effect of the floor is reduced by only $175

million. This very small effect of bunching on the revenue loss reflects the

distribution of gifts by non—itemizers, particularly the large number of relati-

vely small gifts for which the floor would eliminate all or nearly all deduc-

tibility. An individual who would give less than $150 a year without bunching

would get no deduction even if he bunched completely. And a taxpayer who gives

$oo every other year instead of $200 each year still gets a deduction for only

one—fourth of his total giving.

           Table 5 presents results for the "partial bunching" model in which all

taxpayers who can benefit from bunching do bunch at least part of their gift.

The results are similar to the probabilistic total bunching model of Table )4

but   indicate even smaller effects on giving and tax revenue.26

           Since there is no experience with floors on which to base empirical

estimates of the taxpayers' likely response, it is reassuring that the results


26 The figures for full and partial bunching with p =   would be exactly equal
if there were no gifts of appreciated property. The small difference in our
calculations reflects differences in the assumed realization of capital gains.
                                                     Table     5


                                     The   Partial      Bunching Model




Proposal                                           Bunching     Sensitivity
                   No Bunc hing              P     = 0.5               P  2.o           P = 10.0          P     =

                   Changes in             Changes in                Changes in        Changes in        Changes in
                  Giving Taxes           Giving       Taxes        Giving Taxes      Giving Taxes      Giving Taxes
                                                                                                                             J)
                                                                                                                             00

Full    De-
ductibility       14.o6   14.ioi                                   (NoT RELEVANT)


$300 Floor        3.608   2.1430         3.615        2.1431       3.616    2.1432   3.730    2.1498   14.093       2.825


3 percent
of AGI            3.039   1.91414        3.01414      1.9145       3.0145   1.9146   3.1614   2.008    3.697        2.3514
Floor

Changes in Giving and    Taxes are stated in billions of 1977 dollars.
See    text for definition of bunching sensitivity.




                                    p.
                                        —39—


of this section are not sensitive to a wide variation in assumptions about the

possible extent of bunching. It should, however, be borne in mind that only

two—year bunching was considered and that if taxpayers bunched over a longer

period the effects would be more substantial.


5.2 Net Altruism

          The "net altruism" model of charitable giving described in section 2.3

implies that individuals choose the amount that they contribute to charity to

achieve a desired net cost to themselves. Individual differences in the desired

net cost reflect differences in income and taste. Alternative tax rules affect

charitable giving by altering the amount that individuals can contribute per

dollar of net cost. Any   loss   in tax revenue is matched by an equal increase in

charitable giving.

          In the simple context of extending the charitable deduction without

any floor, net altruism is equivalent to a price elasticity of minus one for the

nonitemizers themselves. However, net altruism implies that the taxpayers who

switched from itemizing to using the standard deduction will add the resulting

tax saving to their charitable gifts. Moreover, where giving causes a reduction

in marginal tax rates, the net altruist contributes all of the intramarginal tax

saving while traditional demand behavior implies that intramarginal saving has

only a small income effect. The difference between the conventional demand

model with unitary price elasticity and the net altruism model is shown in the

first row of table 6.

          The contrast between conventional demand and net altruism is cuch

greater when there are floors. Thble 6 shows that the conventional demand

model with a unitary price elasticity implies that a $300 floor causes giving
                                          —40—




                                         Table   6
                          The    Effect of Net Altruism Behavior
                  on   Aggregate Contributions and Tax Liabilities



Proposal              Conventional Demand                           Net Altruism
                           with (=—l
                   Changes in      Budgetary                Changes in         Budgetary
                 Giving Taxes Efficiency                  Giving    Taxes      Efficiency

Full De—         3.506          )4.0L2     0.867            3.871      3.951       0.979
ductibil ity

$300 Floor       2.879       2.368         1.216            1.963      2.008       0.978

3 percent
of AGI           2.1t09         1.886      1.277           1.5)43      1.573       0.980
Floor


Changes in Giving and Taxes are stated in billions of 1917 dollars. See text
t'or definition of bunching sensitivity.
                                              —4i —



to   fall by $600 million and     increases    tax revenue $i.i billion. With net

altruism, the reduced deductibility has          a    rmich bigger effect on giving. Giving

falls by $1.9 billion and the tax revenue rises by an equal amount. The results

are similar if the floor is stated as a percent of adjusted gross income.

            If   the   net altruism model is true, extending the deduction with a

floor    does not have greater budgetary efficiency than full deductibility.
Introducing the floor in itself no longer increases tax revenue by more than it
reduces   giving. With net altruism, the principal reason for having a floor is
to reduce the scale and cost of extending deductibility. The floor would of
course also affect the income class distribution of the induced changes in
giving    and tax payments and    therefore    the mix of donees that benefit.

            The choice between the net altruism model and the conventional demand

model cannot be settled decisively with the available evidence. To the extent

that the estimated price elasticity is significantly different from minus one,

the data do support a conventional demand analysis. But it is quite possible

that some individuals behave according to net altruism principles while the

behavior of others is best described by a conventional demand analysis. If so,

the observed price elasticity is a misleading guide to what would happen if

deductibility were extended with a floor. The results would then be some mix

between the net altruism behavior of Table 6 and the conventional demand

response with a price elasticity between —1.3 and —1.6.


6. Concluding Remarks

             The   primary purpose of   the   present paper is methodological: to exa-
mine how tax simulation could be extended to incorporate nonlinear budget
constraints and nonstandard economic behavior. We have shown how econometric
estimates derived under existing tax rules can be exended to deal with this

wider range of simulations. On those issues for which existing evidence is not

informative we have presented simulation that indicate the sensitivity of the

conclusion to the unknown aspects of behavior.

            The specific simulations indicate that the econometric evidence on

charitable giving implies that extending the charitable deduction to noniterni—

zers would raise individual giving by about 12 percent of the existing total

amount or $1.5 billion at 1977 levels.            The extension would reduce tax revenue by

slightly less, about $Li billion. A floor of $300 or 3 percent of AGI would

reduce the revenue loss by 30 to             percent, even if there is significant

bunching. The effect of the floor on increased giving depends critically on

whether taxpayers' behavior is guided by conventional demand principles or by

the net altruism rule. A reasonable conclusion is that a floor would reduce

giving by less than the increased revenue but that the difference between them

would not be very large.

            In   conclusion,   it   should   perhaps be stressed that the appropriate tax

treatment   of charitable contributions depends on much more than the effects of
alternative tax rules on the magnitude and distribution of contributions and
taxes.   Andrews (1972), for example, has argued that a correct definition of net

income requires deducting charitable gifts while Surrey (1973) has argued the

opposite. Feldstein (1980) has emphasized that a tax subsidy of individual

giving may be preferable to goverment spending for the same purpose even when a

dollar of tax revenue loss induces less than a dollar of additional giving if

individual giving is influenced by the level of government spending on the par-

ticular activity. Still others have emphasized the administrative and
                                     —1t3—



compliance problemz associated with extending the deduction to low income tax-

payers who are rarely audited. All these considerations are important but lie

beyond the scope of the current paper.
                                          _14I

                                       Bib1iograpy


Andrews, William D. December 1912. Personal deductions in an ideal income

    tax, Harvard Law Review 86: 309—385.


Boskin, Michael J. and Martin Feldstein. August 1977. Effects of the

     charitable deduction on contributions by low—income and middle—income

     households: Evidence from a national survey of philanthropy,t' Review

     of Economics and Statistics 59: 35l—354.


Clotfelter, Charles T. 1980. Tax incentives and charitable giving:         Evidence

     from a panel of taxpayers," Journal of Public Economics 13:       3l9—34O.



Clotfelter, Charles T, and Steuerle, C. Eugene. 1979. The effect of the

     federal income tax on charitable giving. Forthcoming. Duke University and

     Office of Tax Analysis.


Dye, Richard F. 1977. Personal charitable contributions:         Tax effects and

     other motives. Proceedings of the National Tax Association.


Feldstein, Martin. 1975a. The income tax and charitable contributions: Part I

     —   aggregate and distributional effects. National Tax Journal 28: 81—100.

                        1975b.   The income tax and charitable contributions: Part
_________________

     II —   the   impact on religious educational, and other organizations.

     National Tax Journal 28: 209—226.


_________________       1980.    A contribution to the theory of tax expenditures:

     the case of charitable giving. In Aaron, H and Bo skin, N., eds. Essays in

     Honor of Joseph Pechman. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.
                                       _)4 5—




Feldstein,   Martin and Clotfelter, Charles. 1976. Tax incentives and charitable

     contributions in the United States. Journal of Public Economics 5:     1—26.


Feldstein, Martin and Taylor, Any. 1976. The income tax and charitable contri-

     butions. Econometrica 4:       1201—1222.


Hausman, Jerry A. 1979.      Exact consumer's surplus. Massachusettes Institute

     of Technology. Mimeo.


Reece, William S. 1979. Charitable contributions: New evidence on household

     behavior. American Economic Review 69:      142—151.


Surrey, Stanley S.   1973. Pathways to tax reform      Cambridge: Harvard Univer-

     sity Press.
