                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          RELATIVE PRIG ES, EMPLOYMENT, AND THE EXCHANGE
                RATE I AN ECONOMY WITH FORESIGHT


                        Maurice Obsfeld

                     Working Paper No. 685




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1981




This paper was presented at the Econometric Society World Congress
1980, Aix—en—Provence, France. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any opin-
ions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #685
                                                              June 1981




                Relative Prices, Employment, and the Exchange
                      Rate in an Economy with Foresight




                                   Abs tract




 This paper studies the effects of monetary policy in a small, open

 economy with a floating exchange rate, sticky wages, and rational expec-

 tations in both the asset and labor markets.
                                                 The model developed empha-
 sizes the link between exchange-rate
                                        depreciation and nominal wage infla-
tion, embodying it in an expectations_augmented
                                                   Phillips curve. The
economy studied produces both traded and non-traded goods, and thus

provides a framework in which to explore the connection between the

dynamic behavior of the exchange rate and the supply structure and degree

of openness of the
                      economy. In addition, the paper examines the "vicious

circle" hypothesis, showing how an explosive cycle of exchange-rate de-

preciation and wage-price inflation may arise in response to an expected

monetary expansion.




                                                  Maurice Obstfeld
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  International Affairs
                                                  Columbia University
                                                  New York NY 10027
                                                  (212) 280-4190
  1. Introduction



        A striking feature of the recent experience with flexible exchange

 rates has been the widely-observed
                                      sensitivity of nominal wages and national
 price levels to exchange-rate fluctuations.1 The close link between the ex-

 change rate and domestic prices, operating through both demand-side substitu—

 tion between home and tradable goods and
                                            through resistance in the labor

 market to real wage cuts, has helped undermine early beliefs--as expressed,

 for example, by Johnson {22]--that a regime of market-determined exchange

 rates can enhance the efficacy of
                                     monetary policy as a stabilization tool

 while ensuring balance-of-payments equilibrium.2    Indeed, much recent policy
 discussion has centered on the possibility that
                                                   freely floating exchange rates
may be inherently unstable. This "vicious circle" view of the current arrange-

ments holds that inflationary asset-market disturbances
                                                           entail short-term ex-
change-rate movements which feed into domestic price levels and may set off

successive, explosive rounds of wage-price inflation and further exchange-

rate depreciation.,3 The concern is reflected in the emphasis on exchange-

rate surveillance in the revised Articles of Agreement of the International

Monetary Fund, in the adoption of informal exchange-rate
                                                            targets by most cen-
tral banks, and in the emergence of more formal
                                                   arrangements to limit the

degree of exchange-rate flexibility, such as the European Monetary System.4

       This paper studies the effects of monetary policy in a small, open

economy with a floating exchange rate, sticky wages, and rational expecta-

tions in both asset and labor markets. The model
                                                    developed here emphasizes
the link between exchange-rate depreciation and
                                                  nominal wage inflation,
embodying it in an expectations-augmented Phillips curve. The institutional
                                  2




assumption made below is that an economy-wide nominal wage is determined in

advance of the period in which it is to prevail, with workers agreeing to

supply all the labor required by employers during this period.5 Expected

real wages rise gradually over time whenever the demand for labor by firms

persistently exceeds a fixed natural level of labor supply, and decline over

time in the opposite situation. For the sake of analytical simplicity, the

analysis below is carried out in continuous time. The assumption that the

nominal wage is a predetermined variable that cannot jump instantaneously

but must adjust gradually provides a rough approximation to the set of wage-

setting arrangements described above. The model may be interpreted as one

in which unions and firms interact to reverse the real-wage changes induced

by unanticipated price fluctuations through successive wage bargains that

push the real wage toward the level equating aggregate labor demand to full-

employment labor supply.6

       The interplay between various wage rigidities and the effects of mon-

etary policy has been studied by Argy and Salop [1], Bilson [3], Burgstaller

[9], and Sachs [30] in models based on the classic Mundell-Fleming framework

of a single domestically-produced good with endogenously-determined terms of

trade.7 The economy studied in this paper comprises sectors producing both

traded and non-traded goods, and thus provides a framework in which to explore

the relationship between patterns of aggregate dynamics and the underlying

supply structure and degree of openness of the economy.8 Of particular inter-

est are the model's predictions concerning the effects of monetary policy on

the real exchange rate (defined as the domestic-currency price of foreign ex-

change deflated by the general price level),9 on the domestic real interest

rate (defined as the domestic nominal interest rate minus the expected instant-
  aneous percentage rate of increase of the general price level), and
                                                                           the
  nominal interest rate itself. While
                                          recent discussions of   exchange_rate
  dynamics,   notably those of Dornbusch [12] and Mussa
                                                          [26], have ascribed
  persistent movements in all these
                                       variables, in part, to speed-of_adjustment
  differentials between asset and
                                     domestic goods markets,1° the approach fol-
  lowed here allows goods prices
                                to adjust instantaneously to clear output
 markets. The temporary real effects of money and the dynamics of
                                                                   adjust-
 ment are consequences of the
                              wage-setting process, which responds only over
 time to labor-market
                      pressures and inflationary expectations.

        The organization of the paper is as follows.

        Section 2 presents a model of
                                         a small open economy producing traded
 goods only. The price level in this
                                         economy fully reflects any movement in
 the exchange rate, but a temporarily rigid nominal wage induces
                                                                 a dynamic
 adjustment to monetary disturbances.     In the model of this section, the in-
 itial depreciation of the exchange rate in response to an
                                                               unanticipated,
 permanent increase in the money
                                   supply falls short of its long-run
                                                                        deprecia-
tion, so that the exchange rate
                                   'undershootsu its eventual level.U
                                                                          Monetary
policy exerts a transitory effect
                                     on output through its impact on the real
wage, but can influence neither the real
                                            exchange rate nor the real inter-
est rate, which are exogenously determined.

       The model is made more realistic in Section 3 through the
                                                                 explicit
introduction of non-traded or home goods that are regarded by
                                                              consumers as
imperfect substitutes for goods
                                   entering international trade. This modifi-
cation weakens the link between the
                                      general price level- -defined as a geo-
metric average of the absolute prices of tradables and non-tradables__and

the exchange rate.   Accordingly, it enhances the ability of
                                                               monetary policy
                                  4




to influence real economic variables.

       Section 4 uses this extended model to study the effects of an un-

expected, one-time increase in the money stock. A key determinant of the

economy's response is the relative magnitude of the output-wage elasticities

of supply in the economy's two sectors. When the supply elasticity in the

home-goods sector is smaller than that in the traded-goods sector, an in-

crease in money causes a rise in the real interest rate and an appreciation
                                               reversed over time as the real
of the real exchange rate, both of which are

wage is restored to its long-run eauilibrium level. When the ranking of

supply elasticities is reversed, monetary expansion has the opposite effects

on the real interest rate and exchange rate. In     the   latter case, also, the

exchange rate may, but need not, overshoot its long-run level in the short

run. The exchange rate may thus exhibit the type     of volatility studied by
                                                      overshoots in this
DornbusCh {12]. The likelihood that the exchange rate
case is greater the lower the substitutabilitY between home and traded goods,

but need not increase with the share of non-traded goods in national output.

There is thus no simple relation, in the framework explored below, between

 the degree of openness of the economy and exchange-rate volatility.

        Section 5 investigates the effects of monetary disturbances that are

 anticipated in advance. The real effects of such disturbances are seen to

 disappear only when they are anticipated
                                            infinitely far in advance.12 In

 addition, the belief that arnonetary expansion
                                                  will occur at some time in the


 future is likely to set off a period of explosive exchange-rate depreciation

 and wage-price inflation that corresponds well to the picture of the "vicious

 circle" emerging from policy discussions. The increase in money, when it occurs,
                                      S




appears to acconunodate the increases in
                                           wages and prices. but in reality
brings the ViCiOUS circle to an end
                                      by placing the economy on a convergent
path along which money-wage growth decelerates.

      Section 6 offers some
                              concluding remarks. In addition, there are
two appendices. Appendix A derives the local stability
                                                        propositions invoked
at various points in the text. Appendix B uses a linearized model
                                                                    to derive
an approximate analytic
                        representation of the path taken by the economy in
response to an anticipated future change in
                                              the money supply.
                                       6




2. Aggregate Dynamics in a Small Open Economy



                                     consists exclusively of a composite
      A small country whose output
                                                 the simplest setting in which
tradable good also produced abroad provides
                                    exchange-rate and wage-price dynamics.
to study the relationship between
                                  of the economy exhibits constant returns to
      The production technology
                                           inputs.13 Demand for labor is determined
scale, and uses capital and labor as

by the equality of the output-wage and the marginal physical product of labor.
                                           stock of capital is fixed and always
On the assumption that the available
                                                level, y, can be expressed as a de-
fully employed, the home country's output

creasing function of the ratio W/Q, where W is the nominal wage and Q the

domestic price level:


                                                                                  (1)
      y =    y(W/Q), y' < 0.


 corresponding to the output-supply schedule is the labor-demand schedule,



                                                                                  (2)
       n =   n(W/Q), n' < 0.


 Domestic residents divide their wealth among domestic money, domestic interest-
                                                          bonds4 All non-money
 bearing assets (bonds and capital), and foreign-currency
                                                     substitutes; their common nominal
 assets are viewed by wealth owners as perfect
                                                                       The demand for
 rate of return in terms of domestic currency is denoted by R.

 real money balances is an increasing function of domestic output and a decreasing

  function of R. Letting M denote the nominal money supply, asset-market equilibrium
                                             7




  may be written as



       M/Q =    L(y,R), L > 0,   LR <   0.
                                                                                      (3)



       The nominal exchange rate, E, is the price of foreign
                                                             money in terms of
 domestic money. As the economy is small with respect to the international

 markets for both goods and assets, it can influence neither the
                                                                            foreign_currency
 price of its output, Q*, nor the
                                 nominal foreign bond rate, R*, both of which
 are assumed to be fixed. The domestic
                                       price level is related to Q* by the
 arbitrage condition



      Q =    EQ,
                                                                                     (4)



while under perfect asset
                            substitutability R is given by



      R=R*+S,
                                                                                     (5)



where 5 is the expected
                          percentage depreciation of the exchange rate.
                                                                                 Equations
(4) and (5) together imply that the real         interest   rate can never deviate from
R*. The. world price of
                          tradables, Q*, is chosen to equal 1, so that the ex-

change rate may be identified with their
                                                 domestic_currency price.
       A key assumption is that agents have rational expectations, so that



         =   E/E,
                                                                                    (6)




barring unpredictable events that bring about discrete jumps in E. Equations
                                             8




                                                    condition (3) to be written as
(1), (4), (5), and (6) allow the equilibrium



      M/E =   L(y(WIE),   R* +   LIE).                                         (7)




Equation (7), in turn, can be written as a differential equation in E,



       LIE = E(E,W,M).                                                         (8)




       An increase in E, given W and M, raises output, leading to excess

demand for real balances in the absence of a rise in LIE.         Similarly, as in-

crease in W or M must be accompanied by a fall in EIE in order that (7) continue

to hold. It follows that



                               < 0.                                            (9)
          > 0, C < 0, LM



       Unlike the exchange rate, the nominal wage, W, is assumed to be a pre-

determined variable that cannot jump instantaneously but must adjust to dis-

turbances over time. Firms can always hire the amount of labor they desire

at the prevailing nominal wage. But there exists a "natural" level of em-

ployment, n, having the property that the expected real wage is increasing

whenever labor demand n(W/E) exceeds n, and decreasing whenever n(W/E) falls

short of n. The implied wage-adjustment scheme is an expectations-augmented

Phillips curve,



        W/W =   n(W/E)    -   i•) +   S,   • > 0,                               (10)
                                                 9




   which may be written in the form



             W/W = W(E,W,M)
                                                                                     (11)



   after making the substitution 5 =
                                     €(E,W,M).
             Equation (10) implies the existence of a unique
                                                         stationary or long-
  run real wage, dependent only on the technology of
                                                     production and . The model
                                              and firms
  may thus be interpreted as one in
                                    which workers/respond with a lag to move the
  real wage toward its
                       long-run target level, thus
                                                   allowing temporary fluctua-
  tions in employment and output.

         An increase in the
                                exchange rate, given the nominal
                                                                    wage, tightens the
  labor market, and, by (9), increases the
                                           expected inflation rate; both factors
 cause the growth rate of money wages to rise. In
                                                    contrast, an increase in V
 or M dampens the rate of
                          nominal wage inflation. Therefore,



         WE >   0,    < 0,    w <   0.



         For a given stock, of
                                    money, (8) and (11) constitute a
                                                                       complete System
 of differential equations in the nominal exchange
                                                           rate and wage. The phase
portrait implied by the partial
                                         derivatives in (9) and (12) is displayed in
Figure 1.       and
                      denote, respectively, the stationary or long-run equilibrium
values of the exchange rate and
                                         money wage. Appendix A contains the proof that
the locus along which W/W = 0
                              has a slope exceeding that of the locus along which
E/E = 0 in a neighborhood of (LW,
                                    implying that the system, locally, has the
saddlepoint property of a unique
                                         convergent path. We follow Sargent and Wallace
 [32]   in   assuming that when no change in
                                                  exogenous variables is expected,
market partcipants, given the nominal wage
                                           W0 inherited from the past, always
    EJi5   0




g
                                         10




  choose as the equilibrium
                              exchange rate the unique value
                                                               E0 placing the economy
  on the saddlepath Converging to long-run equilibrium.

         Consider now the consequences of an Unanticipated,
                                                               permanent increase
  in the nominal money
                         supply on the assumption that the economy is initially

  in long-run equilibri•      From (7) and (10), the long-run exchange rate and
 wage must both rise in proportion to the
                                              increase in the money stock. Ac-
 cordingly, monetary expansion has no lasting effect on the real
                                                                 wage or out-
 put. This long-run neutrality is
                                     represented in Figure 2 by the proportionate
 outward shifts of the E/E = 0 and W/W = 0
                                           schedules along the straight line
 Connecting the initial stationary state and the origin.

        The temporary rigidity of the nominal wage enables
                                                           monetary policy to
 have real effects in the short
                                run, however. At the initial exchange rate
 and interest rate, there is a momentary excess supply of
                                                          money, which causes
the exchange rate to depreciate immediately to the value
                                                         E'0 indicated by S'S
as wealth owners attempt to increase
                                     their holdings of foreign-currency assets.
 This impact depreciation is
                               proportionally smaller than the increase in nominal
money, but the expansion in
                              output occasioned by the accompanying fall in the
real wage increases the transactions demand for real balances
                                                              by an amount
sufficient to ensure that the
                                higher real money stock is willingly held.    In-
deed, the increase in transactions
                                     demand actually pushes the nominal interest
rate R upward, for at
                      E, further exchange-rate depreciation is expected.
       The instantaneous equilibrium
                                     following the monetary expansion cannot
persist in the face of overemployment
                                        and accurately_anticipated depreciation.
The economy therefore moves to its new long-run equilibrium
                                                               along a path char-
acteri:ed by a rising price level, a declining nominal interest
                                                                rate, and
levels of production and employment that fall over time as nominal
                                                                   wage growth
outstrips inflation. The pattern of
                                      adjustment, in which wages, prices, and
        I   -




w               w




    2
                                          11




  the exchange rate move together in the wake of inflationary
                                                                   money-market
  disturbances, is suggestive of the experience of several Western
                                                                   European
  economies during the recent period of exchange-rate flexibility.
                                                                    It stands
  in interesting contrast to the
                                   adjustment pattern described by Dornbusch [12],
  in which an inflationary shock
                                   leads to rising prices, but also to a rising
  interest rate and an appreciating exchange rate.

         The Keynesian liquidity effect
                                          emphasized by Dornbusch [12], which
 depresses the nominal and real interest
                                               rates in the short run and forces the
 exthange rate to overshoot its eventual
                                               level, is absent in the case of a
 small open economy with no sector sheltered from international trade.
                                                                             Instead,
 the nominal interest rate
                              adjusts to monetary expansion in Fisherian fashion,

 fully reflecting subsequent price-level inflation, and then returns to its

 initial level over time as
                            inflationary expectations subside. The real rate
 of interest remains constant.

       It is easy to see why this must occur. Because the price level
                                                                       increases
one-for-one with the exchange
                              rate, exchange-rate overshooting, in the present
setting, would imply an initial net decline in real balances, but a simul-

taneous increase in both the income- and
                                               interest-sensitive components of
money demand. This configuration of prices would be inconsistent with
                                                                      money-
market equilibrium.



3. The Role of Non-Traded Goods



       The existence of goods that do not enter into international trade

weakens the link between the price level
                                           and the exchange rate, and frees
the domestic real interest rate to diverge from the world bond rate. We now

extend the previous section's model by adding to the economy described there
                                            12




                                                         This modifcatiOfl is seen
a sector producing non-traded consumption goods.
                                        of the economy. A detailed ;a1ysiS of the
to alter the dynamic properties
                                                       non-tradables is reserved for
response to monetary shocks in the presence of

the next section.
                                                   non-traded or home good and a
       We now assume that both a composite

                                           to constant_retUrflt0_5le technologies
traded good are produced according
                                                  Both sectors of the economy--tradable
requiring capital and labor as inputs.15
                                     with fixed stocks of non_depreciating capital.
and non_tradable--are endowed
                                           between sectors at the time the nominal
But while labor is free to migrate
                                                            infinitely costly. On the
                                 movements of capital are
wage is set, inter-sector
                                                                               of
 assumption that each sector's capital is always fully utilized, supply
                                                        functions of the re-
home goods and tradables may be expressed as decreasing

 spective output wages,




                   ''            <
                                                                                   (13)
           =
                   y(W/P)    h
                                                                                   (14)
           =                     < 0,


                                            price of non-traded goods.   Corresponding
 where P denotes the domestic-mOney
                                     and (14) are the sectoral labor-demand schedules
  to the supply schedules (13)


                                                                                    (15)
               =             h <     O


                                                                                    (16)
               =
                   n(W/E),   n' < 0.


         The introduction of a           distinct, non_traded good makes necessary an
                                                   13




  explicit description of the demand side of
                                                            the economy. Consumers   are
  identical, and their utility is
                                                given by a homothetic function of their
  consumption rates of home and traded
                                                    goods. Maximization of utility sub-
  ject to a level of nominal
                                      expenditure, Y, leads to the demand functions for
  the two categories of consumption,



         dh =
                                                                                           (17)


        at
              =
                  d(E,P,y).
                                                                                           (18)



 It is assumed, for simplicity, that
                                                  domestic spending always equals domestic
 output, so that



        Y =         +        =
              Py        Ey       Pyh(W/P)
                                            +
                                                Eyt(W/E).                               (19)

The roles of external asset
                                     accumulation and of wealth in general are neglected
so that we may focus on the
                                     relationship between exchange-rate flexibility and
the internal balance of the economy.'6

       The price of home goods is determined
                                                            by the requirement that the supply
of non-tradables equal the domestic
                                                 demand. Using (13), (14), and (17), the
equilibrium condition is written



                   =
                        dh(E) P, Pyh(W/P) + Eyt(W/E)).                                 (20)



Equation (20) implicitly defines the
                                                  equilibrium nominal home-goods price, P.
as a function of the exchange rate and
                                                    money wage:
                                                    14




                                                                                            (21)
        P = P(E,W).


                                                               and in par-
        The properties of the function P(.,.) defined by (20),

                                 will play a key role in the discussion below. An
ticular the sign of P,
                                                                     demand for home goods by in-
increase in E, with W held constant, stimulates
                                           substitUtiOn away from tradables.
                                                                                      This must
creasing income and inducing
                                     the home-goods market is to remain in equilibrium,
be met by a rise in P if
                                          with respect to E is positive.         The elasticity of
and so the elasticity of P

P with respect to the nominal wage is ambiguous, however, for




                                     ''t
                                                    <
                   =   ___________ — 0,                                                      (22)
         (W/P)Pw         +                          >


                                                           _1og(y)/al0g@IE) and a is the compen-
where        _log(y)/31Og(W/1')
                                          of demand for home goods (defined to be positive).
 sated own-price elasticity
                                                                              non-tradables must
 Because demand is homothetic, the equilibrium price of
                                                     proportionallY smaller decrease in non-traded
 fall when a rise in W leads to a

                                           must rise in the opposite case. Defining the output
 than in traded output, and

 share 0h E PyIY (22) may be written as

                             -   0         -   (1
                                     hh
                                     ii



          (w/P)Pw
                             1hOhflhO
                                                         gives the excess demand for home goods, ex-
 The numerator of this expression
                                                         caused by a percentage
  pressed as a percentage of initial home-goods output,
                                                                       occasioned
                                    shows the percentage excess supply
  rise in W, while the denominator
                                                      is decreasing Ifl a, for a
  by a percentage rise in P. The elasticity (W/P)Pw
                                   between home and traded goods dampens the
  high degree of substitutabilitY
                            required to offset the excess demand caused by
  proportional price change
                                             15




 the rise in W. It is also decreasing in
                                                          for the greater the share of
 home goods in national output, the smaller is the percentage excess demand

 relative to the price elasticity a. This point will be important in the

 next section when the relation between
                                                    exchange-rate overshooting and the
 degree of openness of the economy is analyzed.

           We note, for future reference, that because the commodity demand

 functions are homogeneous of degree zero in their arguments, P(.,.) is

 homogeneous of degree one, implying that



           (W/P)Pw + (E/P)PE = 1.
                                                                                      (23)



A ceteris paribus rise in E entails
                                             a less-than-proportional increase in P
when P > 0, and a more-than-proportional increase when                      17
                                                       P < 0.
          Real balances are now defined as nominal balances deflated by a price-

level index Q(E,P) =      PaE1.      The weight a is taken to be the share of home

goods in stationary-state consumption. Demand for real balances is again a

function of real income and the nominal interest rate, so that in perfect-

foresight equilibrium,



          M/Q(E,P) =   L(Y/Q(E,P),   R* +   E/E).                                   (24)



Using (21) and (24), the condition that the goods and money markets clear is

Written



      M/Q(E,P(E,w)) =

                                        + Eyt(W,/E))/Q(E,p(E,w)),    R* +   LIE).   (25)
                                           16




The equilibrium condition may be inverted, as before, to yield the equation

of motion for the exchange rate,



       E/E = E(E,W,M).                                                                 (26)




       It is easily verified that CE and                have the same signs (cf. (9)) as in an

economy that produces traded goods only.            But the sign of        is no longer

unambiguously negative if         >   0.    When P < 0, an increase in W (holding B

constant) entails a fall in the output of both industries and a rise in real

balances; the depreciation rate of E must fall, as before, to restore money-

market equilibrium. When a rise in W is accompanied by an increase in P,

however, the fall in home-goods output is dampened to some extent,18 and the

stock of real balances declines. The net outcome, in this case, of a rise in

W at unchanged B may be either excess supply or excess demand in the money

market. In the latter circumstance, the expected depreciation rate will

have to rise to ensure equilibrium, and the sign of                will be positive. In

the neighborhood of long-run equilibrium (E,W),



                                                                     +
           =
                ()[Oh(l + Pyflhnh (eh) -                                 (l-Oh)nt)],   (27)




where p is the income elasticity of real money demand and p is the interest

 elasticity (defined to be a positive number).19

        The nominal wage again responds over time to both labor-market pressure

 and anticipated price-index inflation. Its equation of motion is now



        W/W =              +
                               nt(W/E)
                                           - i) + Q/Q
                (nh(W/P)
                                                     17




        =                  +             -
            nh(W/1)            nt(W/E)       n) + c(P/P)   +   (1   -
                                                                        c)(E/E).
  Since /P = (W/P)P [/W} +
                                         (E/P)PE{/E],      the reduced form equation for WIlY is


                  -                              (nh(W/P(E,W)) +            n             + E(E,W,M) = w(E,W,M).
              1       ct(W/P(E,W))pW (E,W)                                  t (W/E)   -


                                                                                                            (28)
 Note that W/P(E,W) = 1/P(E/W,1), and because                           >   0, the real wage in terms of
 tradables and the real wage in terms of non-tradables must always
                                                                                             vary in the
 same direction. Thus, (28) implies that lYlE and W/P always move
                                                                  monotonically
 toward their long-run levels.

       As in the one-good model,
                                              WE and WM are, respectively, positive and nega-
 tive. The sign of               is uncertain. A rise in W causes underemployment and

 puts downward pressure on money wages, but also leads to a higher expected in-

 flation rate if (27) is positive.
                                                     is negative when the first factor donii-
 nates, but is positive when the second outweighs the first.

       The system in E and W described                                        locally
                                                    by equations (26) and (28) is/saddlepoint
 stable. When          <   0, the system can again be
                                                      represented by Figure 1. But when
   >   0, the system can assume either of
                                                      two configurations, depending on whether
WW is negative (Figure 3) or positive (Figure 4). In
                                                      both configurations, the
LIE = 0
        locus slopes downward, as does the convergent saddlepath. 20

      An important difference between the present model and that of
                                                                    section 2
is that full-employment
                        output-wages are no longer independent of the domestic
expenditure pattern. Sectoral demand
                                                    shifts, whether autonomous or induced by
official fiscal measures, will shift the P(.,.) function, causing
                                                                  a fall in the
output - wage
              paid by the industry that benefits from the shift and a rise in

the output-wage paid by the industry that is hurt. The adjustment
                                                                  to the shift
will in general require a realigiiment of nominal as well as relative
                                                                      prices, and in
particular a-period of labor-market imbalance as money wages change.
    S


I
            S




        w
S




    S




        w
                                    18




4. Monetary Disturbances and Patterns of Adjustment with Non-Traded Goods



     This section studies the effects of money-supply disturbances in econo-

mies producing non-tradable commodities. The adjustment to monetary perturba-

tions is seen to differ in several respects from that in the simple one-good

economy of section 2. Three of these differences are of particular interest.

First, monetary disturbances induce persistent deviations from purchasing

power parity that disappear only in the long run. Second, monetary disturb-

ances induce movements in the real rate of interest. Third, the exchange

rate may overshoot its eventual, long-run level in response to a nominal

shock. Our aim here is to relate the economy's response to monetary shocks

to its production structure, highlighting in particular the importance of

sectoral output elasticities and the degree of openness.      The latter is de-

fined in terms of both the share of tradable goods in overall output and

the substitutability in consumption between traded and non-traded goods.

     Consider first the effects of an unanticipated, permanent increase

of the money stock on an economy in which h -       < 0.    It must be the case,

 in such an economy, that    <   0. Figure 2 shows the paths of the exchange rate

 and nominal wage on the assumption that the economy is initially at rest.

      The long-run exchange-rate and wage again rise in proportion to the

 increase in money.   The exchange rate depreciates in the short run, too,

 but by an amount necessarily smaller than its long-run depreciation.     The


 reason for this is that, by (22) and (23), the relative price of home goods

 in terms of tradables must rise initially if h <          implying an appreciation

 (i.e., a fall) of the real exchange rate, B/Q(E,P).    As in section 2, exchange-

 rate overshooting would be inconsistent with money-market balance.
                                      19




      The initial real exchange rate appreciation must be reversed during

 the transition to the stationary state, for money is neutral in the long run.

 It follows that the price of home goods in terms of tradables, and with it,

 the output share of home goods, declines during the adjustment process. This

 is possible only if the rate of increase of the price-level index, Q(E.P),

 falls short of the rate of increase of the exchange rate, E.2' An inter-

 esting, and counterintuitive, implication is that when              the real
                                                             h<
 rate of interest, R - Q/Q = R* + ElF - Q/Q, must rise in response to an in-

 crease in money, and fall subsequently to its original level, R*, if no

 further shocks buffet the economy.

     The effects of the disturbance are different when h exceeds n.          n
this case, the sign of      is ambiguous (cf. (27)). The adjustment path can

again be described by Figure 2 when        <   0, and is as shown in Figure 5 when
       22
   > 0.

     The configuration of supply elasticities assumed now implies that a

ceteris paribus increase in the exchange rate is accompanied by a less-than-

proportional increase in the nominal price of home goods, P. Thus, the in-

itial depreciation occasioned by an increase in the money stock is also a

real depreciation in the present case: both F and the ratio E/Q(E,P) rise

on impact. This relative price change is reversed during the adjustment to

long-run equilibrium, and so, the rate of price-level inflation must always

exceed the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate.

     When    <   0, the exchange rate undershoots its eventual level in the

short run, as Figure 2 shows. In this case, the output expansion caused by

the initial fall in real wages increases money demand sufficiently to push

the nominal interest rate upward, even though the price level fails to rise

point-for-point with the exchange rate• While the nominal interest
            SI


                 —




                                         St
N
    N
        N                                     o
            N
                N
                        N
                            N
                                N
                                    NN


                    w
                                          w
                                        20




   rate rises, the real interest
                                   rate falls, for the overall rate of price-
   index inflation is
                        expected to exceed the rate of
                                                          increase of E during the
  transition. Nominal depreciation
                                       is accompanied by real appreciation
  along the path to the
                           stationary state.
       When    >    0, however, the exchange rate
                                                  must overshoot its asymptotic
  level in the short
                     run, depreciating on impact from E to E', and then
                                                                        ap-
  preciating to Th, as shown in
                                Figure 5. This is so because the increase
  in the transaction demand
                              Occasioned by the intial rise
                                                               in Output falls
  short of the increase in
                             real balances,
                                               necessitating a fall in the nominal
 interest rate and
                      so, an appreciating exchange
                                                     rate. Because the relative
 price of non-tradables
                           must rise during the adjustment process to reverse
 the initial real
                    depreciation, the real interest
                                                       rate falls as well.      Indeed,
 the overall price level
                           must rise throughout the
                                                       transition, even though
 the exchange rate is falling. Only a declining
                                                path of real balances is
 consistent with falling real income and a rising
                                                       nominal interest rate.
     This last pattern of
                             adjustnient__iflwhich the price level and nominal
interest rate rie and the
                              exchange rate falls following
                                                               an increase in the
money supply--is essentially the
                                    one described by Dornbusch [12]. As we have
seen, it is possible in the
                              present model only when
likely to occur the larger is
                                                         h >   fl;   and it is more
                                the income elasticity of
                                                            money demand, ji.
Overshooting becomes a Possibility when there are non-traded
                                                             goods because
the aggregate price level, Q, no longer moves
                                                   point-forpoint with the ex-
change rate. If Q initially
                                rises in response to
                                                       a monetary expansion by
an amount less_than_proportional
                                   to the rise in E, the real
                                                                     supply of money
may rise even if the exchange_rate
                                     overshoots its long-run value.        This means
that a decline in the nominal interest rate--an
                                                expected appreciation__cannot
be ruled out, as it was in the traded_goods_only
                                                 model, on the grounds that
                                      21




 it would necessarily entail excess demand in the money market,

           We conclude by examining the extent to which the degree of openness

 of the economy influences the likelihood that the exchange rate overshoots, i.e.,

that     is positive. The degree of openness is most naturally defined in

                                                   in consumption between home and
terms of both the degree of substitutability

traded goods, measured by the substitution elasticity a, and the share of

traded goods in domestic product,

       As (27) shows, E   is   more likely to be positive the smaller the degree


of substitutability on the demand side between traded and non-traded goods.
                                                                          is in-
Indeed, when tradables and non-tradableS are perfect substitutes,
                                            of section 2, in which the exchange
finite, and the model reduces to that

rate always undershoots. The more limited the possibilities for substitution
                                           between the prices of tradables and non-
in consumption, the weaker the link

tradables, and the greater the likelihood that an exchange-rate depreciation

less_than_proportional to a given increase in money leaves an incipient ex-
                                              further depreciation and a fall in the
cess supply of real balances requiring
                                                 of the economy is measured by the
nominal return on bonds. If the openness

 degree of 5ubstitutability between home and international goods, exchange-

 rate overshooting will tend to be associated with less open economies.
                                                      the share of tradables in dom-
        If the degree of openness is measured by

 estic output, however, the association between overshooting and openness
                                                      in this sense, is one in
 becomes less compelling. A less open economy,
                                               relatively small direct effect on
 which exchange rate depreciation has a

 real output and the money-stock deflator. This, by itself, would imply a

 tendency for the domestic interest rate to fall in response to an increase
                                              in E has, in addition to its direct
 in the money supply. But an increase

 effect, an indirect effect on real output and the price level through its in-
                                        22




  fluence on the price of home goods, P. And a decrease in the
                                                                      traded-goods
  share O, as we have seen, lowers
                                       (W/P)Pw, and, by (23), raises
  which measures the sensitivity of the price of non—tradables to exchange-

  rate movements. A decrease in
                                    O thus affects the likelihood of overshooting
  in a second, possibly offsetting,
                                      manner by strengthening the link between
 the prices of domestic and foreign goods.

       To summarize, while lower
                                    substitutability between tradabjes and non-
 tradables makes overshooting
                                more likely, there is in general no monotonic
 relation between the output share of
                                         non-tradables and the likelihood that
 the exchange rate overshoots its long—run level in response to
                                                                      monetary
 perturbations.



 S. Anticipated Monetary Disturbances and the "Vicious Circle"
                                                               Phenomenon


        The analysis has, so far, been
                                             limited to monetary disturbances that
take the public by surprise. We ask, in this section, how the
                                                               analysis must
be modified when the same
                          monetary disturbances are instead anticipated.
                                                                         by
the public some time before their
                                  occurrence. Three points of particular
interest emerge. First, the exchange rate, like any nominal asset
                                                                   price,
responds immediately and discontinuously to new information about future

monetary developments, subsequently evolving along a smooth path in the ab-

sence of further news. Thus, while the
                                              exchange rate must, in the long run,
change in proportion to any change in the
                                                nominal money supply, exchange-rate
movements may bear no relation to actual contemporaneous move-

ments of the money stock over finite intervals of time. Second,
                                                                      monetary
disturbances that are expected in
                                    advance in general have real relative_price
effects that persist after the disturbance has occurred. Only a monetary
                                     23




                               far in advance is fully neutral, having no
shock anticipated infinitely

effect on relative prices at any
                                   time. Finally wages and the exchnge rate
                                                           the announcement of
are likely to evolve explosivelY during the period between
                                                            of nominal price move-
a monetary change and its implementation. This pattern
                                                         of exchange-rate de-
ments corresponds well to the so-called "viciOUS circle"
                                                                role in recent
                          inflation that has played a prominent
preciation and money-wage

discussions of exchange-rate policy.
                                                is initially at rest, Figure 6 shows
       On the assumption that the economy
                                     the monetary authority that the money stock
the effects of an announcement by
                                                             time T in the
will increase from its current value M to (1 + )M at a known
                                   derived from three considerations. First, while
 future. The path displayed is
                                       level M, the motion of the exchange rate
 the money supply is at its initial
                                            by equations (26) and (28). Thus, these
 and the nominal wage must be governed
                                          initial jffrfltial_equati0r system between
 variables move along a path of the
                                                                      Second, once
 the announcement and the moment the monetary expansion occurs.
                                     the economy must be on the convergent path of
 the expected event has occurred,
                                                                  This is a conse-
 the system associated with the higher money stock (1+ )M.
                                                                  equilibrium
 quence of the assumption that the economy chooses the saddlepath
                                      anticipated. Finally, there can be no
 when no future exogenous changes are
                                          when the increase in money actually occurs.
  discrete jump in the exchange rate

                                   would imply an anticipated deviation from the
  Under perfect foresight, this
                                                                        These three
  interest parity condition (5) at time r, which is impossible.24
                                                                       the an-
  requirements can be satisfied simultaneously only if, in response to
                                                                         unstable
  nouncement, the exchange rate jumps to place the economy on the unique
                                intersecting the saddlepath of the new system at
  path of the original system

  time T.
                                                       rate entails a fall in real
            The initial depreciation of the exchange
                                                             increase in the
  wages measured in terms of either good: the belief that an
&
        N               I
            N
                N
                    N   I

                            0




    w
                                     24




money supply is imminent has an immediate expansionary effect. As E and P

both rise, the stock of real balances is reduced, and money-market equilibrium

requires a rise in the nominal domestic interest rate and, by (5), a depreciating

exchange rate.

      The exchange rate and nominal wage rise together until T, the moment

at which the monetary change takes place. Because the nominal money supply

rises discontinuously at r but prices and output cannot jump, the nominal inter-

est rate R necessarily falls at this point. The expected depreciation rate

thus declines, actually becoming negative if the saddlepath slopes downward

as in Figure 6. Thereafter, the economy moves along the convergent path to

the long-run equilibrium associated with money stock (1 +

       It is of particular interest to trace the paths of output and

employment. The real wage in terms of tradables rises steadily until time
                                                                   in
t, as Figure 6 shows, and this implies that the real wage measured
                               well.25 The nominal wage thus "catches up" to the
terms of home goods rises as
                              demand allows workers to conclude ever more favorable
price level as excess labor
                                                                     is thereby
 wage bargains over time, and a smooth fall in output and employment
                                            cannot jump at time T, and the expected
 induced. As noted above, nominal prices

 increase in money therefore has no effect on output and employment at the moment

 it occurs. Real wages continue to rise smoothly toward their long-run levels,
                                            their natural levels until the economy
 while output and employment remain above

 returns to its stationary state.
        These real effects of an anticipated monetary change disappear only when

 the change is anticipated infinitely far in
                                               advance. To make this point formal-

 ly, it is convenient to work with a linear approximation of the differential-

 equation system, valid in a neighborhood of the initial long-run equilibrium
                                                  25




   (E,W):




              E
                        E,W,M) EEW,W,M)                    E -


             W
                        E,W,M)                             W-
                                                              -.                              (29)
         -
                                                       L

  The linearization (29) is used in
                                    Appendix B to calculate an
                                                                                 analytic descrip-
  tion of the path taken
                                by the exchange rate in response to an anticipated

  future monetary change. If (E',W') denotes the
                                                  stationary position of the
  system associated with
                         money stock (1 + y)M, the exchange
                                                            rate and wage at
  time T are given
                   aPproximately by



             E(T) =     +   YW(w/(E - 2flexp({x2            -
                                                                 1]T),                       (30)


         W(-r)    =     — yWexp([2   —
                                         X1JT),
                                                                                             (31)


 where        > 0 and       < 0 are the characterictic
                                                 roots of (29), ad must be real
 and of opposite sign by the saddlepoint..stability
                                                    established in Appendix A.
 A necessary condition for the monetary
                                         change to have no real effects
                                                                         at any
 time is that the
                  adjustment to the new
                                         long-mn equilibrj (E',W') be com-
 plete the moment it occurs. But as (30) and
                                                   (31) show, this requires that
the adjustment period - be
                           infinite. In addition, as -r -÷               , the
                                                                 path of the economy
converges to the segment of the line E(t) -
                                               = (/W) (W(t) - TV) between (E,W) and
(E',t)26 Along this path, relative prices are at the
                                                     long-run values while ab-
solute prices rise explosively with no real effects; and
                                                                         so, the condition that the
monetary change be anticipated
                                     infinitely far in advance is also
                                                                                  sufficient to en-
                                               26




sure full neutrality.27
                                                    economy's path up until time T shows
      A more detailed analysis of the
                                                this case, the arrival of news concerning
how an asset-market disturbance--in
                                                                      of ac-
the future behavior of the money supply--can give rise to an a period

celerating depreciation and inflation even in the absence of any accommodation

                                   While this "viciouS circle" has been widely dis-
by the monetary authority.
                                                                       the flexible exchange-rate system,
cussed in the last decade's policy debate over
                                                    little support in the theoretical liter-
its existence has received curiously

ature. The latter has, in partcular, failed to capture the possibly explosive

nature of the process (see Basevi and De Grauwe [2] and Bilson [3]).
                                                               the path of the exchange rate
      Using the linear approximation (29),

between t = 0 and t =       T   is described by



               —       —                            ________ exp(X2t -          Xt)               (32)
       E(t)   - E   = yE exp(X1(t -      T))    +
                                                           -   x
                                                      E            2


                                         > 0 (the "overshooting" case), (t) is unambi-
 (see the appendices). When

 guously positive for all t, i.e., the exchange rate depreciates at an ever-
                                                                    takes place.
 increasing rate up until the moment the expected increase in money
                                                      the nominal wage also increases at
 Because the real wage must be rising,

                                                    > 0,           > 0, and so the general price level
 an increasing rate. Finally, if
                           28
 rises monotonically.
                                                                            to accelerate until the
       When         < 0, the exchange rate may not begin
                                                                adjustment. But as t - T, the ex-
 final stages of the period of anticipatory

                                 T)),   which pushes all nominal magnitudes upward at
 plosive term exp(X1(t -
                                                                                                  So
  the exponential rate X1, tends to dominate the term associated with X2.

  in this case, too, it is possible that the anticipated monetary change ulti-
                                         27




  mately results in a period of
                                   accelerating depreciation and wage-price
  inflation.

        The "VICIOUS circle" phenomenon
                                          is often linked to a
                                                                 monetary policy
  that systematically accommodates money wage increases in order to avoid
                                                                          un-
  employment. But the present
                               analysis shows that no such permissive
                                                                      policy
  is necessary. Nonetheless, the expected increase in the
                                                           money supply may
  well ppear to accommodate the increase in wages and
                                                       prices, particularly
  since output declines and the nominal interest rate
                                                      generally rises along
 the path following the initial
                                   depreciation. Actually, it is the belief
 that this monetary increase will occur that sets off the depreciation_inflation

 spiral. The expected event brings the vicious circle to
                                                          an end by pushing
 down the nominal interest
                           rate, reducing the rate of
                                                      exchange_rate depreciation,
 and allowing a smooth transition to a convergent path.



 6. Conclusion



      This paper has developed a model of exchange-rate determination
                                                                          and
nominal wage adjustment in a two-sector economy with
                                                     foresight. The model
assumes that goods prices adjust
                                   immediately to clear markets, but that the
nominal wage is sticky in the short run. The persistent
                                                        effects of monetary
disturbances are thus ascribed
                               to the gradual adjustment of expected real
wages to labor-market imbalance, rather than to the short-run
                                                              rigidity of the
domestic price level postulated in
                                   much recent literature. This is in accord
with the observation that
                          exchange-rate fluctuations are immediately reflected
in import prices, while domestic
                                 goods' prices are often closely linked to the
                                     28




prices of international1y.-trade goods.

      The model predicts a variety of macroeconomic adjustment patterns,
                                          of the economy and to some key economic
linking these to the supply structure
                                                           of depreciation
parameters. Also, the model generates the "vicious circle"
                                             to anticipated future monetary ex-
and wage-price inflation as the response

pansion.
                                           is its neglect of the external balance
      A major shortcoming of the model
                                                                                It
and of factors such as wealth influencing aggregate spending and saving.
                                             to the intermediate run in which
is probably best interpreted as applying

labor-market pressures have their full impact but current-account adjustment is

incomplete. On this interpretation, the model presents only a partial picture
                                    flexible rates, but one that nonetheless
of macroeconomic adjustment under
                           features of the recent experience.
 captures some prominent
                                                     29




   ppendix A



          This appendix establishes that
                                                     the model developed in the text is
  saddlepoint_stable in a neighborhood
                                                     of its long-run equilibriun.         When
  linearized in a neighborhood of
                                              (,W), the associated
                                                                              differential_equation
  system has the representation (29).
                                                     This linear system has the saddlepoint
  property of a unique convergent path if and only if the characteristic

  roots of the matrix in (29) are real and of Opposite sign. To
                                                                                      demonstrate
  this, we show that the determinant
                                                 of (29), which equals the product of the
  characteristic roots, is negative (see Hirsch and Smale
                                                          {2lJ).
          In a neighborhood of the
                                            stationary state,


             =
                                                 +         +
                 (1 -
                                       E>'hflh
                                                                                              (Al)

             =
                          E/W
                 (1   -
                                     Ehh +                 +
                          a(Wff)P)                                                           (A2)

 where all derivatives are evaluated at
                                                                  The determinant of (29) therefore
becomes



                 -
                                       —
       EcEww          ECWWWE
                                (1 -
                                           ——
                                       c(W/P)P)
                                                 — Ehh           +
                                                                     >'tflt    "E + E]
which is negative if and Only if                 +        > 0.
      The function c(E,W,M) is
                                           homogeneous of degree zero in its arguments (by
(25)), and so Euler's theorem
                                        implies that             +        +     = c(,M)/ =       0.
Because      <   0,         +    must therefore be positive. This shows
                       CE                                               the local
saddlepoint stability of the system.
                                                     30




     By direct substitution of (Al) and (A2) into the characteristic equation



        -
               E
                       +   Wui) ,       + EW -        EWWWE) = 0,




it is easy to verify that the characteristic roots of the system (29) are:
         =         +               > o,   x2 =    -         < 0.                              (A3)




Appendix B

                                                      linearized
      This appendix presents an algebraic solution of the/model of exchange-rate

and wage dynamics, and calculates the path taken by the economy during the period

                                                                in the money stock.29 The economy is
preceding an anticipated permanent change
                                                                         moment the future change in
assumed to be at the long-run equilibrium (E,W) the

the money stock becomes known. The initial money supply is M.

      A general solution of (29) takes the form


                               r       k1Ecw     __________
      E(t)   - E                   —             —                   exp(X1t)
                                                      -
                                   EE -    A1              x2
                           —
                                                                                ,              (Bl)

      W(t) -   W                                                     exp(X2t)
                                                      k2


                                                                                        of the system
where k1 and k2 are constants determined by the initial position

 (see Hirsch and Smale [21]). Because the term exp(A1t) is explosive, the con-
                                                                                          =   0.    The
 vergent saddlepath must be associated with the initial condition k1

 equation describing this saddlepath is therefore


                           -Ec
                                   W                                                               (B2)
                                        (WW)
                       BCE -
                                              31




  The slope of the saddlepath depends on the sign of
                                                                  at long-run equilibrium
  in the manner described in the text.

         In what follows, we shall make use of the fact that the matrix
                                                                                 coefficients
  of the linear approximation
                                      (29) are not altered by a
                                                                  proportional increase in
  M, E, and W. This is a
                               consequence of the fact that E(E,W,M) and
                                                                             w(E,W,M) are
  both homogeneous of degree zero in their arguments, so that
                                                              their partial
  derivatives are homogeneous of degree -1. In particular, the
                                                                         characteristic
 roots      and 2 are invariant with
                                            respect to changes in the money supply.
         To determine the path of the
                                            economy up until an expected increase in
 the money supply from M to (1 + y)M at time T, it is
                                                      necessary to determine
 the appropriate values for the
                                       arbitrary coefficients k1 and k2. The first
 initial Condition comes from the
                                         assumption that the nominal wage is predeter-
 mined at the initial time t = 0.
                                          This means that while the exchange rate
 will jump from   to E(0) when agents learn about the future increase in
                                                                         money,
 N is constrained to remain at the value W determined in the
                                                             past. Using (Bl),
 the implied constraint on k1 and k2 is



      W(0) -   W   = 0 =
                           k1 + k2.
                                                                                   (B3)



      The second initial Condition
                                          comes from the continuity condition
                                                                                 ruling
out anticipated, discrete jumps in the exchange rate.
                                                              By assumption, the econ-
omy must be on the stable trajectory of
                                               the system associated with money stock
(1 + y)M at all times t > T. Thus, the initial Conditions
                                                                    k1 and k-, must place
the economy on an unstable path of the original system
                                                              bringing it to the new
systemts s.addlepath at time T. For if this were not the
                                                         case, the exchange rate
would have to move sharply to attain the new saddlepath.

      What information does this second set of constraints give
                                                                         us about k1 and
k2? Let ('') denote the stationary
                                             position of the economy after the increase
                                                            32




in money; clearly, B' = (1                     + y)B     and W' = (1             + 1)W.    By (Bi), the position

of the economy at time t =                     t   is


        E(t) -
                    —
                    E = —
                                  _kiEw
                                  E
                                      —
                                          xi
                                               exp(X1T)    +    _k2EEw

                                                                 E
                                                                     -   X
                                                                             2
                                                                                  e(X2T),                    (B4)




                         =                         +                                                         (B5)
        W(t) -      W
                              k1e(X1T)                 k2exp(x2T).


The condition           that (E(T),W(T)) lie on the stable arm of the system associated

with   the higher money stock is

                                      _E'w(E' ,W' (1        +                             —
                    —
                    E'       =                                               (W(T)    —
                                                                                          W')
        E(T)    —
                                  —
                                                         + y)M) —


                                                                         —
                             = —_Ecw(E,W,M)                (W(T)     -   W'),                                 (B6)
                                  Ee(E,W,M) —


                                   above. CoditiOflS (B4)-(B6) together imply
 by (B2) and the homogeneity noted


                                                                 - X2)'(E + EW(EE - x1)W]
                   exp(-X1T) [( - X1)                                                                         (B7)
            k1 =—                                         W2 -           X1)




            Using    (A3), (B3), and (B7), we find that


            k1 =    1W   exp(-X1T) = -k2


                                                           associated with the economy's path between
  is the set of initial conditions

  t   = 0   and t =          T.
                                          33




  Notes


  1. Dornbusch and Krugman
                               [13], Bruno [5, 6], and Spit11er
                                                                    [33] provide some
  preliminary econometric evidence.


  2.
         This development has not been
                                         surprising to readers of Nurkse [27],
  Triffin [34], and Mundell [25], however.


  3. See Dornbusch and
                          Krugman [13], Basevi and De Grauwe
                                                                [2], and Bilson
  [3].



 4. Additional Concerns lie
                             behind these developments, of course, but a
 complete discussion would lead beyond the scope of this
                                                         paper.

 5. Hall [19] argues that many U.S. labor contracts do have this
                                                                  feature of
 demand_determined labor supply over limited periods. The
                                                           assumption of pre-
 determined nominal wages is familiar from the closed-economy
                                                              macroeconomics
 literature exemplified by Fischer [14] and by Phelps and Taylor
                                                                      [28].

6. Some econometric evidence on the extent of real-wage
                                                         resistance in
Western Europe in the l970's can be found in Branson and
                                                         Rotemberg [} and
Sachs [31].


7. See Mundell [24]. These
                               authors generally extend the
                                                          Mundell-Fleming
framework by fleshing out the labor market, allowing
                                                     wages and prices to
adjust gradually to market disequi1jbrj, and introducing
                                                            expectations. The
approach of this paper is closest to that of Burgstaller [9],
                                                               who studies
anticipated and unanticipated changes in the monetary growth
                                                              rate and public
spending in a neighborhood of
                              an inflationary stationary state.
                                   34




                                        fixed-exchange-rate model in which a
8. Gordon [17] develops a two-sector

Phillips curve mechanism ensures a long-run real wage that clears the labor

market. Buiter's [7] model is of related interest.


                                        real exchange rate movements (i.e., de-
9. The existence and persistence of

viations from purchasing-OOwer parity) during the recent period of floating

have been documented by Kravis and Lipsey [23] and Frenkel [16], among others.
                                      alternative theory of real exchange rate
Calvo and Rodriguez [11] develop an

movenients based on external asset accumulation.


10. Like this paper's model, that of Mussa [26] describes a two-sector economy.

Mussa's model abstracts from the labor market and from endogenous fluctuations

in output, however.


 11. Dornbusch [12] has made the point that exchange-rate undershooting may
                                        rises in the short run as a result of mon-
 occur when the level of real output

 etary expansion. In the model of Section 2, however, undershooting necessarily

 occurs.


 12. The possible real effects of anticipated money under rational expectations

 are widely discussed in the literature on the macroeconomics of closed econo-

 mies. See, for example, Fischer [15].


                                function exhibits positive but diminishing mar-
 13. As usual, the production

 ginal returns to either factor.


 14. All bonds carry a fixed nominal face value.


  15. Both production functions are as decribed in footnote 13, above.
                                             35




    16. Burgstaller [8] and
                                  Henderson [20] develop sticky-wage models that
    take these factors into account.
                                            Note also that the effect of the real
    interest rate on expenditure
                                      is neglected as well.
                                                                 The explicit intro-S
   duction of this factor into
                                    the present model would complicate the
   analysis considerably be adding a third differential
                                                                 equation (in P) to the
   system.


   17. The degree_o
                        homogeneity of P(.,.) in its two arguments
                                                                    would not
   obtain if real balances
                           were a determinant of
                                                 aggregate spending.

   18. By (23), if        >   0, (W/P)Pw < 1, so the concomitant rise
                                                                      in P cannot
  offset the effect of a rise in W on the
                                                  wage in terms of home goods.

  19. All functions
                      are henceforth evaluated at
                                                                unless otherwise indicated.

  20. See Appendix A.


 21. The ossib1jty that the aggregate
                                      price level falls
                                                        curing the transition
 cannot be ruled out under the present
                                            ranking of supply elasticities

 22. In Figure 5,    it   is assuned that         < 0
                                                        near long-run equi1ibrju

 23. Bilson [3] touches on this Issue in the
                                             Context of an extended Mundell_
 Fleming model.


24. An anticipated
                      discrete jump in the
                                          exchange rate would involve an instan-
taneously infinite
                   percentage rate of capital loss
                                                      on domestic_currency assets.
This anticipated loss would provide wealth_oers
                                                   with an incentive to shift
their portfolios
                 toward real and foreign
                                         assets an instant before T. Calvo
                                                                              [103
provides a more detailed
                         discussion of this
                                            continuity Condition.
                                      36




                                              function P(.,.), W/E and N/P must
25.   Recall that by the homogeneity of the

 always vary in the same direction.


26. In the notation of Appendix B, this is the unstable path of the original
                                                       0.     It is clearly the only
system obtained by imposing the initial condition k2 =

path passing through (E',W').


27. It is of interest to note that in the model of DornbusCh [12], the real ef-

fects of an anticipated monetary disturbance
                                                do not disappear as -r -   :   even a

                                           far in advance requires that some relative
monetary change anticipated infinitely
                              "after" its occurrence. See Gray and Turnovsky [18],
price adjustment take place
                                      counter-intuitive result follows from the fact
Rogoff [29], and Wilson [35]. This

that in Dornbusch's model, the locus obtained by imposing the initial condition

mentioned in the previous footnote has a slope differing from the long-run equi-

 librium terms of trade. As Mussa [26] has emphasized, the problem is caused by
                                             The latter builds into the model a form of
 the model's price-adjustment mechanism.
                                                                  domestic output,
 money illusion by postulating that the (sticky) nominal price of

 rather than its price in terms of foreign goods, adjusts over time in response
                                                  is avoided in the present model by
 to goods-market disequilibrium. This problem

 the expectatioflal, forward-looking component of the wage-adjustment scheme, which

 automatically adjusts the nominal wage over time to offset expected increases in

 the absolute price level even in the absence of labor-market imbalance.


                                           R must also rise monotonically until time -r.
 28. By (5), the nominal interest rate


  29. The analysis in this appendix draws heavily on Rogoff [29] and Wilson [35].
                                            37




  References



  [1] Argy, V., and J. Salop: "Price
                                           and Output Effects of Monetary and Fiscal
        Policy under Flexible Exchange
                                             Rates," International Monetary Fund Staff
        Papers, 26 (1979), 224-256.

  [2] Basevi, G., and P. De Grauwe:
                                         "Vicious and Virtuous Circles: A Theoretical
        Analysis and a Policy Proposal for
                                                 Managing Exchange Rates," European
        Economic Review, 10 (1977), 277-301.


 [3] Bilson, J.F.O.: "The 'Vicious Circle'
                                                 Hypothesis," International Monetary
       Fund Staff Papers, 26 (1979), 1-37.

 [4] Branson, W.H., and J. Rotemberg:
                                            "International Adjustment with Wage
       Rigidity," European Economic Review, 13 (1980), 309-332.

 [5] Bruno, M.: "Exchange Rates,
                                       Import Costs, and Wage-Price Dynamics,' Journal

       of Political Economy, 86 (1978), 379-403.

 [6] ____:   "Import     Prices and Stagflation in the Industrial Countries: A

       Cross-Section Analysis," Economic Journal, 90 (1980), 479-492.


[7] Buiter, W.H.: "Unemployment_Infj0
                                                 Trade-Offs with Rational Expectations
      in an Open Economy," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1
                                                                       (1979),
      117—142.

[8] Burgstaller, A.: "Flexible
                                     Exchange Rates, Unemployment and Stabilization
      Policy Effectiveness," Journal of International
                                                            Economics, 10 (1980), 341-
      355.

[9] ____:    "Flexible   Exchange Rates, Rational Expectations and the Trade-Off

     between Inflation and
                                 Unemployment," mimeograph, Barnard College,

     Columbia University, 1980.
                                       3g




[10] Calvo, G.A.: "The Stability of Models of Money and Perfect Foresight:

     A Comment," EconometriCa, 45 (1977), 1737-1739.

[11] Calvo, G.A., and C.A. Rodriguez: "A Model of Exchange Rate Determination
                                            Rational Expectations," Journal of
     under Currency Substitution and

      Political Economy, 85 (1977), 617-625.
                                                                       of
[12] Dornbusch, R.: "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal

      Political Economy, 84 (1976), 1161-1176.
                                        "Flexible Exchange Rates in the Short Run,"
[13] Dornbusch, R., and P. Krugman:

      Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 7 (1976), 537-575.
                                              Rational Expectations and the Optimal
[14] Fischer, S.: "Long-Term Contracts,
                                      of Political Economy, 85 (1977), 191-205.
      Money Supply Rule," Journal

              "Anticipations   and the NonneutralitY of Money," Journal of Political
 [15] ____:

       Economy, 87 (1979), 225-252.
                                       of Purchasing Power Parities in the 1970's,"
 [16] Frenkel, J.A.: "The Collapse

       mimeograph, University of Chicago, 1980.
                                        between Domestic and International Theories
 [17] Gordon, R.J.: "Interrelations

       of Inflation," in The Political Economy of Monetary Reform, ed. by R.Z.

       Aliber. London: Macmillan, 1977, pp. 126-154.

 [18] Gray, M.R., and S.J. Turnovsky: "The Stability of.
                                                              Exchange Rate Dynamics
                                              International Economic Review, 20 (1979),
       under Perfect Myopic Foresight,"

       643-660.
                                  Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity," BrookingS Papers
 [19] Hall, R.E.: "Employment

        on Economic Activity, 11 (1980), 91-123.

  [20] Henderson, D.W.: "The Dynamic Effects of Exchange Market Intervention
                                                                          Discussion
        Policy: Two Extreme Views and a Synthesis," International Finance

        Papers No. 142, 1978.
  [21] Hirsch, M.W., and S. Smale: Differential
                                                    Equations, Dynamical Systems
        and Linear Algebra. New York: Academic Press, 1974.

  [22] Johnson, H.G. : "The Case for Flexible
                                                Exchange Rates, 1969," Federal
       Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 51.
                                                (1969), 12-24.

 [23] Kravis, I.,and R. Lipsey: "Price
                                          Behavior in the Light of Balance of
       Payments Theories," Jouriial of International
                                                       Economics, 8 (1978), 194-
       246.

 [24] Mundell, R.A..: International Economics. New York:
                                                         Macmillan, 1968.
 [25] ____:   "A Plan for a European Currency," in The
                                                       Economics of Common

       Currencies, ed. by H.G. Johnson and A.K. Swoboda.
                                                            London: George Allen
       and Linwin, pp. 143-177.

 [26] Mussa, M.: "A Model of
                               Exchange Rate Dynamics," mimeograph, University of
      Chicago, 1980.

[27] Nurkse, R.: International
                                  Currenc, Experience: Lessons of the Interwar
      Period. Geneva: League of Nations, 1944.

[28] Phelps, E.S., and J.B. Taylor:
                                       "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy
      under Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, 85 (1977),

      163-190.

[29] Rogoff, K.: "Essays on Expectations
                                            and Exchange Rate Volatility,"
     unpublished doctoral dissertation,
                                            Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
      1979.

[30] Sachs, J. : "Wages, Flexible
                                    Exchange Rates, and Macroeconomic Policy,"

     arterly Journal of Economics, 94 (1980), 731-747,

[31] ____: "Wages, Profits, and Macroeconomic Adjustment:
                                                            A Comparative
     Study," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 10 (1979), 269-319.
                                     40




                                                             of Money and
[321 Sargent, T.J., and N. Wallace: "The Stability of Models
                                       EconometriCa, 41 (1973), 1043-1048.
     Growth with Perfect Foresight,"
                               Effects of Exchange Rate Changes on Terms of
33] Spitaller E.: "Short-Run
                                  International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 27
     Trade and Trade Balance,"

      (1980), 320-348.
                                                         Yale University Press,
[34] Triffin, R.: Gold and the Dollar Crisis. New Haven:

      1963.
                                  Shocks and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal
[35] Wilson, C.A.: "Anticipated

      of political Economy, 87 (1979) : 639-647.
