NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AGGREGATE SPENDING AND THE TERNS OF TRADE:

IS

THERE A LAURSEN-METZLER EFFECT?

Maurice Obstfeld

Working Paper No. 686

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEkRCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1981

I have had the benefit of very helpful conversations with Ralph
Braid, Guillermo Calvo, Slobodan Djajic, Ronald Findlay, Paolo
Kind, and Robert Mundell. Valuable suggestions were made by participants in a seminar at Harvard University. The research
reported here was partially supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation. The research reported here is part
of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Anyopin—
ions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #686
June 1981

Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade: Is There a
Laursen-Metzler Effect?

Abstract

This paper investigates the spending and current—account effects of
permanent terms—of—trade shifts in a model where households maximize

utility over an infinite planning period. In the framework we adopt,
an economy specialized in production must experience a fall in aggregate

spending and a current surplus wh the terms of trade permanently deteriorate.
The model thus provides a 'ounter—arnple to the argi.rnent of Laursen and

Metzler (1950) and Harberger (1950) that a permanent worsening
in the terms of trade must produce a current—account deficit.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
Columbia University
New York, New York 10027
(212) 280—4190

Introduction

In their classic 1950 analysis of the international transmission
of business cycles under flexible exchange rates,' Svend Laursen and
Lloyd A. Metzler hypothesized a relationship between aggregate spending and the terms of trade that has come to occupy an important place

in open—economy macroeconomics. This Laursen-Metzler effect was central to the early post—war writing on the theory of devaluation--notably
that of Harberger [1950] and Alexander [19521--and has, more recently,
emerged in discussion of the external adjustment problem accompanying
s:ifts

in the

1n'.at!7e prc3 of mnufàctured and prima:7 commod.ties. 2

It predicts that an adverse movement in the terms of trade between domestic and
foreign goods will cause a rise in the home-goods value of expenditure, and, under con-

ditions of complete specialization in production, a current-account deficit.

Laursen and Metzler based their hypothesis largely on statistical
evidence that seemed to confirm Keynes' "fundamental psychological law"
positing a stable relationship between current real income and consump-

tion.3 According to this law, individuals adjust only gradually toa decline in real income, reducing saving as well as spending in an attempt

to smooth their consumption stream. While recognizing that "a wide
variety of different relations is consistent with rational behavior
on the part of producers and consumers," Laursen and Netzler nonetheless
adopted the Keynesia.n assumption, arguing that a deterioration of the
terms of trade, which lowers real income, must lower saving as well.
This paper takes as its .starting point the proposition that the

question raised by Laursen and Metzler can be answered only in a con-

text of explicit, intertemporal utility maximization. To this end, we

2

describe an economy in which households consume a non-produced exportable
good and an imported foreign good, face given terms of trade, and maximize
an integral of discounted instantaneous utilities over an infinite horizon
by optimally allocating income each moment between current consumption and

the accumulation of real claims on foreigners. The results of a permanent, unanticipated terms-of-trade change in this setting throw doubt on the general validity of
the Laursen—Metzler relationship, for a worsening of the terms of trade between
exports and imports is found to occasion a surplus, and not a deficit, in the

current account. This implies that when net claims on future units of the
foreign good are zero, so that the Laursen—Metzler assumption of complete
specialization is valid, aggregate spending measured in units of the domestic
good must fall.

The analysis pursued here is based on some special assumptions, due to
Uzawa [1968], on the determination of agents' subjective rate of time prefer—
ence; and its applicability is narrowed further by the exclusion of all but a

single asset. Different assumptions about the structure of preferences and
the range of assets may yield different results, and so, the outcome described
here should be viewed only as an example of how the Laursen—Metzler effect may

be reversed.4 Nonetheless, the economic principle underlying this example is
worth emphasizing, as it extends beyond the present context to any discussion
of the relation among aggregate spending, income, and wealth. An unanticipatec'
change in real income conveys new information about future consumption possibilities, and thus calls for a complete revision of the previous

lifetime expenditure plan. The new plan may well entail a sharp change
in current consumption, in contrast to the gradual adjustment implied by the

3

Keynesian "psychological law." Barring further surprises, the path of future consumption will be smooth. But the arrival of new informatIon renders all previous
consumption levels irrelevant, if, as is assumed here, these have no
influence on the household's welfare over the remainder of its lifetime.

The paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the lifetime
maximization problem of the typical household in a world of two consumption
goods and perfect capital mobility, and derives necessary conditions for an

optimal plan. Section II proves that there is a unique convergent path
satisfying these necessary conditions, and that this path is optimal in the

class of feasible paths. Section II uses this fact to determine the economy's response

to a permanent worsening in

the terms of rade b-eten in.poLs anc exports.

Section IV extends the model to the case in which the home country faces an

capital market, showing that the previous results are essentially
unchanged. Finally, Section V presents some concluding remarks.
imperfect

4

I.

The Model

The economy consists of identical households, each maximizing its
utility over an infinite lifetime. Instantaneous utility is derived
from consumption of two goods, one of which must be imüorted from abroad
and one of which is available at home in fixed supply. Households may

save by foregoing consumption and accumulating instead an internationally
traded bond, assumed, without loss of generality, to be indexed to the

foreign good.5The economy is small, in the sense that it can influence
neither the terms of trade between home and foreign goods nor the world
rate of interest. Finally, it is assumed that these prices are expected

to remain fi::ed forever. ny price changes take households by suprise.6
The representative household's instantaneous utility is a function

=

fh

U(ct,ct)

of its consumption of foreign and home goods. U is taken to be positive,
strictly increasing in both its arguments, strictly concave, and twice
continuously differentiable. To avoid non—interior solutions to the

household's lifetime consumption problem, we postulate that

(1)

urn Uf = urn U h =

cO t c±O t

The household's objective is to maximize the discounted sum of
future instantaneous utilities

r

(2)
J

U

Ue

—

dt,

5

where
t

t is

ds

0

and

is the instantaneous Subjective discount rate at time s. Like Uzawa
to be a function

[1968], we suppose

=

of

(3)

utility at time s, where cS(.) 4s positive and has the properties

'(U) ,

S

(U) — U6 '(U)

(U) > 0.

While the conditions (3) are not the only ones consistent with the
assumption of endogenous time preference, they turn out to be quite
convenient in the present context. The reasons for imposing them
will become clear during the course of our analysis.7
At each instant, the representative family is bound by a flow
constraint linking any divergence between its income and its
expenditure to its accumulation of claims on future units of the foreign

good. Letting b denote bond holdings at time t, p the price of foreign
goods in terms of domestic goods, y the family's (fixed) endowment of
the home good, and r the international rate of interest, we may write
this constraint as

(4)

bt =

y/p

-

c

-

c/p + rbt.

6

The condition implies that for the economy as a whole, the capitalaccount deficit must equal the excess of income over expenditure.

The household is also bound by a second, less obvious, constraint
on its program of saving and spending. The discounted sum of lifetime

expenditure (measured indomestic goods, say) must be no greater than
the capitalized value of lifetime income plus initial bond holdings,

(5)

y/r + ph0

>

J

e rt[pcf +

c]

dt.

The importance of this constraint can best be appreciated by contrasting the present infinite-horizon planning problem with a finite-horizon
problem whose planning period ends at time T. In the latter setting, the

family's budget constraint clearly implies that bT is nonnegative, for
any lifetime borrowing must be repaid before death. But an infinitelylived family facing a perfect capital market may borrow and consume
arbitrarily large amounts while always meeting its interest payments.

Unless a condition such as (5) is imposed, its lifetime utility will be
unbounded: no optimal program will exist.
To rule out this "paradox of borrowing" we shall impose the feasibility constraint that at each moment, the family's capitalized future
income must exceed its indebtedness,

(6)

y/r +

pbt . 0.

This restriction eliminates the option of running up an infinitely large

debt. As we shall see in the next section, (6) is sufficient to ensure

7

the existence of an optimal path satisfying (5)

The household's problem is to choose paths for c, h and b that

(7)

maximize U(c,c')et dt

subject to

(i)

=

(11) b =

I(U(ch))ds,
y/p

-

c,

-

Ct/p + rb,

(iii) c, c > 0,

(iv) y/r pb

The number of households is for convenience taken to be 1, so that the
consumption and saving paths chosen by the representative household may
be identified with those of the economy as a whole.

A few simplifications will facilitate solution of this maximization problem. In order to maximize lifetime welfare, the household must
at each moment maximize its instantaneous utility, given relative prices
and its chosen level of expenditure on consumption goods in general. Our
first simplification is to replace the utility function in (2) with the
indirect utility function

V(p,z)

max {U(cf,ch) pc +

=

z}.

This device both reduces the dimensionality of our problem and allows
us to focus on the variable of primary interest, expenditure in terms

8

of the domestic good, z.

A second simplification is achieved by noting that assumption
(1) implies constraints (iii) and (iv) can never be binding along an

optimal trajectory, and may thus be ignored in deriving necessary
conditions for optimality. In particular, spending on both goods must
be zero whenever constraint (iv) binds, for at such a point, current
income just suffices to meet interest payments on previous borrowing.
A final simplification is obtained by changing variables in (7)
from t to A,

using

S(V(p,z))

dA =

the fact that

dt.

This reduces the family's problem to finding paths for b and z that

(8,

f

maximize I
J

V(p,z) e—A dA
S(v(p,z))

0

db — (y
z)/p rb
_____________
—
d
-

subject to

+

5(V(p,z))

Necessary conditions for a solution to (8) are readily derived
using the Maximum Principle, provided that the problem's maximand is
concave. That V(p,z) is concave in z under our assumptions (so that

V2 < 0)

is demonstrated in the appendix. This fact, together with the

restrictions (2) on the time preference function S(),
to imply that

is

sufficient

9

V(p,z)

dz2

=

( — V5')

(rSV

—25'(v)2) — VS"5(V)2

6(V(p,z))

is negative.
To apply the Maxirnurn Principle, we introduce the costate variable

X, which may be interpreted as the imputed value or shadow price of
saving.

An optimal plan must at each moment equate the marginal

utility of spending to the imputed value of an additional unit of
saving, and must thus maximize the Hamiltoniari

(9)

H(b,z,X) = V(p,z) + A1(y

- z)/p

+ rb]

S(V(p,z))

The chosen expenditure path therefore has the property that

0

at all 1x, that is, that

(10) X =

In

pV(l

—

v('/6))/(l + vc'/) fy -

z +

rpb}).

addition, the costate variable evolves according to the law of

motion

d(eX)

— -

(eH)
Th

or, reversing our initial change of variables,

10

(11) A =

Xt((v(p,zt))

-

r).

This condition states that the marginal rate of time preference must at
each instant equal the rate of return on bonds plus "capital gains" A/A.

Differential equation (11), together with the flow constraint

(12) bt =

( - zt)/p + rbt,

must be satisfied by any optimal path.

While conditions (10), (ll)7and (12) are necessarily satisfied by
an optimal program, they are not in themselves sufficient to guarantee
optirnality. The stock of bonds inherited from the past is predetermined

at time t = 0, and this fact provides one initial condition for the
system. But an initial value of A is also required, and unless this

shadow price is chosen correctly, a path that at each instant equates
the marginal utility of consumption to the imputed value of saving will
be suboptimal. Again, the problem is due to our assumption that the planning unit has an infinite life. If this life instead ended at time T, the
0 would enable us to solve backward for A0. But

terminal condition bT

in the present context, no such restriction is available; and this difficulty calls into question the existence as well as the uniqueness of
an optimal plan.

It is natural €0

focus our attention on the unique stationary

state (b,z) of the economy, defined by the conditions

A =

A(5(V(p,z)

-

r)

=

0,

Li.

ensuring that the marginal rate of time preference equals the rate of
interest, and

b = (y -

z)/p

+

rb

=

0,

ensuring external balance. The reason for doing so is that paths which

converge to the stationary state satisfy the sufficiency condition for
optimal controls,

lim [y/rp +

b]eX = 0,

and so, are optimal.1° We shall now show that there exists a unique

convergent path, and that no divergent path is optimal. This, in turn,

will guarantee that the economy's response to any change in the parameters it faces is uniquely determined.

II. The Optimal Path
Our analysis can be simplified by transforming the differential
equations (11) and (12) into a system involving only b and z. The necessary condition (10) shows that

can be written as a function of bt and

zt,

=

A(bt,zt),

which may be differentiated and equated to (11) to yield

Xbbt +

X(bt,zt)((V(p,zt))

-

r).

12

This irnDlies the equation of motion for zt,

r)

X(bt,zt)(5(V(p,zt)) —

-

(13) z =

Ab(bt,zt)((y

-

z)/p

+ rbt)

XztlZt)
E

Of course, f'(b,z) =

0.

We now derive the system's phase portrait in a neighborhood of the
stationary state by expanding (13) about (b,z). The resulting linear ap-

proximation is

+

(14) Zt

Abr
- —b)
= - __—(bt

+

X'PVz

+

—

(zt

- —z),

PAZ

AZ

where a bar over a function indicates that it is evaluated at (b,z). Because

- V6')6'/cS,

=

•:-

= p(V(S - vS') -

(14) reduces to

(15)

Zt —

p(v)2

— ——

V(

—.

Vs')

Vc5')cS'r
—

— — (bt

—

b).

The right-hand panel of Figure I displays the dynamic behavior of

C

.Q

L

0
IQ

H

f.L1

>1

N

N
Q4

13

the system described by equations (12) and (15) in the region where the

feasibility constraints (7(iii)) and (7(iv)) are respected. From (15),
expenditure z is stationary provided bonds are at their long-run level
b; hence, the locus of points such that z = 0 is (locally) vertical. The assumptions
to the left of this line and de-

made in (3) guaantee that spending is increasing

creasing to its riqht. The locus along which b = 0 is upward sloping with slope

—
dz

db b=O

=rp,

for a rise in spending must be matched by a rise in interest income if

the current account is to remain

balance. To the left of this schedule,

income falls short of spend.g and bond holdinçs are dec'easthg; to its
right, they are increasing. We note for future reference that the points
(0,y) and (-y/rp,0) always lie on the b = 0 locus.
The stationary state or long-run equilibrium (b,z) is a saddlepoint because of
function.11 The path
our assumptions regarding the shape of the time preference
SS in Figure 1 is the unique convergent path. From the sufficiency

theorem for optimal controls cited above, we know that, given an initial
value of b, it is optimal for the economy to choose an expenditure level

placing it on the saddlepath SS. But it is now clear, in addition, that
any other choice will be suboptimal.

Paths originating below SS with z0

< z and b0 > b are dominated by the saddlepath; if z0 > z and b0 >
such a path is dominated by one that coincides with the original path until
Zt =

z and remains at z thereafter; and if b0 < b, a path coinciding with

the original one until the b = 0 schedule is crossed but holding spending

constant thereafter dominates. Paths originating above SS entail a
rising level of consumption over time. But consumption rises so quickly
that the feasibility constraint that y/rp + b be nonnegative eventually
becomes binding. Thereafter, expenditure z must fall sharply to zero in

14

order to prevent any further growth in indebtedness, and this, by assumption (1), is not consistent with optimality. The unique path SS converging to long-run equilibrium at (b,z) must thus be the path the economy
12.

actually chooses.

The two panels of Figure I together show how long-run equilibrium is
determined. From the law of motion for ), (11) , we see that the long—

run utility level U is fixed by the relation

(16)

(U) =

and so,is
the

independent of the

economy's

teirs of trade. i-e.i terms. o trade p, the:i,

stationary-state expenditure level z must allow it to attain

utility level U, so that

(17) V(p,z) = U.

Equation (17), which gives long-run expenditure in terms of domestic
goods as a function of the terms of trade, is plotted in the left-hand
panel of Figure I. By Roy's identity,

=

- vcPrz)/v(Piz)

=

(p,U),

showing that the function has the concave shape displayed in the diagram. Having found z, we find the stationary stock of bonds•b by noting
that for every choice of long-run consumption, there is only one
level of bond holdings consistent with external balance. The b = 0

15

schedule of Figure i shows this relationship. A rise in stationarystate consumption must be financed by a higher stationary-state

level of interest payments from abroad. This entails a higher stock
of claims on foreigners in long-run equilibrium.
We observe, 'finally, that the saddlepath SS does satisfy the

intertemporal budget constraint (5). After substituting for z
using (12) and integrating by parts, we find that

I

[y + rpb0 -

)

-rt

z)e

dt =

urn Pbe

-rt

0

This limit is certainly zero if bt ÷ b <

iii.

.

Aggregate Spending and the Terms of Trade

In this section we analyze the effects of a permanent terms—of-trade
deterioration on aggregate expenditure measured in home goods and

on the current account. The initial income effect of this price movement
depends, of course, on the size and sign of the economy's stock of

claims on future units of the foreign good. For simplicity, we begin
by assuming that bond holdings are zero.

This corresponds to the case

of complete specialization in production assumed by Laursen and Metzler
and their contemporaries.

The hypothesized situation is depicted in Figure II. At the initial
long-run equilibrium E, the economy enjoys terms of trade p and derives
all its income from its fixed endowment y of the home good.

Consider

now a rise from p to p' in the relative price of the foreign good. The
slope of the b = 0 schedule rises from rp to rp', the point (O,y) re-

mains consistent with external balance, and so the schedule rotates about

0

0

Ix

0

H
H

N

>1

w

N

N

>

16

E in the counterclockwise sense. The left—hand panel shows that the
stationary expenditure level rises to z', and the new external balance
locus shows the unique level b' of bond holdings consistent in the long

run with that level of spending. The convergent path leading to the post—
disturbance stationary—state E' necessarily passes below the initial

position E. The stock of net foreign claims cannot change instantaneously, so the economy jumps to point E' on

the saddlepath when the terms

of trade deteriorate. Contrary to the Laursen—Metzler presumption, the
optimal response to the terms—of—trade shift requires a fall in the
domestic—goods value of aggregate spending and a current—account surplus.

The intuition behind this finding is easy to grasp. By (16), the
economy will choose a transition path that allows it in the long run

to attain its original utility level, U. This implies that the
permanent level of expenditure must rise from z to z'. The current
account must eventually be in balance, however, and domestic spending

measured in home goods cannot be higher in the new stationary state

unless income is higher as well. A rise in income can be accomplished
only through the gradual accumulation of

interest-earning claims on

foreigners. The terms—of-trade shift (in the present case) leaves the
domestic—goods value of output unchanged, and so the required surplus
must be accommodated by a fall in the domestic—goods value of expenditure. Figure

shows how consumption and bond holdings grow over time

along the transition path to E'.
It is instructive to ask why this reversal of the outcome

predicted by Laursen and Metzler is possible. The Keynesian
consumption function upon which the Laursefl-MetZler argument is based

posits a mechanical relationship between realized income and spending,

17

according to which the household smooths the path of its consumption
stream by reducing saving as well as spending in response to a worsen-

ing of the terms of trade. The result is a current—account deficit.
However, an examination of the household's lifetime problem (8) shows
why this reasonirg is invalid in the present framework. Given its view of future
prices, the family smooths the path of its future consumption streaih; previous

levels of real income are irrelevant. The point can be put another
way. Expenditure will respond smoothly only to anticipated changes
in real income. Unanticipated changes will convey new information and
so dictate a revision of the lifetime consumption plan and a sharp

change in spending. It is this sudden shift in expenditure that gives

rise to a current-account surplus in the present setting.
We now consider the cases in which th economy's claims on the

rest of the world are nonzero when the disturbance occurs. These
may be thought of, of course, as cases of incomplete specialization

in the exported commodity. When bond holdings are negative, the termsof—trade shift leads to a fall in the export value of income, and the
export value of spending must decrease by a greater amount to deliver
the current surplus required for the return to long-run equilibrium.

But when net bond holdings are positive, the export value of income rises when the terms of trade turn against the home country, and

so,an increase in the export value of consumption need not entail
a current deficit. Figure iii shows a case in which a positive expendi-

ture response results from a sufficiently large endowment of claims on

the foreign good. While in this instance the Laursen-Metzler spending

effect is verified, nonspecialization is a necessary condition and a

z

z(p') =

0

b(p') =

0

ZI

b(p) =

0

z

b

-y/rp

-y/rp'

i;•I

Figure III

18

current deficit remains impossible)-3

IV.

An Imperfect Capital Market

In this section we relax the assumption that the home

country

has access to a perfect world capital market willing to lend or borrow

any amount at the going world rate of interest. We suppose instead
that the cost of borrowing faced by the home country is an increasing

function of is indebtedness to the rest of the world. This extension
adds to the complexity as well as the realism of our analysis. While
under perfect capital mobility, the representative household's eventual

utility level U is a constant determined by e fixed world intest
rate r alone, our new assumption implies that U and r are jointly

determined. In addition, we must describe how expectations regarding
the future path of the interest rate are formed.

We assume now that the number of households in the economy is 1, that

(18) r =

r(b),

r'(bt) <

0,

and that the realized path of interest rates, {rt}, is a perfect—foresight

equilibrium path. Under the last assumption, {rt} has the property that
when households behave competitively and maximize lifetime welfare in the

belief that rt} is the path of interest rates that will prevail, the chosen

path of bond holdings, b} ,

satisfies r =

r(b),

for all t.14 To find the

set of paths consistent with the maximization hypothesis and the perfect—fore--

sicht assumption, note that the necessary conditions (12) and (13) remain

applicable under competitive behavior. We need only substitute rt for r using
(18) in order to take into account the dependence of the interest rate on the

19

stock of bonds. The stationary—state (b,z) of the resulting system
continues to be characterized by the equality of the marginal rate of
time preference and the interest rate,

S(V(p,z)) =r(b),

and by external balance.
To inves'tigate the system's dynamic properties in a neighborhood

of the stationary—state, we may once again linearize (12) and (13)

about (b,z), this time taking aOount of (18). The resulting approxi—
mation is

b

(1-)r(b) _l/P1

b-b

(19)

z

b

where now

b

=

Vz =

Vz

-

\76')S'(l - r,)r - V (- V5')r'
p(V)2(z
z

Vzz (
Z

zz (5

- I) - 7II( )2
z

2 \75) - VcShI(V)2
z

arid r E —br'(b)/r. On the assumption that

<

1, so that interest

income can never decrease as bond holdings increase, the determinant

20

of the system (19) is negative.15 Since the latter is the product
of the system's characteristic roots, (19) must possess one negative

root and one positive root, implying the existence of a unique saddlepath

converging to the stationary position (b,z). It is straightforward
to show that this'convergent path is the sole

perfect-foresight equi-

librium path for the economy. 16
Once again, the saddlepath satisfies the intertemporal budget
constraint, which is now written as

(20) b0 +

where Pt -

f (y/p)ePt

f(b)

dt -

J

(z/p)e

t dt = 0,

ds. The left-hand side of (20)

,

after

a change of

variables from t to p, becomes

b0 +

J

( - b)e

dp =

This limit is zero provided b
In Figure

Iv

urn ben.

converges to a finite value.

we depict the joint determination of the long-run

equilibrium interest rate r and utility level U. Let (r) be the level
of bond holdings associated with interest rate r. The equation

(21) U = V(p,y +

r(r))

shows that a higher long-run utility level requires a higher long-

run level of interest payments from abroad and so (because

ru

<

1) a

lower long—run interest rate. This gives the downward sloping rela—

r
B

r=(U)
r

B

U
U

Figure IV

21

tionship BB shown in Figure IV. The upward-sloping relationship reflects
the equality of the interest rate and rate of time preference that must

obtain in the stationary state. Long-run equilibrium must be consistent

with both of these relationships. The long-run values of utility and
the interest rate ate thus determined by the intersection of the two
schedules at E.

We now consider the effects on the stationary utility level and interest rate of
a permanent, adverse shift in the terms of trade. From (21)

,

the

position of the EB schedule depends on p. If p rises to p', the economy
will enjoy a lower long—run utility level for any level of interest income, and so the EB schedule shifts leftward to B'B'

as

Figure V shows.

Thus, a rise in the relative price of imports leads to lower utility and
a lower interest rate in stationary-state equilibrium.

Recalling our result that the system's stationary state is a saddle—
point, it is easy to characterize the dynamics of the transition path

leading there. A lower long—run interest rate implies higher net bond
holdings than before the disturbance, and the terms-of-trade shift must
therefore cause a current—account surplus on impact. Whether spending in
terms of exportables rises or falls will again depend on the economy's

initial holdings of claims on foreign output. When net claims are zero,
so that the economy is, in effect, specialized, a current surplus requires
a fall in the export value of expenditure.
Consideration of the case where the capital market is imperfect reinforces our earlier conclusions regarding the effect of terms-of-trade

change on absorption and the external balance. In addition, it shows
how a fall in the relative price of exports may cause a decline in the

r
B

B'

r=

\\

cS(U)

B

B'
U

U,

Figure V

22

economy's permanent, long—run utility level.

V. Conclusion
This paper has studied the expenditure and current-account effects of a
permanent terms-of-trade deterioration in an economy of infinitely-lived,
utility-maximizing families.

In this context of explicit, intertemporal

optimization, we found that the well—known Laursen-Metzler relationship
predicting a current deficit and a rise in the export value of spending

is invalid. A deterioration in the terms of trade, in our setting, leads
to a current surplus as households acquire interest—bearing claims on
foreigners in order to restore their stationary-state real income to

its original level. This entails a fall in the home-good value of
spending when initial bond holdings are zero, but may be coupled with
a rise in that variable when initial claims on future units of the import
are positive.

These findings have arisen under a particular set of assumptions

concerning preferences and the opportunites for transforming present utility
into future utility. And, indeed, the interernporal transformation possibilities
assumed here have differed form those assumed by Laursen and Metzler, who envisioned a monetary economy with a floating exchange rate, unable to borrow or

lend abroad. The validity of the Laursen-Metzler prediction depends in general
on the economy's intertemporal utility possibiuites and its menu of assets.
We have analyzed only one of many possible cases.
Nonetheless, the example analyzed here throws doubt on the notions

underlying

the Keynesian consumption function

prediction

is derived. Aggregate relationships that link consumption only to

from which the Laursen—Metzler

23

measured income or wealth fail to account for the impact of unanticipated
changes in the perceived lifetime budget

constraint, changes that call for

a revision of the entire planned future consumption path. Recent

discussion of the current—account "adjustment problem associated
with terms-of-trade shocks to the industrialized economies has,

for the most part, ignored this point

App endix

In this appendix, we show that the indirect utility function V(p,z)
is concave in z when the underlying utility function U(cf,ch) is concave.
To see this, write indirect utility as

V(p,z) = max {U(c,z — pc)

}.

C

Let V(p,z')

U(c',z' -

pc')

and V(p,z") =

U(cfl,Zt

—

pc"),

and suppose

X c [0,1]. Then

2)V(p,z") = XU(c!,zI

AV(p,z') + (1 —

<U(Ac + (1

—

>)c,Xz'

—

pc')

+ (1

<max {U(c,Xz' + (1 — X)z"

—

—

+ (1 —

X)U(c",z"

X)z" — Xpc' — (1

—

pc")

—

pc)}

C

= V(p,Xz'

+ (1 —

where the first inequality is a consequence of the concavity of U(,).

Notes

1. Laursen and Metzler [1950].
2. Johnson [1967] includes a survey of previous writing on the Laursen—
Metzler relationship, while Mussa [1979] and Dornbusch [1980] provide more re-

cent treatments. Interest in the macroeconomic consequences of terms-of—trade
disturbances has until recently been "crowded out" by the one-good paradig-m
associated with the monetary approach to the balance of payments. An exception is Rodriguez [1976], who attempts to deal with terms-of-trade questions
within the framework of the monetary approach.

3. Keynes [1936], p. 96.
4. This paper's assumption that the subjective rate of time preference
is a function of contemporaneous utility allows the small economy described
in Section I to attain a stationary state under perfect

capital mobility.

Findlay [1978] provides another example of this type of assumption, and a dis-

cussion. The economy described in Section IV could attain a stationary state
even if the subjective rate of time preference were constant, as is usual in optimal

control problems. But the resulting model would have the unrealistic implication
that a terms—of—trade change has no effect on the current account when the
economy is initially in external balance. Svensson and Razin [1981] ,

in

a two—period model, show that the current-account effect of a permanent
terms—of—trade change depends on whether the subjective time preference
rate is increasing or decreasing in the level of instantaneous utility.

We make the former assumption in (3), below; the latter assumption
excludes the possibility of a convergent optimal accumulation path
in an infinite—horizon setting (see n. 11 below) , and thus renders our small-

country assumption untenable. Note also that we have not analyzed the
effects of transitory terms-of-trade shocks in this paper.
5. If we allowed some lending to be indexed to the home good as. well,

the economy would be able to vary its endowment of both goods. But this would

25

have no bearing on the results derived below.

6. This assumption allows us to speak of 'the" rate of interest.
7. It may be helpful to note that if instantaneous utility is constant
at level U, discounted lifetime utility is U/5(U), and the second inequality
in (3) asserts that this quotient rises as U rises.

8. This is the solution proposed by Arrow and Kurz [1969], who provide
a more detailed discussion of the problem raised by perfect capital markets.
The paper is reprinted as chapter VII of Arrow and Kurz [19701J.

9. See Arrow and Kurz [1970].

10. The form in which this cndition is stated requires comment.
The sufficiency theorem assumes that the state variable in this case,
b) is always non—negative (see Arrow and Kurz (1970) ,
we have seen that the sufficiency

p.

45); indeed,

theorem must break down if we allow un-

limited borrowing from abroad, since it is then easy to dominate the
saddlepath. If we define "total assets" as the sum of bond holdings
plus the discounted future flow of the home good, a

flow constraint may be written a

=

ra - z/p.

b +

y/rp,

the

Carrying out the

optimization exercise (7) with a instead of b as state variable, we
obtain necessary conditions identical with those appearing in the
the condition
text. But since (7) imposes the constraint a > 0,
urn

ae X =

0 is sufficient for optimality.

This is just the

criterion invoked here.

but the
11. When â'(U) < 0 (contrary to the assumption of (3))
rnaximand V(p,z)/(V(P,Z)) remains concave,
(15) possesses two characteristic

the system described by (12) and

roots with positive real part.

This

means that there exists no path converging to the stationary state.
for given b0, there may be no optimal feasible expenditure path,

Further,

26

12.

It is interestjnu to note that

along the saddlepath, saving in terms of

home goods is given by the "Metzlerian" function pe(b -

(r

—

/r2_4Tb/)/2

<

0.

b),

where e =

Of course, this formula is applicable only so

long as no unanticipated disturbances move the optimal path.

13. There exit terms of trade so adverse that the "home" good
becomes an import in the stationary state. But the long-run level of
bond holdings must rise as long as the home good is being exported initially.

14. Our assumption of competitive behavior implies that the interest
rate perceived by households will differ from the economy's true marginal

rate of transformation between future and present goods. This type of
divergence is familiar from the optimal tariff literature, and can

he corrected by appropriate government fiscal intervention. The
government's problem is a dynamic one in the present context, however.
The determinant is

-

(1 -

+

''b"

=

2) (V )2( - V')'r - V(6 —- V5')
-.- - --- —
V
zz

which is clearly negative provided
16.

<

(

V"(vz )2

1.

Because the saddlepath is convergent, it satisfies the optimal

control sufficiency theorem (cf. n. 10) and is thus a perfect—foresight
equilibrium path. Feasible, non convergent paths entail ever—rising in-

come but perpetually falling consumption. They therefore cannot be equi—
librium paths, for agents would never willingly pick the paths of bond
holdings generating the associated paths of the interest iate.

27

References

Alexander, S.S, "Effects of a Devaluation on a Trade Balance," International
Monetary Fund Staff Papers, II (April 1952), 263—78.
Arrow, K.J., and M. Kurz, "Optimal Consumer Allocation over an Infinite
Lifetime," Journal of Economic Theory, I (June 1969), 68—91.
Arrow, K.J., and M. Kurz, Public Investment, the Rate of Return, and
Optimal Fiscal'Policy (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1970).
Dornbusch, R., Open Economy Macroeconomics (New York: Basic Books, 1980).
Findlay, R., "An 'Austrian' Model of International Trade and Interest Rate
Equalizatio'n," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI (Dec. 1978), 989—
1008.
Harberger, A.C., "Currency Depreciation, Income and the Balance of Trade,"
journal of political Economy, 'LVIII (Feb. 1950), 47-60.
Johnson, H.G., "The Transfer Problem and Exchange Stability," in Inteinat--o:aTrade and Economic Growth (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967).
Keynes, J.M., The General Theory of Employment Interest and Money (London:
Macmillan, 1936)
Laursen, S.,, and L.A. Metzler, "Flexible Exchange Rates and the Theory of
XXXII (Nov. 1950), 281—
Employment," Review of Economics and

Statistics,

99.

Mussa, M., "Macroeconomic Interdependence and the Exchange Rate Regime,"
in R. DornbusCh and J.A. Frenkel, eds., International Economic Policy:
Theory and Evidence (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979).
Rodriguez, C.A., "The Terms of Trade and the Balance of Payments in the
Short Run," American Economic Review, LXVI (Sept. 1976), 710-16.
Svensson, L.E.O., and A. Razin, "The Terms of Trade, Spending, and
the Current Account: The Harberger_LaUr5enMeter Effect,"
unpublished manuscript, Institute for International Economic
Studies, Stockholm, 1981 -

Consumption Function, and Optimum Asset
Uzawa, H., "Time Preference, the
Holdings," J.N. Wolfe, ed., Value, Capital and Growth: Pa?ers in Honour

of Sir John Hicks (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 1968).

