NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TA( POLICY AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

David G. Hartmari

Working Paper No.

689

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

June 1981

This research is part of the NBER's programs in International
Taxation, and Capital Formation. Their financial
assistance is gratefully acknowledged, as are the comments of Alan
Auerbach, Thomas Pugel, and participants in seminars at Harvard and
NYU. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

Studies,

NBER Working Paper #689
June 1981

Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the implications of the most common system of

taxing foreign source income. It is argued that, because the repatriation
of earnings to the home country investor and not the earnings themselves
are typically the source of tax liability, the foreign source income tax
should affect foreign investment differently depending on the required
transfers of funds within the firm.

One implication of viewing the tax in this fashion is that in order
to maximize after tax profits, a firm should finance its foreign investment

out of foreign earnings to the greatest extent possible. That is, a firm's
required foreign return jumps at the point at which desired foreign invest-

ment just exhausts foreign earnings. This allows us to draw a distinction
between "mature" foreign operations, which are at any point in time financed
at the margin by reinvested earnings (and perhaps also pay dividends to
their parent firm in the home country), and "immature" foreign affiliates,
which rely on funding from their parents (and should not be paying dividends).
It is noted that survey evidence on multinational firm behavior is consistent

this distinction. Direct investment data indicate that mature foreign
operations probably account for nearly ninety percent of U.S. foreign direct
with

investment.
The discussion then turns to investment incentives. It is shown that
the home country's rate of tax on foreign source income and the presence
or absence of a foreign tax credit should be irrelevant to a mature foreign

operation's investment and dividend decisions. This conclusion, which
conflicts sharply with the conventional wisdom, follows because the home

country tax acts as an unavoidable cost. New firms' investment decisions
are, on the other hand, influenced by home country taxes.

C. Hartman
Research Associate,
David

NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Mass. 02138

(617) 868—3925
and
Associate Professor of Economics
Harvard University

TAX POLICY AND FOREIGN DIRECT INVESThIENT

The importance of foreign direct investment to the economies of most

countries has increased dramatically in recent years.' For instance, more
than a quarter of new investment by U.S. firms is made in foreign operations.
Predictably, the tax treatment of income earned by multinational firms has
been the subject of frequent debates in both the firms' home countries and

the countries which host the investments. Broad issues of both equity and
efficient international investment patterns are raised by the interactions of
separate national tax systems.

This paper focuses on issues of home country tax policy. In particular,
it is argued that the incentive effects of the most common system of taxation

are very different from those usually ascribed to such a policy. The analysis
of investment incentives is contained in later sections of the paper. First,
the international tax policy issues and the conclusions of previous studies

are briefly examined. While most of the existing literature is concerned
with U.S. policy, the results have broader applicability.
One basic concern of all countries has been the double taxation of corporate income which would arise if both the home country and the host country
ignored the multinational nature of a firm and its earnings.

Generally,

such double taxation has been avoided by action of the home countries, which
have recognized the primary right of host countries to tax income earned in
their jurisdictions and have forgone a portion of the taxes they would normally

have collected on foreign source income, Some countries have, in fact,
adopted a "territorial" approach to taxation, under which no tax is owed on

income earned abroad. Under the more common "residence" approach, double
taxation may still be alleviated by allowing a credit for taxes paid to the

host country government. The former system produces an effective tax rate

—2—

equal to the host country rate, while the latter results in an effective tax
rate equal to the greater of the two countries' rates. Thus, the two systems

result in equal tax burdens only if the tax rate in the host country equals
or exceeds that in the home country.

Some relief from double taxation is, it is believed, necessary to preserve
incentives for capital to be efficiently allocated on a worldwide basis. That
is, capital should be employed in the country in which it will earn the highest
gross return.

The United States employs the residence approach with a credit given for
foreign taxes paid, but proposals to allow only a deduction for foreign taxes

have gained considerable support. Given the corporate tax rates in effect
in most of the world, very high effective rates

of tax would result from ending

the U.S. foreign tax credit. A rejection of the present system by the world's
largest direct investing nation could apparently have important welfare
effects worldwide, but the proposal is justified by opponents of the tax

credit by the gains it would bring the U.S. The current system, it is argued,
encourages too much U.S. capital to be invested abroad. The reason is that
firms will profitably invest abroad as long as the after—tax return abroad
exceeds the after—tax return at home, while the U.S. as a whole gains only

home.2
if the after—foreign—tax return abroad exceeds the gross return at
Therefore, it would seem that providing only a deduction for foreign taxes
paid is necessary to make firms behave in a fashion consistent with the
national interest.

One other aspect of residence—based systems which has come under attack
in the U.S. is that the home country tax is deferred. That is, the tax on
foreign source income is paid only upon repatriation of the income to the

parent firm. Deferral reduces the effective tax rate on income earned abroad

—3--.

and provides some further inducement to foreign direct investment. While
deferral has been called a "loophole" by its critics, it is regarded by many
as crucial to guaranteeing consistency with a basic premise of U.S. law:

that a firm should be taxed only on income it actually receives.3 In fact,
ending deferral raises serious constitutional issues, particularly in the case
of parent firms who, by virtue of having minority ownership in a subsidiary,

may not be able to control the timing of dividend payments.4 Exceptions to
the general policy have been made for actions motivated by tax avoidance, but
the basic principle, that the U.S. should tax not the income of firms incorporated abroad but the income recieved from them by U.S. parents, has remained
intact.

5

The interaction of the foreign tax credit and deferral of the home country

tax makes examination of foreign investment incentives quite complicated when
the home country's tax rate exceeds the rate of creditable host country tax.6
Generally, those interested in the incentive effects of the U.S. system have

treated deferral as a reduction in the effective tax rate. Specifically,
deferral is viewed as reducing the total effective rate from the U.S. rate
to a linear combination of both countries' rates, with the dividend payout
ratio determining the fraction of subsidiary earnings subjected to the U.S.

rate.7 An increase in the U.S. tax on foreign source income, due either to
the elimination of the foreign tax credit or to the imposition of a special

tax, would discourage foreign direct investment. This, of course, is the
result anticipated by those who propose repeal of the foreign tax credit.

In this paper a much more important role is ascribed to deferral. It
is argued that, because the repatriation of profits and not the earning of
profits becomes the source of tax liability under deferral, the corporate
tax when applied to foreign source income should be thought of as a tax on

—4—

the transfer of funds. Therefore, this tax could have very different
consequences from those of the tax on domestic income and its effects could
be highly dependent on the funds transfers involved in the marginal foreign

investment. In particular, it will be important to distinguish the tax
implications for new foreign investments from those for what we will call
"mature" foreign operations, namely those which do not require continuing
injections of funds from the parent.

First, it is shown that the mature foreign operations, which at the
margin are deciding to reinvest versus pay dividends to their parents, are
theoretically distinct from the "immature" foreign operations, which at the
margin are investing funds transferred from the parent.8 That is, we
domonstrate that all foreign direct investment in subsidiaries currently
paying dividends to the parent firm should consist of retained earnings.

Some casual empirical evidence is cited to support the validity of this

separation. In Section II the data on financial behavior of U.S. multinational firms are examined to estimate the fraction of foreign investment

accounted for by earnings retained abroad. The conclusion is that all but
a small fraction of U.S. foreign direct investment appears to be financed
by retained earnings of mature subsidiaries.
In the third section, we examine the effects on mature subsidiaries'
investment and dividend decisions of a home country tax system of the U.S.
type, and of changes in such a tax law.

It is shown that the home country's

rate of tax on foreign source income and the presence or absence of a foreign
tax credit should be irrelevant to a mature subsidiary's investment decisions,

as long as the home country taxes are deferred. This conclusion conflicts
sharply with prevailing opinion. Similarly, the repatriation of profits
from abroad should be unaffected by the tax treatment of foreign source
income, despite the fact that taxes are deferred until repatriation occurs.

—5—

This result stands in contrast to the concerns of some that removing the
foreign tax credit but maintaining deferral would result in reduced income

repatriation.9 Finally, the decisions of the immature subsidiary are examined
and related to the existing foreign investment literature.

—6—

I. Foreign Direct Investment and the Funds Transfers It Involves
Foreign direct investment can be accomplished in several ways. Transfers of funds abroad by a parent firm, either as loans to or equity investments
in subsidiaries, are the most explicit forms of direct investment.10 However,

the retention of earnings abroad by foreign subsidiaries raises the stake of
the parent firm in the operation of the subsidiary just as surely as do

explicit transfers. Retained earnings investment has, of course, been well
recognized, and, beginning in 1979, it has been treated in the U.S. balance of
payments accounts as two separate transactions: an impitcit payment of dividends to the parent firm and an investment of the funds abroad.

Preliminary to the discussion of tax effects on investment incentives,
this section demonstrates the impact of the tax system on the choice among

the several forms of making direct investments. Later, it will be shown
that this choice, which in a world without taxes would be a matter, of no
significance, can have an important bearing on the tax rate which applies

to the marginal investment. The choice among these forms of direct investment
follows in a straightforward fashion from the following simple proposition:
if unnecessary funds transfers result in extra tax liabilities or in earlier
tax liabilities, then the transfers should not be made.
Previous analyses of tax effects on foreign investment incentives have
either neglected reinvestment of subsidiary earnings or have assumed a fixed
retention ratio (a fixed dividend payout ratio), so that marginal direct
investment can be thought of as involving capital transferred directly from

the parent. The assumption of stable dividend payouts by subsidiaries,
even while additional capital flows to the subsidiaries are taking place, has
been justified in much the same way that the behavior of domestic firms has

been explained: by the need to maintain a "reasonable'1 debt—equity ratio,

—7--

the desire to signal success, or simply habit. Here, the question is one of
how a given amount of internal funds reach the subsidiary, so the debt—equity

ratio is unaffected. Since the transactions under discussion are carried
out within one firm, considerations such as signaling profitability would seem

irrelevant. In general, then, there seems little reason to expect the
dividend payout ratio to be fixed unless taxes give no incentive for firms

to act otherwlse)2 Therefore, we will assume that firms have complete
flexibility to respond to tax inducements.

In a no—tax world, there would be no cost to financial transfers across

national boundaries within the firm. Therefore, the firm would be concerned
only about the net transfer of funds between parent and subsidiary.

What is important for our purposes is the effect of a home country tax
system, such as that of the U.S., including deferral and a foreign tax credit.13
A simple formulation of a home country tax on capital income earned abroad
(at rate t), with a credit for host country taxes paid (at rate t* < t), has

the rate (t —
(t —

(1 —

t*)
t*)

t*)

applied to the gross—of—foreign—tax return or the rate

applied to the net—of—foreign—tax return. t is paid as the capi—

tal income is earned, while (t_t*) is paid only on repatriated dividends. A

(lt*)

dollar of after—foreign—tax earnings repatriated to the home country results,
therefore, in a receipt of

dollars by the parent firm. Because of the

limitation of foreign tax credits to the home tax liability, only the foreign

tax is relevant when t exceeds t.
To illustrate the implications of various financial transactions which
could occur within a firm consisting of a domestic parent and one foreign
subsidiary, suppose that each has a dollar and intends to invest a dollar.

It is clear that simu1taneou repatriation of profits and direct investment
through funds transfer is inferior to the alternative of making no funds

transfers. With no transfers, parent and subsidiary investments leave them

—8—

with 1 + r and 1 + r*(l._t*) respectively at the end of the period (or

1 + r +

(l)

[1 + r*(l_t*)1 in the hands of the parent if earnings are

repatriated). The alternative of dividend repatriation coupled with equity
investment simply results in an unnecessary tax payment to the home contry
government at the time of the initial repatriation.

the parent with only

This payment leaves

dollars to invest, rather than one dollar. At

the end of a period, parent and subsidiary have --)[1 + r] and 1 + r*(1_t*)

respectively (or the parent has :)[2 + r + r*(l_t*)] if all income is
repatriated). So, regardless of whether the firm intends to reinvest abroad
at the end of the period or repatriate all assets from abroad, making equity
transfers abroad while earnings are being repatriated is a sub—optimal
strategy.

This example, which is summarized in Table 1, allows two sources of loss
arising from the sub—optimal transfer policy to be distinguished. The first
occurs because of an implicit assumption that the eventual repatriation of
the extra paid—in equity constitutes a taxable event.

That is, the home

country tax is paid twice on the initial dollar of subsidiary earnings.

However, there is a further loss to the firm making dividend and equity
transfers which would occur even if the eventual repatriation of the extra
paid—in capital were viewed as a tax—free return of capital.14 This loss
can be identified as the cost of having to pay the extra home country tax
immediately, rather than at the end of a period of investment and would
should not be
(t_t*)
equal (lt*) r. Therefore, we have shown that a subsidiary
repatriating profits and receiving equity transfers from the parent simul-

taneously, even if the equity can be returned to the parent tax free.
A financial policy of simultaneous dividend payment by the subsidiary
and direct investment in the form of loans has a similar effect.

of repatriated earnings produces

The dollar

of parent firm assets, which grow to

—9—

Table 1

A COMPARISON OF INTERNAL FINANCIAL TRANSFER POLICIES

No Transfers Made

Subsidiary pays dividend to parent, parent

transfers equity to subsidiary

Subsidiary pays dividend to parent, parent transfers
equity to subsidiary
(Repatriation of the equity transfer is tax free)
I

Initial

After
transfers

End of
period

Post Repatriation

Parent Assets
-1

Subsid jar

l+r* (l_t*)

Subsidiary pays dividend to parent;

parent makes loan to subsidiary (at rate r*)

Injtjall After
transfers

Parent Assets

_____________
Subsid jar

(1')

End of
period

(l+:)+r*(lt)

Post—Repatriation

(l±r)+1+r* (l-t)

—10—

+ r) by the end of a period. Since interest payments are ordinarily
deductible under host country tax systems, the subsidiary can pay its gross
capital return to the parent as interest.15 The principal of the loan is

repaid without further tax liability. As in the case of an equity transfer
which can be reversed tax free, the firm incurs an earlier tax liability by
making these offsetting financial transactions; the cost, in end—of period

dollars,

is

(t_t*) r

(l_t*) n

In summary, then, a foreign subsidiary should utilize its profits to

finance further investments whenever possible, rather than paying dividends
to the parent and receiving direct investment from the parent in any form.

Only those foreign subsidiaries without sufficient earnings should rely on

parental financing. This result, that a tax on transfers of funds from
subsidiaries to parents should make firms avoid unnecessary transfers, is

certainly not surprising. However, it calls into serious question the
previous discussions of the foreign investment decision which presume that
parent firms are making equity transfers to dividend—paying foreign subsidiaries.

These previous studies have relied on the aggregate foreign investment
data which show substantial dividend payments and parent company transfers

of funds taking place at the same time. Our analysis is in no way inconsistent with this observation, so long as the same firms are not involved

inboth transactions. In fact, there is a great deal of casual empirical
evidence from U.S. firms consistent with the predictions of our analysis.
Barlow and Wender (1955) reported, for example, that U.S. firms operating
abroad tend to "expand the business within the country through reinvestment

of local earnings to the greatest extent possible." From their survey of

U.S. subsidiary firm behavior, Robbins and Stobaugh (1973) similarly conclude

—11--

"After the initial incubation period, retained earnings and depreciation

allowances are the dominant source of funds, and these sources, when coupled
with local brorowing, leave little need for fresh funds from headquarters."
Unfortunately, there is a near absence of empirical evidence on this issue
from sources other than interviews or surveys of firms.16
More recently, Gilman (1980) has presented empirical evidence on sources
of funds employed by multinational firms, concluding that net parents' contributions are generally minor, "only becoming a significant source of foreign
asset financing when asset growth is very rapid, past investments small or

profits small or negative." Unfortunately, his data, while disaggregated by
OECD country, are aggregated across firms; and so, his investment figures net

any dividend payments from capital transferred abroad. However, the cases
in which funds transfers are found to be significant are those in which we
would expect our arguments above to not be applicable, so the results are
at least not contradictory to the conclusions reached here.17
Without data at the firm level, which could allow isolation of firms
which produce sufficient foreign earnings to finance their chosen levels of
foreign direct investment, it is necessary to be somewhat cautious.

However,

both our theoretical analysis and the evidence available t this time indicate
that direct investment studies should differentiate the behavior of two types

of firms. We will, therefore, characterize foreign operations as "new" (or
"immature"), in which case the marginal source of internal funds is a transfer

from the parent, or as "mature", in which case the marginal source of funds is

a reduction in dividend payments to the parent. As we will show in Section
III, the responses of the two types of firm to a tax policy change could be

very different. First, we will examine evidence on the proportion of U.S.
foreign direct investment accounted for by each category of firm.

—12—

II. The Evidence
In order to discern whether "maturet' or "immature" firms are more

representative of U.S. foreign direct investment, individual firm data would

be required. Since such information is unavailable, inferences about marginal
sources of direct investment must be made from aggregate data.

Very reliable evidence exists on the average source of internal funds.
Figure 1 shows the historical pattern of U.S. foreign direct investment and

its division into transfers from parent firms and reinvested earnings. The
data indicate that a dramatic change has occurred over the past fifteen years

in the method by which direct investment is carried out. Reinvested earnings,
which formerly played a minor role in direct investment now account for over
three quarters of the total; the change is even more impressive for manufacturing investment alone.

The trend toward greater reliance on retained earnings in the aggregate

is consistent with the "maturing" of U.S. foreign operations over the past

decade which has often been noted by observers. It has produced a situation
in which the level of firms' operations abroad could continue to grow quite
rapidly without the need for further parent company financing.

That transfers to subsidiaries play a minor role becomes even clearer
when it is recognized that the data on transfers are for both separately
incorporated and unincorporated foreign affiliates, while the reinvested

earnings figures are for only incorporated affiliates. When a firm's foreign
affiliate is not separately incorporated, all investment is treated as an
"equity and intercompany account" capital outflows in the Commerce Department

statistics. Similarly, the earnings of such affiliates are immediately
included in the company's consolidated income and are taxed as soon as earned.
For purposes of this paper, then, we are mainly concerned with the ninety

—13—

FIGURE

1

U.S. FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT

TOTAL
$20B

Reinvested earnings
Equity and Intercompany Account
Transfers from parent

$ 16B

$12B

7.

$8B
p.-.

$4B

66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75

76 77 78 79

MANUFACTURING ONLY

$8B
$6B

$4B

$2B

—

66

-

67 68 69 70 71

Source: U.S. Commerce Department,

72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79

Survey of Current Business, August, 1980.

—14—

percent of U.S. foreign direct investment which occurs in incorporated

affiliates. As Table 2 shows, nearly ninety percent of such investment is
made out of the profits of the subsidiaries.

While this evidence seems striking, it does not offer conclusive proof
that retained earnings provide the marginal source of funds for most invest-

ment. Evidence on the marginal source of funds is more indirect. As the
theory of Section I has indicated, the payment of dividends should signal
a reliance on internally—generated funds as the marginal source of finance.
The dividends received from foreign subsidiaries have increased from less
than three billion dollars in 1970 to more than nine billion dollars in 1979.
In recent years, about forty percent of total foreign subsidiary earnings
have been paid out as dividends)8 In combination, the available evidence
points to a very large percentage of U.S. foreign direct investment being
undertaken by mature firms.

—15—

Table 2
Characteristics of U.S. Direct Investment — 1979

Manu—
All

Total Direct Investment
Reinvested Earnings of Incorporated Affiliates

$24.381 B

facturi
$9.375 B

18.414

8.139

5.904

1. 26

Unincorporated Affiliates

3.363

—.131

Incorporated Affiliates

2.541

1.367

87.9%

85.6%

Equity and Intercompany Account Outflows

Reinvested earnings as percent of total
investment in incorporated affiliates

Source: U.S. Commerce Department, Survey of Current Business, August 1980

—16—

19

III. The impacts of Taxes on Mature Foreign Operations
Since at least U.S. foreign direct investment seems to now be dominated
by firms employing foreign earnings as their marginal source of finance of

new foreign investment, we now turn to an analysis of their behavior. While
in a no—tax world, the fact that such mature firms are the typical investors
would be irrelevant for analysis, the optimal investment decisions in a
system with taxes can be quite sensitive to the marginal source of investment

funds. In particular, common home country tax systems, which we have argued
can best be viewed as imposing a tax on the transfer of funds from the subsidiary to the parent, will obviously affect foreign investment decisions
differently depending on whether the funds are already abroad.

Consideration of asLmple marginal investment decision of a mature
foreign subsidiary serves to illustrate this point.. Suppose that a foreign
subsidiary has a dollar of after—foreign—tax earnings which it can either

reinvest or repatriate to its parent. If the dollar is reinvested, the
dollar plus the one—period investment earnings will be repatriated at the
end of the period.20
If the subsidiary firm repatriates immediately, the parent receives
one dollar, must pay the home country tax net of foreign tax credit, and
therefore, has at its disposal

dollars.21 After investing this amount

for the period, the parent has

By comparison, the subsidiary could reinvest a whole dollar in its
own operations, ending the period with [1 +

r*(l_t*)]

to be repatriated as a

dividend to the parent. Upon receipt of the dividend, the parent must pay
the home country tax on the original dollar of earnings and the return earned

during the period, but it can claim a credit for the foreign taxes paid. So,

—17—

the parent receives

(l—t)

[1 +

r* (l_t*)].

Comparing these two decisions, it can be seen that the subsidiary will
optimally reinvest rather than repatriating profits if r*(l_t*) exceeds r.
That is, the home country system of deferring taxes and providing a credit
for host country tax payments induces multinational firms to invest abroad

up to the point at which the after—foreign—tax return available abroad
the available domestic after—tax return.

equals

Surprisingly, the domestic tax

applied to foreign source income plays no role in the firm's marginal investment decision; the firm behaves in the same manner as it .qould with no home

country tax on foreign source income. So, home country tax systems
of the U.S. type provide what is termed "capital import neutrality":
the tax rates influencing decisions of both host country firms and foreign
investors in the host country are equivalent.

This conclusion stands in direct conflict with the previous research

which notes that taxing at the domestic rate with a foreign tax credit provides
for "capital export neutrality" (the same tax rate applied to the foreign
and domestic investment returns of multinational firms) and concludes that
deferral serves to shift the system partially away from such a standard.
Horst (1977), who assumes that new funds advanced from the parent are the
marginal source of direct investment, concludes, for example, that the firm

should optimally equate r to [1 —
payout ratio.

Pt

—

(l_p)t*]r*,

where !t1n

is

the dividend

22

Our result that the home country tax should not affect the mature subsidiary's investment decision extends to a system which replaces the foreign

tax credit by a deduction. Under such a system, a dollar of after—f oreign—
tax earnings repatriated to the parent gives the parent (l—t), which produces

(l—t)(l+r) after one period. A reinvested dollar, on the other hand, produces

—18—

[1 + r*(l_t*)] for the subsidiary and, upon repatriation, the parent receives

(l—t)[l + r*(l_t*)]. Again, the firm is induced to invest abroad up to the

point where r(l—t) = rn
As noted above, if the home country imposed no tax on foreign source

income, the same condition for optimal investment would hold. Conseauently,
the same optimal foreign investment rule applies under the typical home
country system of foreign tax credits when t exceeds t, generating foreign

tax payments in excess of the amount creditable but leaving no home tax

liability. That is, despite the discontinuity in the foreign tax credit around
the home country tax rate, one marginal condition is sufficient to describe

the optimal behavior of a foreign investor. Similarly, the investor's optimal decisions are determined in the same manner if it is able to avoid a
tax imposed by the home country.23

These results, which are so contrary to the conventional wisdom, are, in

addition to being very simple, highly intuitive. Since the potential foreign
direct investment is to be financed out of foreign subsidiary earnings, which
will currently or in the future bear the same home country tax liability, the
only question for the firm is in which locations those earnings could be

invested to produce the highest net return. The firm's choice is between a
return of r*(l_t*), reduced by the home country tax, on a dollar invested

abroad, versus a return of r on an after—home—country—tax dollar invested
at home. The home country tax on foreign source income affects both available
returns equally.

That a revenue—producing tax imposed on foreign source Thcome would not

affect investment decisions may still seem curious. The answer to this puzzle
lies in the unavoidable nature of the tax for a firm with subsidiary earnings.
A tax increase would immediately lower the value to the parent firm of the

—19—

future subsidiary earnings, but would do nothing to alter future decisions.

Only for firms with immature foreign operations is the home country tax a
deterrent to investment.

Implicit in these conclusions is the further result that optimal dividend
payments——subsidiary earnings net of reinvestment——are not sensitive to the

home country tax policy toward foreign ource income. Kopits (1972), who
concluded that a rise in the U.S. tax rate would reduce dividend payments,

neglected the future U.S. tax liability due to repatriation. The consistent
treatment of current and deferred tax liabilities is what produces the absence

of an impact on dividends. One casualty of our results, therefore, is the
argument that eliminating the foreign tax credit without ending deferral could
backfire, resulting in greatly reduced dividends and, therefore, possibly
decreased tax revenue.

These conclusions have been based on a simple example, but one which is

quite general. Since no particular assumption has been made concerning the
length of the time period, the results hold even if home country taxes are
deferred for a very long time. The analysis would be invalid, however, if the

home country tax could somehow be avoided eventually. An ability to avoid
paying the home country tax later, but not if repatriation occurs currently,

would tend to cause the firm to invest more abroad. In particular, the
ability to repatriate tax—free at the end of a period would cause a firm to
(l—t)
(t_t*)
reinvest abroad as long as r*(l_t*) exceeds rfl(l*)
—

(l_t*)

.

This

situa-

tion could arise if the firm anticipated a tax—favored liquidation of foreign

operations at some future time24 or if a future elimination (or reduction) of
the home country tax were expected. On the other hand, a firm expecting the
home country tax treatment of foreign source income to take an unfavorable
turn will tend to reinvest less abroad.

—20—

The existence of operations in many countries changes nothing of substance in our analysis but does point to a role for funds transfers between

mature and immature subsidiaries. An immature subsidiary of a parent firm
with mature subsidiaries should be financed to the greatest extent possible
by funds transferred from the mature subsidiaries (rather than the parent).

An immature subsidiary optimally follows the investment rule anplicable to
a mature subsidiary if its marginal source of funds is a mature subsidiary's

earnings. That is, our concept of maturity is most appropriately defined by
reference to the firm's aggregated operations abroad.

Thus, we reach the general conclusion that investment by mature foreign
affiliates should be insensitive to home country rates of tax on foreign

source income. It is to the investment decisions of foreign affiliates which
rely on parent funds that we now turn.

—21—

IV.

The Impact of Taxes on Immature Foreign Operations
While the available evidence points to the predominance of mature sub-

sidiaries, in at least U.S. foreign direct investment, the tax effects on
newer foreign operations could be important also, particularly over time.

Unlike the mature firms considered in Section III, immature subsidiaries
should in general alter their investment decisions in response to tax changes,
since the tax is not, for them, an unavoidable fixed cost as it is for a

mature firm. As we shall see, the precise nature of the tax effects on the
behavior of immature subsidiaries depends on the firms' plans for future
investment abroad.

The situation in which investment is financed by capital transfers from
the parent to the subsidiary is the one considered in previous foreign

investment studies. As shown in Section I, a firm would not be expected to
be paying dividends at the same time transfers are being received from the

parent. So, the accepted method of analysis which assumes that the income
generated by new foreign investment faces a weighted average of the home
and host country's tax rates, with weights based on the subsidiary's dividend
payout ratio, seems problematic. 25

The basic notion of a weighted average tax rate is, of course, correct

in the sense that in every future period the

marginal dividend payout ratio

will determine the marginal rate of combined tax.

Furthermore, it is simple

to show that, if a foreign subsidiary were expected to pay out p of its

earnings in every future period, the weighted average rule would exactly
describe the effective tax rate over the life of the foreign operation. That
is, the present value of all future dividend payments generated by a dollar
of investment abroad (discounted at rn), would equal one only with

r = {l_pt_(l_p)t*}r*.

—22—

As our earlier analysis indicates, however, a foreign subsidiary
currently relying on parent funds will begin to repatriate dividends to the
parent only when, due to earnings reinvestment over time or to reduced
investment opportunities, the return available at the margin declines.

A precise calculation of the effective tax burden on earnings from a prospective investment would require knowledge of the marginal dividend payout

ratios in each future period. The weighted average

formula based on some

average dividend payout ratio across firms will, consequently, provide a
better or worse approximation to the tax facing a firm, depending on that
ratio's adequacy in representing the firm's future plans.

In any case, the general thrust of the received theory is applicable

to the immature firm. A subsidiary whose marginal source of finance is
capital transferred from the parent faces a tax rate between the host
country tax rate and the home rate of taxing foreign source income, with the
exact value depending on the timing of the deferred tax payments.

—23—

V. Implications
In summary, our analysis of a firm relying on its foreign earnings as
the marginal source of funds for foreign direct investment has left virtually

none of the theory of optimal foreign investment decisions unscathed. For
what is apparently the overwhelming majority of U.S. firms investing abroad,
for example, the size of the U.S. tax burden on foreign source income should

be irrelevant for investment decisions. Even replacing the foreign tax
credit with a deduction would not provide a disincentive for such firms to
reinvest abroad. Similarly, the foreign subsidiary's dec'isions to repatriate
earnings to the parent should be independent of the home country's tax
treatment of foreign source income.

By contrast, a parent firm whose foreign subsidiaries can not finance
their investments without funds transfers from the parent should respond to
an increase in the home country's tax on foreign source income by investing

less abroad. Crucial to the coexistence of both types Of firm is, of course,
some aspect of foreign investment opportunities which is firm specific.

Otherwise, since the required return abroad is lower for mature firms, no
new investment requiring transfers abroad would occur as long as some firms
were reinvesting less than their total earnings.
With foreign investment opportunities being firm specific, home country
taxes on foreign source income are distortionary to the extent that oppor-

tunities arise for new firms to invest abroad. An increase in the tax would
tend to cause reduced foreign investment in the period before a foreign
subsidiary matures and might cause a firm to completely forego the opportunity

to invest abroad. However, in terms of aggregate investment, the impacts of
any tax change are likely to be minor and largely temporary in nature. Thus,
the distinction drawn between the territorial and residence approaches to

—24—

taxation is much less important in practice than is commonly believed.
Another striking conclusion of our analysis concerns the effects of
changes in the general system of capital income taxation in the home country.
Even though the same tax rate might apply to domestic and foreign source
income, changes in that tax rate will, as we have shown, have their main

effect on domestic investment incentives. Therefore, even a tax increase,
which might appear to apply equally to domestic and foreign income, could
cause foreign investment to become more attractive relative to domestic
investment.

Our results depend on the continued deferral of home country taxes.
The elimination of deferral would, of course, end the distinction between
new and mature foreign operations; and the effective tax rate on foreign
source income would be the greater of the home and host tax rates. Proposals to end the U.S. foreign tax credit often include the elimination of

deferral. One reason sometimes given for this package is that, otherwise,
the foreign tax credit elimination would increase the incentive to retain

earnings abroad. As we have shown in this paper, such fears are misguided.
However, the practical significance of our results does hinge on the like—
lihood of deferral being retained as other features of the tax are changed.
The constitutional issues raised by current taxation of foreign earnings would
seem to make the chances for moving to such a system fairly low. In any event,
a full understanding of the effects of the current home country systems should
be important in assessing any proposals for change.

—25—

FOOTNOTE S

1Direct investment is distinguished by the existence of capital supplier
control over the "affiliate" receiving the capital.

2This argument was made by Musgrave (1969) and numerous others. Later

extensions, such as Hartman (1980) in which other aspects of firm behavior
such as host country borrowing are considered, show the result to be sensitive to the characterization of the multinational firm.

The earlier notion

of foreign investment will be retained here for reasons of simplicity. The

extension of this analysis to take account of this more recent work is
straightforward.

3See, for example, United Nations (1970).
4lhese issues are discussed in Fatemi, etal (1976), while a different

opinion of the constitutional question may be found in Krause and Dam
(1964).

5The current law does make provision for taxing not only incomes of firms

abroad which are not separately incorporated but also incomes of majority—
owned controlled foreign corporations which do not make substantial dividend
payments, which do not face foreign tax rates approximately as high as the
U.S. rate, and which earn significant profits from sales to related parties

or sales outside the country of incorporation. In other words, the law is
intended to discourage the artificial shifting of profits to sales subsidi-

aries in low—tax countries. However, if even a company which meets these
criteria can demonstrate that its motivation is not tax avoidance, taxes

are deferred. The amount of this currently—taxed retained income

(Subpart

F income), $95.7 million in 1972 (Treasury (1979), is minor by any standard.

—26—

6Only brief mention will be made of cases in which the host tax rate exceeds
the home tax rate, since no tax is collected by the home country in such
instances.

7See Horst (1977).

81n order to focus on these important transactions, we will ignore foreign

subsidiary borrowing from unrelated parties. For discussions of subsidiary
borrowing, see Horst (1977) or Goldsbrough (1979).

9Kopits (1972), for example, argues that a rise in the U.S. rate of tax on
foreign source income would produce lower dividend payments.

10Foreign affiliates not separately incorporated as subsidiaries are taxed

on a current basis, as noted above. The analysis of their behavior is
straightforward and will not be discussed here.

11Curiously in contrast to these studiesareKopitS' (1972) study of subsidiary dividends which take these payments as a residual in the reinvestment
decision and the survey literature on business decisions, to be discussed
later.

law may force some subsidiaries to pay some dividends in order to
avoid current taxation of earnings retained abroad, but as was noted before,
the practical effect of that provision is doubtful.

13For simplicity, we will ignore foreign withholding taxes, which are paid
to the host country at the time of dividend repatriation, and also the compli-

cations inherent in the corporate income tax itself such as depreciation
allowances.

—27—

14Since we are considering a marginal investment decision, it may be difficult for such a firm to meet the restrictive conditions under which a return
of capital is allowed (see U.N. (1970)).

15The ability to charge a different rate of interest could provide the firm

with an advantage over charging r* in some situations. Making a low—interest
loan to a subsidiary could be a superior way of transferring funds abroad,
in cases in which a tax—free return of equity transferred abroad is not
available. A loan at high interest could be attractive i'f t'

16Kopits

exceeded

t.

(1972), who assumes the absence of additional parents' funding,

verifies that the dividend payout ratios of subsidiaries respond to investment incentives.

'7Gilman does not consider the tax implications of funds transfers in his
analysis, attributing the firms' behavior to "exchange rate illusion".

18US Commerce Department, Survey of Current Business, August, 1980.
'9The effects of a tax on dividend payments made by a purely domestic firm

are explored by Bradford (1981). The method of analysis followed here owes
a great deal to both that paper and the work of King (1977).

20The consideration of some discrete time period is, of course, crucial if

deferral of the home country tax is to be incorporated.

this stage, we are still assuming t

> t.

221f the average and marginal payout ratios are equal and the future home
country tax liability on the retained earnings can be ignored, the firm pays

the home country tax on p of its earnings and only the host tax on the remainder.

—28—

23The flexibility of transactions within the multinational firm is commonly
believed to proiiide some potential for tax avoidance. The fact that a
sizable volume of taxable dividend payments are made seems to imply that, in
general, the marginal method of transferring funds to the parent firm

produces a tax liability. See Horst (1977) for a thorough analysis of intra—
firm financial transactions.

24The U.S. law is designed to prevent tax avoidance at the termination of
the foreign operation. The Revenue Act of 1962 specified' that the sale or
liquidation of a foreign subsidiary produces ordinary income for tax purposes

to the extent of earnings previously reinvested. See Musgrave (1969).

similar concerns arise from the standard discussions of the "excess

credits" case, i.e., the case of t

> t.

—29—

REFERENCES

Barlow, E.R. and I.T. Wender, Foreign Investment and Taxation, (Englewood

Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice—Hall, Inc., 1955).
Bradford, David F., "The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on
Corporate Distributions," Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 15, No. 1,
(February 1981), pp. 1—22.

Fatemi, Nasrollah S., Gail W. Williams, and Thibaut de Saint—Phalle,

Multinational Corporations, second edition, (Cranbwfy, N. J.: A. S.
Barnes and Co., Inc., 1976).

Gilman, Martin G., Exchange Rate Illusion and the Financing of Foreign
Direct Investment, (unpublished Ph.D. thesis, London School of Economics,
1980).

Goldsbrough, David, "The Role of Foreign Direct Investment in the External
Adjustment Process," IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 26, No. 4, (December 1979),
pp. 725—754.

Hartman, David G., "The Effects of Taxing Foreign Investment Income," Journal
of Public Economics, Vol. 13, No. 2, (April 1980), pp. 213—230.

Horst, Thomas, "American Taxation of Multinational Firms," The American
Economic Review, Vol. 67, No. 3, (June 1977), pp. 376—389.

King, Mervyn, Public Policy and the Corporation, (London: Chapman and Hall,
1977).

Kopits, George F., "Dividend Remittance Behavior Within the International

Firm: A Cross—Country Analysis," Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. 54 (August 1972), pp. 339—42.

Krause, Lawrence B., and Kenneth W. Dam, Federal Tax Treatment of Foreign

Income, (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1964).

—30—

Nusgrave, Peggy B., United States Taxation of Foreign Investet Income:
Issues and Arguments, (Cambridge:

Harvard Law School, 1969).

Robbins, Sidney M. and Robert B. Stobaugh,

Money in the Multina2

(New York: Basic Books, 1973).
u.s.

Department

of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, U.S. Corporations

and Their Contr led Foreign CorporatiOns, 1979.

