                    NBER WOBICING PAPER SERIES




          CONSUMPTION CORRELATION AND RISK MEAI3URD4ENT
               IN ECO1O)(iES WITH NON—TRADED ASSETS
                   AND W2EROGENEOUS INFORMATION


                       Sanford J. Grossnan
                        Robert J. Shiller
                      Working Paper No.




               NATIONAL MJREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 ttssachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                               June 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Itrkets and Ibnetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and qot those of the National
Bureau of Thongmic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper !690
                                                            June 198.1




                  Consumption Correlation and Risk Measurement
                       in Economies with Non—Traded Assets
                          and Heterogeneous Information



                                    ABSTRACT



     The consumption beta theorem of Breeden makes the expected return

on any asset a function only of its covariance with changes in aggregate

consumption. It is shown that the theorem is more robust than was indicated

by Breeden. The theorem obtains even if one deletes Breeden's assumptions

that (a) all risky assets are tradable, (b) investors have homogeneous

beliefs, (c) other assets can be traded without transactions costs and

(d) that all assets have returns which are Ito processes.




                                               Sanford Grossman
                                               Department of Finance
                                               University of Pennsylvania
                                               3620 Locust Walk—CC
                                               Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104

                                               (215) 243—4361


                                               Robert J. Shiller
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                               (617) 868—3964
                                                                April 1981




               Consumption   Correlation and Risk Measurement
                    in Economies with Non—Traded Assets
                        and Heterogeneous Information


                                      by


                    Sanford J. Grossman and Robert Shiller




1.   Introduction

     Douglas Breeden [1979] has recently considered an intertemporal capital

asset pricing model which implies that the expected return on an asset depends

on its "consumption beta." His result is that asset i's mean excess return

can be explained by the covariance of asset i's return with aggregate consump-

tion. His model has attracted interest because it solves the problem of extending

the simple one—period Sharpe—Lintner portfolio model to the intertemporal case

without assuming an unchanging investment opportunities set. The kind of solu-

tion shown earlier by Robert Merton, Breeden argued, implies that the return on

an asset depends on its covariance with s+2 portfolios where s is the number

of state variables in the economy. Since s is likely to be large, Nerton's

approach does not suggest a simple empirical regularity as does Breeden's.

     We show here that Breeden's result is even more powerful than is suggested

by his paper. We assume that there is a single consumption good and that an

individual's consumption is a diffusion, i.e. an Ito process. Under this assump-

tion, if asset i is freely tradable and if its return follows an Ito process,

then its mean excess return will be explained by the covariance of its return

with aggregate consumption. This theorem is true even when we delete Breeden's

assumptions that (a) all risky assets are tradable, (b) that investors have homo-

geneous beliefs about future returns, (c) that all other assets can be traded with
                                             2



no transactions costs, and (d) that all other assets have returns which are an
Ito process.-" This extension of Breeden's result is important because (i) human

capital cannot be traded, but has an uncertain payoff, (ii) other assets, such

as housing, are very lumpy, and can be traded only subject to a significant

transaction cost, and (iii) when information is costly, traders will, in equi-

librium, have different beliefs about returns or consumption.

       Our method of proof is more direct and simpler than Breeden's, in that it

is not necessary to complvtely solve the consumer's intertemporal continuous

stochastic optimization problem. Our argument can be summarized as follows.

For the consumer to be at an optimum, the distribution of excess returns between

two   traded   assets r1—r2, given his information I., must satisfy

E[U!(C.)(r1—r2)I I.] =    0.    That is, each trader must expect his marginal

utility of consumption to be uncorrelated with excess returns on traded assets.

This is true even if there are untraded risky assets. In continuous time, the

solution to individual i's portfolio problem is as if he has quadratic utility.

It is as if consumer i's marginal utility is linear in his consumption:

u(C.) = a.—b.C..      When   marginal   utility is linear, this relationship can be writ-


           ii 12 1I.] =
ten as (a./bjE[r —r               E[Cjr i2 I
                                           —r    I ]. If we let I
                                                                   c
                                                                       denote the

information which all consumers hold in common, such as past prices, past aggre-

gate consumption, and past asset payoffs, then we can take the expectation of

both sides of the last stated equation conditional on I .         Since   I. contains
                                                                           1
                                                              c

strictly more information than 1c' the above procedure yields the same equa-

tion except that I. is replaced by I. This equation can now be summed over

the consumers to yield E[r -r J   I I=
                               12 c                          .1 12 C
                                       (E (a./b.))E[(E C.)(r —r ) I I. This
                                        1             1
equation holds for any subset of the information set which is common to all

traders. Hence it is also true using the unconditional distributions

      Thus this model states that covariance with aggregate consumption is the
                                      3




appropriate measure of risk even when traders have different beliefs. The con-

sumption correlatedness model works even when there are nontradable assets and

heterogeneous beliefs because it does not rely on there being one portfolio

which is optimal for everyone. It holds even when individuals do not have per-

fectly correlated consumption. The linearity of each consumer's "first order"

condition for optimality implies that idiosyncratic components of consumption

are irrelevant for asset pricing. This is true even though there does not exist

spanning or a comp1ete set of markets which traders can use to insure against

fluctuations in the idiosyncratic components of their non—tradable assets.
                                             4




2.     The Model

       We assume that a consumer has a time—additive utility function over a single

consumption good

                         T/h
(1)
              U =              hJ(ch)h
                         j=O

where T is his time horizon, Ct Is consumption at time t and h is the discount fac-

tor between utility at t and t+h. (Note that consumers may differ in their utility

functions and discount factors and time horizons.) u(C) is the flow of utility

during the period of length h Our approach to the continuous time optimization

problem will be by taking a limit of discrete time problems as the time h between

periods goes to zero.' To define the budget constraint, suppose the consumer ar-

rives at time t with a portfolio of N traded assets ft—h' where the date the consumer

last trades is denoted by t—h. Let Pt be the vector of prices for these assets in

terms of the single consumption good. Let            be the vector of per share payouts

on each of these assets which is accumulated by time t when the asset is purchased

at t—h. Let            be the consumption that the consumer gets at t from nontraded or

imperfectly traded assets, and let           be the consumer's information at time t. Let

         denote the portfolio he decides to hold at t; then his budget constraint is



(2)
              hCh =
                   t
                          H
                           t
                               -PX
                                —t-—t
                                      +PX  +DhX
                                       —t—t—h —t—t—h

       Thus the    consumer's problem in a competitive market is to act as a price

taker and maximize the expected value of (1) subject to (2) using the controls

             Note that when the consumer chooses ' he         does not know Ht+h. Ht
can   be interpreted as the consumption derived from human capital and housing at

time t, i.e. stochastic wage income and stochastic imputed rental income.

       It is notationally convenient to eliminate the dividend payment as a corm'o—

nent   of holding period return. We thus assume that all companies use dividend
                                      5




income to buy back shares of firms rather than paying out dividends. Let V

be the market price of asset i at time t. Clearly the real returns are un-

changed in this model when dividends are paid out to shareholders instead of

being used to make share repurchases (since we assume no taxes).

      Let (C,X) be a solution to the discrete time problem for the consumer

when the trading interval is h. Assume that Ctl > 0.     For this to be optimal,

it must be the case that the consumer cannot raise his expected utility by sel-

ling some of asset i at time t, planning to buy it back at time t+h. At

any time t, the consumer can sell s units of asset i; this would increase

his consumption at t by sV.1. Let him make no other change in his portfolio.

Suppose he buys the s units back at time t+h, by reducing his consumption at

t+h, but keeping his other assets as before, and from then on makes the same

trades as previously. Thus the consumer's consumption only changes at t and

t+h. Hence his total change in expected utility from selling s units at t

and buying them at t+h is


(3)          u(C1) + Eu(Ch+h) —    Iu(C + sV.) + Etu(C+h — SVit+hfl

For xh,c1 to be optimal, the proposed trading plan must not raise expected

utility. Hence (3) must be minimized at s = 0      (since (3) must always be posi-

tive for s    0 and equals zero at s =    0).   Assuming u is strictly concave

and differentiable, this means that the derivative of (3) with respect to s

must be zero at s =   0.   Hence


(4)          uT(C)V. =       hE[T(Ch)vJ
This is just the statement that a trader equalizes his marginal rate of substi-

tution between current consumption and shares to the relative current price of
                                               6



shares. Let t be a time after t such that r—t is an integer multiple of

h. Then r is a feasible trading date. The reader can verify that, for any

feasible trading date      'r, the consumer must also be indifferent between selling

a little of the asset at t and buying it back at t. This implies that


(5)           u' (Ch)V.        6T_tE u' (Ch)V.           for all t        t+h, t+2h, t+3h,
                    t it            t         r it

Dividing both sides of this equation by V (which is known at time t and

can therefore be taken inside the expectations operator), we find that, for any

two assets i and j:


                          u(Ch)    V.        V.
(6)           0 =                        —                     = t+h,   t+2h, t+3h,
                     Et
                          u'(C)     it        jt


      In order to take limits as h goes to zero, we assume that we are looking

at a given consumer and only varying the length of time h between his trades.

That is, we will take prices as being unaffected by the change in trading oppor-

tunities (i.e., the change in h) to which this consumer is subjected. This paper

will say nothing further about the equilibrium determination of prices. Our goal

is simply to derive a simple relationship between rates of return and consumption.

(See Cox, Ingersoll and Ross {l978] for a model with endogenous prices.)

      If we take the limit of (6) as h goes to zero, we conclude that:


                                             u(CF1) V.         V.
(7)           For all h > 0, 0                             —            for   =   t+h,t+2h,t+3h...
                                                      it        jt
                                             u'(Ct)
Note that each h defines a stochastic process                        over t which are inte-

ger multiples of h, assuming that the initial trading date is t = 0.

      We assume that C urn {Ch} exists and is a diffusion, i.e. an Ito process.
                             h÷0
(Note that Jim {C} is some stochastic process which is defined all over real

t.) This is surely a strong assumption. Further we do not know exactly which

stochastic processes {H,V} will lead the consumer's optimal consumption policy
                                                            7




to    be a diffusion. However, the reader should be aware that all of the work

which uses the stochastic calculus (such as Breeden) to solve for the consumer's

optimal consumption policy also assumes that the optimal policy is a diffusion,

rather than proving that it is best in a larger class of policies. We also

assume that the log of the price of the assets follows a diffusion.                                           These to

assumptions imply:

                dv.
(8)
                 V.
                           =    pdt
                                 i
                                           + o.dri.
                                              i 1
                   1


                 dC*
(9)                        =    pdt+Tdc
                   t

where 1.1., a, p and t can depend on all current state variables including

V, 3*, where p, T and E can be different among consumers, and where if

                                      then (n,c) is an N+l dimensional browian motion with
dfl     (d1,d2,. . . ,thiN)

mean zero.

        Since (7) holds for all h, it is true of the limit process                                      C*:




                                    u'(C*)       V.        V.
                0 =                                    —                       for    all T > t
(10)                           E T (C*)
                                     t            it            Jt


        We now show that (10) implies that, if At                                        (u"(C)/u'(C))C is the

coefficient or relative risk aversion, then


                       dv.           dv.                             dC*        dv.            dv.
(ila)           Et —1           —
                                                = At Cov                                   —

                                                                       t             i              3




equivalently


                                                                       dii,                dii.
(lib)
                       —            =A                     dE
                                             Cov (T - , 0. —a—
                                                                           1
                                                                                     °-j
                                                                                                3
                                                               8




which simply states that the mean excess return between any two assets is pro-

portional to the covariance between the growth rate of consumption and excess

returns.

             We first give an intuitive proof and then give a very short formal argument

using Ito's lemma. Intuitively, (11) follows from (10) because over short time

intervaLs the marginal utility of consumption can be approximated as a linear
                                                                                                          from
function. That is, take a Taylor expansion of u'(C.) about C to get,

(10),


                                                                                       V      V
"        '
                     0 =     E                                                         v.     v.Jt
                                 t                 u'(C*)
                                                           t                            it
                                                                                   (
where C is the error in the Taylor expansion.

             Multiply both sides of (12) by                            and assume that



(13)                 lim             __                                  =




then (12) becomes

                                                 /c_cAf.  v.                                     v.
    14               -
                         u"(C*)
                                     C*E
                                             L (  t t f - LL                   I    =E       —---
                                                                                           t T—t
                                                                                                 —- - —f--- _i
                                                                                                      T—t V
                         u'(C) t t T_t\C )V. V)

Therefore we have the same first—order condition as with quadratic utility. As

we noted in the introduction, quadratic utility immediately gives a consumption

beta model.' This can be seen as follows. If we take the limit of (14) as

T + t (i.e. as T goes to t from above), then (14) is identical to (11). This

is because, for diffusions,

                         1   V.1                 1
                                                     dv.
                                                       1
(15)                                       ÷ E                     =
                                                9




and


                         LIV.                                AV.                                     dV
                     E   —v = E                                                                , — —)
(16)
                                      (- -) (— —) —4 Coy (:

That is, (14) essentially states that the expected value of excess rates of

return per unit time is proportional to the covariance between the rate of growth

in consumption and excess returns per unit time. Note that, for diffusions, the

expected cross product on the left—hand side of (14) is the same as the covar—
                                       dC  dV                    2       .
iance of the twterms involved, since (E—-)(E-—) is of order (dt)

       Intuitively, the Taylor expansion term in (13) is zero because it equals



(17            CE        C_Ce (          -               1           E


                                             V)                    CT_Ct


The random variables in the first two brackets converge to Normal random variables

as T 4- t since they are each diffusions, i.e. since (dri,dc)                                 is jointly Normal.

The term in the last bracket converges to zero along every sample path because it

is the Taylor expansion error and CT_Ct -* 0                   along every sample path as                 -r   4- t.


       A rigorous proof is much shorter, with the asterisk on C eliminated for

convenience.


ThEOREM: If V,C is an Ito process, then (10) implies (11).

PROOF: Consider the random variable Z.
                                                    it
                                                             u'(C )V. .
                                                                   t it
                                                                             If      (V. ,C )
                                                                                         it t
                                                                                                    is    an Ito

process, then by ItoTs Lemma                 is an Ito process and


               dZ. =
(18)                     u"(C)V.dC + u'(C)dV. +                                                   u(C)dCdV.

Divide both sides Of (10) by T—t and take the limit as                            -r—t   4-   0. This yields


(19)           ——E t
                    dZ it       =   —--E
                                    Z.  t
                                             dZ.
                                               it
               Z.
                it                  Jt
                                                      10



Substitute (18) into (19), use the fact that                         (dc)2       (Var dC)dt, dCdV.t

Coy (dC,dV.)dt, and get


                     ru"(c )             dv.        u"' (C )                         u"(C )             dC           dV.
                 EtL,(Ct)dCt + V. +                              ar dC)dt + u'(C) C Coy ( v)]
                                                     u'(Ct)

                       u"(C   )          dv.        u"' (C )                         u?(C )             dC           dv.
                                                                                                                 '
                                     +                                           +                Coy
             =
                 E        t
                      [U,(ct)t            VJ.t + U,(C)(Var
                                                    t
                                                                      dC)dt          u'(C)
                                                                                         t
                                                                                              C              t         J
                                           Jt


Equation (11) follows immediately.                    Q.E.D.




3.     Aggregation Over Consumers

       In the last section, we showed that an individual consumer will have as a

condition of optimality that the covariance between his own consumption changes

and excess returns be proportional to average excess returns. Since we do not

have much data on individual consumption, it is important to express (11) in

terms of per capita consumption. An aggregation result derived by Breeden for

his more restrictive model also applies here.

       We first analyze the effects of heterogeneous information. Let I de-

note consumer L's information at time t. Then, using the fact that

(EdC)(EdV) is of order (dt)2 so that we treat it as zero, we can write

(ila) as

                     IdV.     dv.                              dC*     dv.       dv.
(20)             E                              =
                                                    A   E                    -




where we use the subscript L to denote a variable specific to consumer

Since each trader knows his own                consumption, C1 can be moved through                     the con-

ditional expectation on the right—hand side of (20). Next, multiply both sides

by CL/AtL. This yields

                                                        =E
(21)
                 E[ (-              - V') I'd]                  dcL(_y               f;JL') i']
                                       11



        Let I   denote the information which all traders hold in common (i.e.,

every trader observes at least I). A well—known result in probability theory

states that, if I is a subset of             then EE[f(W) lIflI} =

where     f(w) is any measurable function on the sample space. Thus, if we

take the expectation of (21) conditional on I we obtain



(22)            Ef(__71)LI3 =
We assume that all consumers observe past prices, payoffs, and the aggregate

level of consumption in the economy. That is, at least those variables are in

the common information set of all traders at t, I. In particular, if

     C , then we assume that
2.




(Al)            C( I
where "X C.Y" means "knowledge of Y implies knowledge of X."

        Under (Al), both sides of (22) can be divided by C, which can be brought

across the expectation operator. Next sum (22) over all agents 2. and use the

fact that, for any two random variables, EXY = cov(X,Y) + (EX)(EY) to get


(23)            Coy (içl, _! _l             + E[A1I IIE[— —    .i '] i



                          =

where


                At


        We next assume that

                              1 -
                                                0
(A2a)           Coy (Ai

This assumption will hold under many conditions. For example, (A2a) will tiold

under any one of the following assumptions: (a) each trader knows A at       time
                                         12




t,   i.e. AC        (b) all traders have the same relative risk aversion and know

it —    since in this case A AC               (c) all traders know each otherst risk

aversions and know each others' current consumption —       since again AC

It is important to note that (A2a) is consistent with traders having different

information about future returns. To get (A2a) to hold, it is sufficient that

all traders know the current At which is generated by the current consump—

tions and risk aversions of traders. For our purposes, this will be sufficient:


(A2b)          ACT
                t  t


Thus,   under (Al) and (A2b), we obtain from (23)


                                     =
(24)
               EC_23I 'I3                AtEC_(_2Lky1)( 'J
        Equation (24) is the basic equation for explaining mean returns. If, for
example, asset j      is commercial paper, then (24) states that any tradable as-

set's ex ante expected excess return over commercial paper's return can be

explained by the ex ante covariance of the excess return with aggregate con-

sumption changes. Testing (24) for tradable assets requires that we know the

common information of traders at each date t. However, a great simplifica-

tion is possible if A is constant. If At is a constant, or independent

of I' then (24) must hold for any subset of the common information of agents

I. That is, take the conditional expectation of (24) onditiona1 on I.

Then, by the previously mentioned result on iterated conditional expectations,

we obtain


(25)
                E[___1JIJ =AtEt_(_y_1)j J
Note that At will be a constant if all tFaders have the same constant reia-
tive risk aversion, or if the traders have different but constant relative risk
                                          13




aversions which are uncorrelated with the consumption share ti
                                                            C ICt             across

traders   in the population.

       Equation (25) is extremely useful for empirical implementation because it

now involves the distribution of observables and a single constant for each

date At. Thus, for example since all consumers observe current prices and

rates of return, we can replace 1     by just those variables, since (25) holds

for any subset of consumers' common information.

       An interesting special case of (25) obtains when we choose to set                     to


be the null set. That is, (25) holds for expectations conditioned on no infor-

mation. Thus, if there is a constant long run joint distribution of aggregate

consumption changes and rates of return, this long run distribution can be used

to test (25). To be more precise, suppose that returns, consumption and

have a stationary joint distribution. (This is consistent with consumers'

expected returns changing from period to period as they observe different

realizations of theirinformation.) Then we may test (25) by using only the

marginal joint distribution of returns and consumption alone (ignoring l).

Thus, an implication of (25', if A = A           is constant over time, is

                  dv.   dv.          dC        dv.   dv.             /dC     dv.       dv.
                                                                                   -
(26)           E[_ -           =A   E_(_* -                    A
                                                                   Ccv (-'-

       Equation (26) involves only the unconditional distribution of the vari-
ables of interest. Note that (26) will hold for portfolios of traded assets.

We are currently empirically testing (26) for assets like the Standard and

Poors portfolio of 500 stocks, commercial paper, long term bonds, etc. over

long time horizons (1890—1980), using the ex post estimated joint distribution

of rates of change in consumption and rates of return on those assets.
                                       14




4.   Conclusions

     We have shown that cross sectional differences in mean asset returns can

be explained by the cross sectional differences in the riskiness of the assets

where risk is measured by covariability of the return with rate of change in

aggregate consumption. This result is true in the presence of heterogeneous

expectations as well as nontradable risky assets. We obtain our result because

of the linearity of consumers' first—order condition in a continuous time model,

rather than from the condition that all consumers hold the same portfolio of

risky assets or have perfectly correlated consumption. The latter two condi-

tions will not obtain in a model with heterogeneous expectations or non—tradable

assets. Our result is similar to that of Mayer [1978] who analyzes a discrete

time model with nontraded assets under the assumption that returns are Normally

distributed. There he is also able to make use of the fact that each consumer's

first—order condition is linear and   this   permits aggregation over consumers.

     We have shown that under the assumption of constant relative risk aversion,

the relationship between ex ante mean returns and covariance may be replaced

by an ex post (i.e. unconditional) relationship between these quantities. We

are currently implementing empirically a test of the consumption correlated—

ness model based upon that result. We have also shown that the fundamental

relationship between ex ante returns and covariances with consumption is true

conditional on any subset of information which is common to all consumers,

such as current interest rates, prices, money supply, etc. This should lead

to interesting empirical tests of the model.
                                                   15




FOOTNOTES


     Note that equation (3) in Breeden permits labor income to be stochastic.
However, in equation (7) only the deterministic component of labor affects the
rate of change in wealth. That is, Breeden assumes that when the portfolio
decision is made at time t, the investor can act as if he is locally certain
about the size of his labor income. See Nerton [1971] for an earlier model
which explicitly used consumption.

-    Indeed, we do not solve a continuous time optimization problem, but only
take limits of discrete time problems. The continuous time solution which we
derive should be interpreted as the approximate solution of a very, very short
discrete time problem rather than as the solution to an unstated continuous
time problem. See Merton [1978] for a good exposition about this technique.

       See Harrison and Kreps [1978] for another approach.

     Throughout this paper, we refer to the fact that excess returns are ex-
plained by covariance with consumption as 'a consumption beta model.tI Of course
this means the following. Let R be the rate of return on a portfolio which
                  dC =      dC
satisfies                         Let . be the slope of the regression ol
                                Var(—d).
          dC                         dC       dC
R. on —,       so    .1   =- Coy (R.,—) Var(—). Let there be a risk—free asset,
 1     C                                1   C          C
i.e. one with return R0 uncorrelated with consumption changes. Then (11)
implies that E(R — R0) = A Var(-). Hence, for asset 1, (11) implies
E(R.—R)   .E(R — R). The next section deals explicitly with aggregation
over   consumers.


       See Ash [1972, p.2601.




                                        , C*,
                                          tj'L
—      That is, suppose

               '     ti
                    C*
                              1    ——
                                        /
                                                        1 \
                                                              - LA1
                                                              —

               Lc t       A
                              t2            i t   2.    t2-       2.   ti



REFERENCES

Ash, R.G. [1972J, Real Analysis and Probability, Academic Press: New York.

Breeden, D. [1979], 'IAn Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Con-
     sumption and Investment Opportunities,t' J. of Fin. Econ,, 7, 265—296.

Cox, J., J.E. Ingersoll, Jr. & S. Ross [1978], "A Theory of the Tem Structt1!e
     of Interest Rates," Research paper II 468, Stanford Business Sooi,
                                      16




REFERENCES (con' t.)

Harrison, J. & D.M. Kreps J1978J, "Martingals and the Valuation of Redundant
     Assets," Research paper # 444, Stanford University.

Mayers, D. [1972], "Non—Marketable Assets and Capital Market Equilibrium Under
     Uncertainty," in Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets, M.C. Jenson
     (ed.); Praeger: New York; 79—121.

Merton, R.C. 11971], "Optimum Consumption and Portfolio Rules in a Continuous
     Time Model," J. of Econ. Theory,   , 373—413.

Merton, R.C. 11978], "On the Mathematics and Economic Assumptions of Continuous
     Time Models," M.I.T. Working Paper no. 181—78.
