                     BER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              WEALTH MOBILITY: THE MISSING ELEMENT



                           J. R. Kearl

                         Clayne L.   Pope

                      Working Paper No. 692




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            June 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper ?1692
                                                                  June 1981




                      Wealth Mobility: The Missing Element

                                    ABSTRACT


   We consider the problems that may arise when cross sectional data alone

are used for inferences about individual welfare, the existence of elites,

the possibilities of class boundaries, the openness of a society, etc. We

also consider problems with alternative measures of socio—economic position.

We then use a sample of 2400 households observed over one or two decade

intervals together with data on the population of households at each observation

point to examine mobility within the distribution of wealth for an almost

closed economy, Utah, 1850—1870. We use information on households to examine

those characteristics that contribute to mobility. We find considerable

mobility, much apparently stochastic, within quite highly skewed distributions

of wealth that also exhibit increasing inequality through time.


                                                  J. R. Kearl
                                                  Clayne L. Pope
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Brigham Young University
                                                  Provo, Utah 84602

                                                  (801) 378--2472
                    WEALTH MOBILITY: THE MISSING ELEMENT


Introduction

     Often inferences about economic and social opportunity are based

solely on distributional data. For example, in his study of the distri-

bution of wealth in mid-nineteenth century United States, Soltow compares

the Gini coefficients for 1850, 1860 and 1870 wealth distributions based

on a sample drawn from the census manuscripts. He finds that there was

remarkable stability in the distribution of personal property and real

estate and then concludes that, "There is no question that a sizable

portion of total wealth was held by a small proportion of the people in

each census year studied. .   .   .   There very definitely was an elite

upper group in America in terms of control of economic resources."1

Williamson and Lindert compare inequality in the U.S. and Europe for the

early twentieth century and find that "by the eve of World War I, wealth--

or at least decedents' wealth--was as unequally distributed here as in

Western Europe. DeTocqueville was right; less than a century after his

visit, the American equalitarian ?dreamt had been completely lost."2

Henretta, examining the distribution of property in Boston in 1687 and

in 1771, found a trend toward more inequality. The upper ten percent of

the wealthholders in 1687 owned about 42% of the taxable wealth in 1687

and 65% in 1771. He concludes "Society had become more stratified and

unequal.

     Comparable conclusions about the presence of elites, the existence

of social stratification or the validity of the equalitarian ideal,

based solely on the level or trend in inequality are numerous in studies

of the distribution of wealth in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
                                2

But one element is missing from the story of wealth inequality told in

increasing detail by economic historians. This missing element, central

to any judgment that we might make about the normative or political

implications of unequal distributions of wealth, is the economic mobility

of individual households as they accumulate or lose wealth and change

position relative to other households. We must know how individuals or

households moved within the rather stable distributions of wealth in

order to evaluate America's fulfillment of the egalitarian ideal. We

cannot conclude that there was an elite if households move in and out of

the upper strata of the distribution with frequency. We should not

puzzle over the quiesence of the lower class if the probabilities of

moving to richer strata In five or ten years were substantial even

though a stable distribution of wealth were observed. Indeed the idea

of class loses meaning or takes on significance as individual mobility

or immobility characterizes the situation within the cross sectional

distributions that have been collected and studied. Thus an increase in

inequality or persistent inequality may or may not imply loss of the

American dream or the existence of social stratification since such an

increase may be accompanied by more or less mobility.

     it is possible, of course, for an economy to have great disparity

in wealth holdings and no movement or change in relative position through

time for any household. Alternatively, it is possible to have great

disparity in wealth holdings and more or less random movements by indi-

vidual households through time. In the first case, we might expect

political discontent or repression but in the second case simply expect

to find comment on the capricious nature of economic life. Unfortunately,

most normative judgements of interest require strong, but unverified,
                                  3

 assumptions about the level of individual household mobility. However,

 an unequal distribution of wealth that persists through time cannot be

used to verify such assumptions and thus cannot be used alone to conclude

that there were elites.    Similarly, DeTocqueville's egalitarian ideal

cannot be evaluated by comparing summary measures of wealth distributions

for the United States and Europe unless there is evidence that the same

pattern of mobility exists in both areas. Unequal distributions of

wealth in precolonial times cannot be made into convincing evidence of

political or social unrest. Each of these conclusions would have to be

based, in part, on an assumption that there was little or no mobility.

     Others have also noted the importance of basing normative judgments

on mobility as well as cross-sectional inequality. Kuznets has stressed

the importance of measuring long-term inequality so that mobility and

cross-sectional inequality are merged together. Lebergott has also

argued for an approach that combines movement with inequality.4 Neverthe-

less, economic historians have devoted few resources to measurement of

economic mobility even though there is significant interest in distri-

butional issues as evidenced by the work of Jones, Soltow, Gailman,

Williamson, Lindert and others.5 A number of factors have undoubtedly

contributed to the emphasis on cross-sectional data. Much contemporary

work has the same focus. Data of the sort required to effectively

examine mobility or to test for assumptions about mobility are costly to

acquire and hence not readily available. Mobility issues introduce

additional measurement problems into an area already fraught with ambiguity.

However, many of the inferences based on cross-sectional data alone

remain unverified and unverifiable and, consequently, it is important to

begin a careful development of the relevant data.
                                   4

    The focus of this paper is on the testing of the implied assumptions

about mobility within a sample capable of describing both cross-sectional

distributional inequality and movements through distributions by individual

households across time intervals. In the following section we provide a

brief discussion of the methods of measuring economic mobility. We then

turn, beginning in Section III, to a consideration of a fairly large

sample case study of mobility and distribution based on records drawn

from the censuses of Utah from 1850 to 1870.


II. Measurement of Economic Mobility

     Three alternative measures have been used in both contemporary and

historical studies of economic mobility--occupation, income and wealth.

The most common measure of change of the economic position of a household

has been occupation.6 Most of the historical studies of occupational

mobility have followed the analytical design of Thernstrom in his study

of Newburyport, Massachusetts with the primary measure of economic or

social movement being change in occupational class by blue-collar workers

or their sons. While occupational change is a useful measure of mobility,

it does present certain difficulties.7 The observed mobility or rigidity

is influenced by the arbitrary decisions made relative to the scaling

and classifying of occupations. Should the movement from carpenter to

brick-mason be considered as upward or lateral? How much of the mobility

observed in occupational studies represents slight movements across

boundaries where both occupations observed could just as easily have

been included in the same category? Just as classification may generate

illusory mobility, it may mask true mobility since each occupation is
                                   8
likely to encompass a hierarchy.       As a particular craftsman moves from

apprentice to journeyman to master or even small manufacturer, it is
                                  5

 possible that the occupational designation, often self-described, may

 not change.

      A second difficulty with the use of occupation as a measure of

 economic mobility is the ever changing context within which the indivi-

 dual movements are observed. The distribution of occupations among

 classes (blue collar, skilled, professional etc.) changes with time and

 economic growth so that the probability of being in a particular occu-

 pational class changes regardless of the flexibility or openness of the

 society. Increases in the percentage of jobs classified as white collar

or professional create upward mobility that is deceptive as a measure of

the openness of the society while being real in terms of absolute improve-

ment for the individual.

     Finally and most importantly for historical studies, occupational

mobility is not a useful mode of analysis in an agrarian economy or in

an economy with significant rural-urban migration. Farm occupations

such as farmer or farm laborer have little or no use as indicators of

economic position. Further, it is very difficult to scale movements

from the farm to urban occupations since agriculture includes the total

spectrum of economic success.

     Economists have tended to use income to study contemporary economic

mobility.9 Income represents the flow of purchasing power for a house-

hold and may closely approximate economic fortunes for that particular

period of time. The use of income to measure mobility by examining

relative movement between two periods (e.g. from one decile or grouping

in the first period of observation to another decile or grouping in the

last period of observation) eliminates the problems of scaling that are
                                    6


present with the use of occupation. However, a new problem is created

by the use of income to measure mobility. It is well known that income

has both permanent and transitory components so that part of the observed

mobility is due to the random effects of transitory income and does not

reflect fundamental change in a household's economic position.'° Thus,

an important task of the researcher who uses income as a criterion for

mobility is the decomposition of mobility into permanent and transitory

elements.

     Ultimately, the question of how to measure mobility is an empirical

issue. What measure (wealth, occupation or income) will correlate most

closely with economic or social status?12 Wealth has attractive features

as a measure of mobility. It requires no scaling.      Rural mobility can

be measured effectively with changes in wealth. Rural-urban migration

and the resultant occupational changes present no particular problems of

measurement if wealth is used as a measure of mobility.13 The transitory

component of wealth should be much smaller than that of income so that

wealth mobility should reflect rather permanent changes in a household's
                     14
economic position.        Hence, wealth may be the best single measure of

economic if not social mobility. This would certainly be the case if a

full measure of wealth in both physical and human capital forms were

available. Unfortunately, accurate measures of human capital are rare.

     While studies of contemporary wealth mobility are rare, there have
                                                                            15
been several historical studies of the wealth mobility of households.

However, these historical studies are limited to study of the richest

 tail of the wealth distribution or confined to very limited segments of

 the economy. For example, Pessen's conclusion that Jacksonian America

 was not an "age of fluidity" is based in large part on the lack of
                                     7

movement in and out of the list of very wealthy taxpayers in New York
              16                         .   .
and Boston.         .

                   Since Pessen s analysis includes the top lb of the wealth

distribution or even less, there could well be substantial mobility

within the bottom 99% of the distribution while the extreme of the

distribution contains the same households through time.17 It would seem

useful to consider mobility within the full distribution of wealth.

There is an additional interpretive problem with measures of the move-

ment in and out of the richest tail of the wealth distribution at dif-

ferent points in time. The group at risk constantly changes as people

migrate, die, form new households or disappear from the tax lists so

that comparison of two points in time may involve groups of quite differ-

ent people. To illustrate, Pessen finds that 57% of the wealthholders

in Boston who possessed wealth in excess of $40,000 in 1833 had accumu-

lated more than $50,000 in wealth by 1848, while 15% had wealth of less

than so,ooo.l8 This means that 28% of the rich housholds of 1833 were

not on the tax list of 1848. There is no way of knowing whether these

households no longer existed because of the death of the household head;

or because of migration from Boston, remaining wealthy or becoming poor;

or because they became so poor that they were not on the tax list.

Similarly, the origins of the wealthy of 1848 who were not on the tax

list of 1833 are also unknown. It would seem more useful to hold the

group at risk constant between two periods of time so that the initial

and terminal wealth of each household is known.

    Those studies confined to smaller communities can hold the group at
                             19
risk constant more easily.        However, confinement of the analysis to a

small group within a larger economy increases the migration in and out

of the sample so that a new question becomes very important--was the
                                 8

experience of the migrants significantly different from that of the

non-migrants? This is a difficult but important question for open

economies with high levels of geographical movement across the boundaries

of the study. Thus, such studies are able to examine a group of house-

holds with initial and terminal wealth observations, but the group is a

small percentage of the total population.

     With the Utah data presented in this paper, we attempt to analyze a

fairly large group of households with wealth observations in both 1860

and 1870. Since Utah was quite isolated from the rest of the U.S.

economy and the migration to Utah was induced largely by religious

beliefs, the problems created by self-selected migration would appear to

be minimal.20 Since Utah has a large agrarian sector with substantial

urban-rural migration as well as rural-urban migration, wealth would

appear to be a better measure of economic mobility than occupation.

Future work will compare mobility as measured by the three alternatives--

occupation, income and wealth. In this paper we report the results

using wealth as a measure of economic movement.


III. Wealth Nobility in Utah Between 1850 and 1870

     We consider wealth mobility for an almost completely independent

economy--Utah from 1850 to 1870. Wealth, occupational and demographic

information have been collected for the population of households in each

census year.21 Thus we are able to observe the complete distributions

of wealth in this economy. We have linked a large number of households

across decade intervals so that mobility within the same group of indi-

viduals can be observed. (We refer to this group as the "linked sample.")

Since we observe both the population of households and a sample of

households drawn from the population that can be linked through time, we
                                    9

are able to place the study of wealth mobility within the distributional

context. Finally, we observe a number of household characteristics and

can, as a consequence, roughly separate stochastic from household charac-

teristic effects in relative movements. These elements of our data

allow us to address some of the issues suggested in the preceding sections

and to illustrate and draw conclusions about the importance of mobility,

the missing element, in distributional studies. We begin with the

distributional setting.

        Table I summarizes the distributions of wealth in Utah in 1850 and

1870 and compares these distributions with those of the United States.22

In 1850 Utah was clearly more egalitarian than the U.S. Utah households

were also much poorer than their U.S. counterparts, and this shared

poverty was undoubtedly a contributor to the more equal distribution of

wealth. In part the poverty and equality can be attributed to the

recent settlement of the area, the Mormons first arriving in Utah in

1847.

        Summary measures also indicate that by 1870 Utah displayed a

distribution that was almost as unequal as the distribution of wealth

for the U.S. This two-decade period was characterized by rapid popula-

tion growth as Mormon converts from the East and especially from northern

Europe migrated to Utah (over 87 percent of the households in the 1870

census were not present in the 1860 census). This period also saw a

growing urban population within Salt Lake County (23 percent of the

households) that supported the usual occupational structure. Both rapid

growth and the development of interdependent urban market activities

probably contributed to the increasing inequality. This increasing

distributional inequality contrasts with the more common circumstance of
                                 10

a stable or slowly changing distribution of wealth. Was this increase

in inequality accompanied by social stratification? Did the increasing

dispersion limit or enhance opportunity?23

     We model economic mobility with transitional matrices summarizing

relative movements of households between two distributions of wealth.

Given a specific group of households (the population, the linked sample

or some sub-group within the population) we construct decile boundaries

for the distribution of wealth in a given year. Distributional deciles

for 1850 or 1860 are rows in the matrices; decile positions within the

1860 or 1870 wealth distributions are columns (See Table 2). Relative

movement or mobility is reflected by changes in distributional position

from year to year, specifically measured by which decile of the wealth

distribution the household occupied in each year.24 There are at least

three interesting comparisons that can be considered.   One can consider

relative movement of the linked sample against the entire population of

the economy in any given year. In this case, the decile occupied in

each year would be determined by the boundaries drawn from the population

distribution of wealth. Alternatively, one can consider relative movement

within the sample of linked households itself. That is, the distributional

positions would be determined by the distribution of wealth held by the

sample of individuals that we observed through time. Finally, one can

consider relative movement against a subgroup of interest. For example,

it might be interesting to consider relative movement of those in the

linked sample living in the urban area against the distribution of

wealth within the urban area.25 We have used each of these three alter-

native comparisons in our analyses since each allows us to factor out

important elements that might contribute to the observed mobility.
                                 11

First we measure relative movement within the distribution of wealth for

the population in each observation year: If a household is observed to

be in the third decile of the wealth distribution of the economy in

1860, what is the probability that it will be in the top decile of the

distribution of wealth for the 1870 population, etc.? A likely hypo-

thesis is that aging ten years as well as being in the economy for ten

years leads to considerable upward mobility. If so, the household would

have moved upward relative to the distribution of wealth for the popu-

lation in the next measurement year.

     Second, we have defined relative position by using the distributions

of wealth held by households in the linked sample itself. Since the

sample consists of exactly the same set of households in each observa-

tional year, these transitional matrices give an indication of relative

movement within the same group of households. This approach examines

mobility for a group within which each member shares a common character-

istic--being linked through time (or surviving within the economy through

time). In this case, upward movement is less likely and downward movement

more probable since drawing the decile boundaries from the distribution

of wealth among the linked group controls for immigration, time within

the economy, and to some degree for age (households formed after the

initial census observation will not be included in the distribution).

    Finally, we consider the movement of households with particular

characteristics against population subgroups with the same characteris-

tics, such as the same age cohort, similar occupational activities, same

residence, etc. The expectation is that age, occupation, place of

birth, etc., would affect economic mobility. Therefore, we are likely

to observe less mobility when such household characterisitcs are factored
                                 12

out. This comparison allows us to go beyond distributional-mobility

relationships to a preliminary and partial decomposition of mobility

into systematic components explained by age, occupation, residence,

nativity and other observable household characteristics and the stochastic

elements that represented the vagaries of economic life in that economy.

     One difficulty with our methodology should be noted. Household

wealth estimates exhibit "heaping't on even values such as $100, $500,

etc. When a decile boundary occurs on such a value the "decile" boundary

has been moved the minimum distance up or down in order to avoid separating

households with identical wealth holdings into distinct deciles. This

means that the number of households per decile may not be identical as

it would be with a continuous distribution. It also means, however,

that we avoid introducing spurious relative movement for households with

the same wealth who would otherwise have been arbitrarily placed in

adjoining deciles. It is, of course, true that if the decile boundaries

are drawn from any group except that which is linked, there need not be

an equal number of households from the linked sample in each decile

since the linked group may not necessarily be a random sample of the

group from which the decile boundaries are drawn. This will occur for

the first and third comparisons outlined above.

     Table 2 summarizes the movement from 1860 to 1870 of our linked

sample through the distribution of wealth for the economy within which

these households were living. The left hand column indicates the decide

position from the 1860 distribution of wealth, 1 being the poorest 10

percent of the population and 10 the richest 10 percent. The first row

of numbers (1 through 10) indicates the 1870 deciles. The numbers

within the table indicate the percentages that occupy each cell where
                                 13

each cell represents a particular combination of deciles for 1860 and

1870. For example, 14.9 percent of those who were within the bottom

decile in 1860 were in the third decile of the 1870 distribution; 2.1

percent in the fourth decile; 20.6 percent in the top decile and so

forth. The column and row labeled "N" indicates the number of house-

holds in each decile position. Thus, for example, there were 204 house-

holds in the 6th decile of the 1860 distribution but only 185 in the 6th

decile of the 1870 distribution. The final column provides a summary

measure of mobility, the conditional mean decile position. Again, by

way of example, for those in the bottom decile in 1860, the "expected"

decile position within the population distribution of wealth in 1870 was

7.2; for those within the top position in 1860, the "expected" position

was 9.2. We note, for comparative purposes, that if mobility were a

completely random process, each cell in this matrix would have the same

expected entry, .1. That is, for any household occupying a given decile

position in the 1860 distribution, the chances of occupying any given

decile position in the 1870 distribution would be 1 in 10 since there

are 10 possible positions in the 1870 distribution. In addition, the

expected or mean decile position for such a household if mobility were

completely random would be 5.5 and this "expected" position would be

independent of the position occupied by the household in the 1860

distribution.

    The impact of rapid and costly immigration is illustrated in the

1860-1870 comparisons: in 1860 less than ten percent of the population

had no wealth but in 1870 more than twenty percent of the households had

zero wealth.26 The linked sample also includes households with zero
                                 14

wealth in one or both years (more than 10 percent of the sample) so that

zero wealth was not simply an outcome of migration or coming to the

economy late (relative to our measurement times).

     A perusal of the 1860 cell sizes (the 11th column, under N)

indicates that our linked sample is not quite a random sample of the

1860 population. (With a random sample from the population each 1860

cell would be expected to contain one-tenth of the sample or about 220

households.) The poorer deciles have fewer and the richer deciles more

members than would be expected with a random selection. This is

reflected in the unconditional mean decile position as well, which, for

the sample in 1860, is 6.1. The mean decile position for any random

sample would be 5.5; this would also be the mean decile position for the

population itself by construction.

     As hypothesized, the entire group of households present in both

1860 and 1870 censuses moved upward through the population distribution

of wealth. Nearly 46 percent of the sample is within the top 20 percent

of the 1870 wealth distribution while only 27 percent is in this position

in 1860. The unconditional mean decile position for the linked group in

the 1870 population distribution of wealth is 7.6, well above the popu-

lation mean (5.5) and above the unconditional mean decile position for

this same group in the 1860 distribution (6.1). Again, this is a reflec-

tion of the upward movement of these households. Those fortunate enough

to be in the top decile in 1860 faced a probability of only .31 of a

decline in relative position. The prospects of moving into the top ten

percent of the population wealth distribution or staying there were

quite good for this linked group since the probability of being in the

top decile in 1870 was .267. Clearly, however, this probability was
                                     15

dependent upon one's decile position in 1860 (note that the probabili-

ties increase as one reads down the column under "10"). Rags to modest

riches was a practical possibility since the probability of moving from

the bottom decile in 1860 to the top decile in 1870 was .206. While the

probabilities of movement differ in ways that we consider below, the

expected decile position based on one's 1860 relative position (column 12)

was well above the expected position for a random member of population

and above the original 1860 position in every case.27

     Elsewhere we have noted the effect of time or experience within an
                              28
economy on wealth holdings.        Time of entry into an economy had a

significant and pervasive effect on mobility; the sample of linked

households occupy a higher position in the 1870 distribution of wealth

than would be expected of a random group of households drawn from the

1870 population and they occupy a higher relative position in the 1870

distribution than they do in the 1860 distribution.

     Obviously, one of the characteristics that these linked households

share is that they all were in the economy for at least ten years. We

can factor out or control for this effect by considering the movements

of households within the distributions of wealth for the sample itself

rather than for the population of all households. This analysis is

summarized in Table 3 where, again, the deciles in 1860 and 1870 are

based on the distribution of wealth within the linked sample and hence

over exactly the same group of households in each year.

     We observe considerable economic mobility up and down through the

distribution of wealth held by the sample. While movement is obviously

not random, there is a high degree of mobility from the lower deciles to

the top and to a lesser degree vice versa. Note that with the exception
                                 16

of the probabilities of those in the 9th and 10th deciles of the 1860

sample distribution remaining in these attractive positions in the 1870

sample distribution, no probabilities exceed .2. However, the higher

probabilities in the bottom right-hand corner of the matrix do indicate

some rigidities in the upper tail of the wealth distribution. Moreover,

the mean decile attained is clearly dependent upon the initial position

in 1860 although the relationship is not strong except for the households

in the upper tail of the sample wealth distribution. However, house-

holds in 1860 decile positions 6 and below had an expected decile posi-

tion in 1870 less than that of a random process (all but the bottom two

elements of column 12 are less than 5.5).

     While the mean decile position in 1870 is dependent upon relative

position in 1860, there is clear evidence of regression toward the mean.

Households from low decile positions have an expected decile position in

the 1870 sample distribution well above their position in 1860; those

occupying decile positions above 5 have an expected decile position

below their 1860 position. For those households occupying 1860 decile

positions 8 through 10, the expected decline is 1.8 deciles. For all

other 1860 decile positions the expected change increases with the

distance from the mean position of 5.5.

     For this sample, even though there is both considerable dispersion

in wealth holdings in any given year and an increase in dispersion

through time, there does not appear to be economic stratification except

perhaps for the very wealthy.

     We can push our analysis back one decade by considering the distri-

bution of real property in 1850 and 1860.29 The movement of households

within the sample relative to each other shows more mobility between
                                 17

1850 and 1860 than it did from 1860 to 1870. (Data not shown here.)

This finding suggests that mobility may be a function of the maturity of

the economy. Kuznets has postulated an "inverted U" relationship between

inequality and the development process: at first, economic development

increases inequality and then diminishes it.3° The relationship of the

development process to wealth mobility is important as well. If inequality

and mobility move together, the interpretation of the process might be

different from a situation in which more equality also implied more

mobility. If the process of economic development eventually leads to

more equality and less mobility, such a tradeoff makes judgments about

the egalitarian ideal difficult. For Utah from 1850 to 1870 we observe

a considerable increase in inequality with early development and an

apparently small decline in mobility.

     Part of the sample (696 households) is observable over a two-decade

interval, allowing observation of longer-term mobility and of the effects,

if any, of the dramatic increase in dispersion over this interval. The

effect of early entry and time within a growing economy is very pronounced.

Fifty-nine percent of the 696 households were in the top two deciles of

the population wealth distribution by 1870. Those in the lowest decile

in 1850 had a .35 probability of moving to the top decile over the

twenty-year period while those already in the top decile in 1850 had a

two-thirds likelihood of remaining there.

    Table 4 illustrates this longer-term relative movement within the

sample itself (deciles are drawn from the distribution of wealth among

the 696 households). We note that there is more mobility over the

longer time period than over either of the two ten-year intervals. This

suggests that even some of the stratification observed in the tail of
                                 18

the wealth distribution decays with time. Those in the bottom half of

the sample wealth distribution had a probability of .44 of being in the

top half of the 1870 and, consequently, those in the upper half could

well fear decline since the probability of falling into the bottom half

is also .44.

    Thus far, an examination of the transitional matrices suggests the

following conclusions. Time with the economy pushes households upward

through the cross-sectional population distributions of wealth so that

few households who were relatively poor intitially were likely to be

among the economyt s poor later. Part of this can be attributed to the

age-wealth profile that is well-documented in historical data. Further,

factoring out this time effect by examining the movement of the sample

households relative to each other (as summarized in Tables 3 and 4) does

not eliminate the pattern of extensive mobility. This implies, of

course, that mobility is not solely a life cycle or duration phenomenon.

Households seem to move quite randomly relative to each other in the

wealth distribution with the exception of the upper wealth level where

movement is less pronounced. However, comparison of mobility in the

1850-1860 decade with the 1860-1870 decade suggests that mobility declined

somewhat with the development of the economy. Finally, the extent of

long-term mobility as reflected in the comparison of households living

in Utah in both 1850 and 1870 is striking. To be sure, the initial

decile position does affect the probabilities of a household's final

decile position, but the effect does not strike us as large. Moreover,

while we observe a decline in mobility in the second decade, there was

considerably higher probability of movement for any given household over

the two-decade interval than for either one decade interval. These
                                   19

observations suggest that there was a regression toward the mean, the

rate of which may be dependent on the distribution of wealth and hence

on those factors leading to increased dispersion.

     Are relative movements simply the result of fate or fortune, or is

mobility related to characteristics the household can either acquire or

already possesses? Alternatively, how much of the observed relative

movement would remain if adjustments were made for age differences or

other characteristic differences? It is to these questions that we now

turn. However, because of the cumbersome nature of the transition

matrices, we have chosen to use summary measures in these comparisons.

Specifically, we use the unconditional mean or "expected" decile position

of the distribution of wealth for different groups in comparison with

the distribution of wealth over either the sample, the population or a

population sub-group with the same characteristics as the group drawn

from the sample. Table 5 provides a comparison of these summary measures

against each of these three distributions for groups with the character-

istics indicated. For example, we can examine the distribution of

wealth for those who were engaged in farming who were also in the linked

sample. The third row first indicates the relative position of these

households in the 1860 sample wealth distribution and then in the 1870

sample wealth distribution (columns 1 and 2). We also provide comparisons

of this group of farmers (who were linked) with the distributions of

wealth in 1860 and 1870 for all those engaged in farming within the

population (columns 3 and 4). Finally, we consider the relative position

of the distribution of wealth for these linked farmers within the distri-

bution of wealth over the entire population of the economy in 1860 and

again in 1870 (columns 5 and 6).
                                20

    We have already noted that there is one household characteristic

that influences the expected mean decile position in 1870 for any house-

hold--the relative wealth position (decile) in 1860. This creates a

problem of interpretation. Since we know that mean decile position in

1870 is affected to a degree by the decile from which the household

moves in 1860, and a characteristic group of households is not a random

sample of the linked sample, relative movement will be affected both by

the position of the household group in the 1860 distribution and by the

household group's characteristic. We can control for the effect of the

beginning position by comparing the expected movement of all households

in the same position with that of the households with the characteristic

of interest by using Table 3.

     We first consider the relative movements of households with given

characteristics within the sample distribution of wealth, columns 1 and

2. For example, those living in the urban area in 1860 occupy a position

consistent with being randomly selected from the 1860 sample distribution

(mean decile of 5.6) but have an expected mean decile position in 1870

of 6.1. Since all those occupying the fifth decile in 1860 had no

expected positional change (5.4, Table 3), this upward movement may be

attributed to the characteristic of residing in an urban area instead of

to the average decile position in 1860. Using this method, we find that

households characterized as farm, urban, foreign-born and a listing in

all three census years (triple) as well as 35-44 and 45-54 age cohorts

evidenced upward mobility. Note that for triples the expected decile

position in 1870 is less than that for 1860 but not by as much as would

be expected for the randomly selected household occupying the 7th decile

position in 1860. The same effect of less relative downward movement

holds for the age cohort of 45-54 years.
                                    21

        Since the change in the relative positions of the age cohorts is

 very much like that of a random sample of households occupying comparable

 1860 positions, age appears to have only a small effect on relative

movement. This observation is reinforced by a consideration of relative

movements within age cohorts, columns 3 and 4. The second pair of

columns considers the movement of a particular subgroup of the sample

against that same subgroup in the population, where the decile boundaries

are drawn from the wealth distribution of the population subgroup. The

third pair of columns considers the movement through the population

distribution of wealth with boundaries being drawn from the population

distribution. Thus, farmers in the sample, meaning farmers found in

both censuses, move from a mean decile of 6.0 relatIve to all farmers in

1860 to 6.8 in 1870. This was a more modest movement than most groups

achieved. Finally, farmers moved up significantly, relative to the

whole population, with mean decile positions of 5.4 in 1860 and 8.2 in

1870.

        It is clear from column 5 of Table 6 that, with the single exception

of the foreign-born, our sample sits in the upper part of the wealth

distribution in 1860 although the effect is not pronounced. It is also

clear from column 6 that the relative position of the sample vastly

improves by 1870 with the sample occupying the upper portion of the

wealth distribution for the whole population by 1870. This positioning

and movement is fairly uniform relative to subgroups as well as the

population. The exceptions are nonfarmers who are moving up relative to

other nonfarmers considerably more than they move relative to the popu-

lation and farmers for whom the opposite is true. The two age cohorts,

35-44 and 45-54, move up more relative to the population than they do

relative to their age groups within the population.
                                 22

    The striking observation about movement within this sample is that

no single characteristic generated much differential mobility for house-

holds with that characteristic. Farmers, those who lived in the urban

area of Salt Lake City, the foreign-born and the young-age cohorts

(25-34 and 35-44) improved their position, but the gains were not large.

Age cohorts 45-54 and 55-64 as well as the characteristics of being

U.S.-born and present in all three censuses produce a decline in the

relative position of households with those characteristics. However,

there appears to be no observed characteristics which would make a

dramatic difference in mobility in this sample.31 The results are

similar for a comparison of 1850 and 1860. It should be noted that the

young and the foreign-born, two relatively poor groups, were moving up

relatively rapidly, producing convergence toward the mean for those

groups. This was not true for the nonfarm occupations.

    Mean decile position considers the expected possibilities for any

random member of the linked group. We have observed that these possi-

bilities are not independent of initial decile position, and that there

is a weak correlation of possibilities with household characteristics.

We now consider possible interactions between characteristics and the

initial decile of the household. Rather than using a summary statistic

(say mean decile position, given an initial position) we provide in

Table 6 the leading diagonal of each of the transition matrices. These

are the "stayers" who remain in the same relative position from one

observation period to the next. If the distribution is random, in the

sense that from one period to the next there is an equal chance of

landing in any given decile independent of one's starting position, then

for each decile ten percent of those observed should be "stayers." We
                                 23

have provided the leading diagonals for characteristic groups and for

the sample itself. The decile boundaries in this case are drawn from

the sample wealth distribution. Hence, Table 6 summarizes the comparative

probabilities of staying in each decile for subgroups within the sample.

     Table 6 suggests that the staying? patterns observed for the

sample are not dramatically different across characteristic groups. The

probability of being a stayer bounces around a good deal and appears to

have a MU,, or "J" shape (higher probabilities at the ends of the distri-

bution, lower probabilities in the middle) but the same pattern occurs

for most characteristic groups. There are two exceptions: TJ.S.-born

and the 45-55 age cohort clearly have lower probabilities of remaining

in the top decile.

     We note that the urban wealthy were especially immune to the

possibilities of decline. At the other extreme, those in the poorest

decile were less likely to move up in certain instances. The nonfarm,

urban and foreign-born poor were less likely to be able to move out of

the poorest decile. Hence, we do observe an interaction between house-

hold characteristics and expected mobility experience in terms of oppor-

tunities when one occupies either tail of the distribution. On the

other hand, with the exception of the final column in Table 6, the

general observation would be very much consistent with the argument we

have developed to this point: while the 1870 wealth distribution cannot

be characterized as anything but one with considerable inequality, it

was a distribution within which individual households moved upward

(relative to the population) and upward and downward (relative to a

group of peers present over the same decade intervals) with frequency.

Only those in the top wealth decile could be very certain of their
                                 24

relative position. Even in this case the probability of decline was

usually greater than .5.


Conclusion

     There is no particular reason to conclude that the patterns of

mobility in Utah in the mid-nineteenth century may be generalized to

other economies, but the Utah data are instructive and lead to inter-

esting conclusions that may be worth examination in other contexts.

     There is a distinct pattern of regression toward mean wealth in

Utah. Regression is not complete in a ten-year period but it is sub-

stantial. This regression toward the mean implies that any boundaries

defining elites or classes were constantly being breached by particular

households. If this pattern of movement toward the mean was perceived

by the population of the time, then social discontent and pressure for

change would be lessened. Therefore, cross-sectional inequality, or its

trend, is not sufficient evidence upon which to establish existence of

an elite.

      Further, much of the observed mobility must be stochastic in the

 sense that it cannot be explained or controlled by holding particular

 characteristics such as age, residence, birthplace or occupation constant.

 In order to explore the full relationship of mobility to particular

 characteristics, one would need a much larger sample than is present in

 the Utah data. There simply are not enough households that appear in

 more than one census. Nevertheless, much of the mobility appears to be

 stochastic. In particular, the mobility within age cohorts and occupa-

 tional groupings such as farmers is quite large.    Cross-sectional regres-

 sions have been used to explain levels of wealthholding by households.
                                                    of the variance in
 Such regressions usually explain less than half
                                 25

wealth.32 The question has remained as to whether the unexplained

variance was due to unobserved variables or was, in fact, stochastic

variance. The transition matrices suggest that the variance may be

stochastic since we find households moving quite freely through the

matrix rather than being confined to particular cells. However, further

work disentangling patterned mobility from stochastic mobility would be
          33
useful.

     If the Utah data are representative, wealth mobility studies should

not be confined to analysis of movement in and out of the richest extreme

of the distribution. Clearly, mobility within the other nine deciles is

different than the mobility of the richest decile. The number of "stayers"

in the richest decile is about twice as high as it is for any other.

Consequently, studies such as those of Pessen or Lebergott that focus on

the richest group do not convey much information about the possibilities

for most households.

     Finally, there appears to be no close relationship between dispersion

or cross-sectional inequality and mobility. In particular, one cannot

easily relate increasing dispersion with reduced mobility. In Utah,

inequality increases from 1860 to 1870 while mobility appears to be at a

very high level. Mobility does appear to decrease slightly between the

1850s and the 1860s, but the decrease is small. Furthermore, the obser-

vations between 1850 and 1860 must be based on real property rather than

the total wealth of a household. Perhaps the most important point about

the relationship between dispersion and mobility is that the relationship,

if there is any, is so tenuous that historical trends in both cross-

sectional inequality and mobility must be measured and compared. It may

be that the trend in economic mobility moves with the trend in cross-
                                26

sectional inequality so that an increase in dispersion in the wealth

distribution is accompanied by increased mobility. In such a case,

reality and the egalitarian ideal are difficult to compare. It may be

that mobility is inversely related to modernization so that opportunity

gradually fades. Mobility may be more volatile than cross-sectional

inequality where summary measures move slowly, if at all, and convey a

sense of stability that may be illusory. Economic mobility observed

through tIme and across economies or societies may have more variance

and may be more closely related to periods of political discontent and

change.

     One very important issue is raised by the presentation of measures

of mobility. How much mobility should there be? Since there are few

measures of wealth mobility, it is difficult to establish any frame of

reference from which to compare the results presented here. For this

reason each scholar examining wealth mobility has been left free to

reach conclusions relatively unconstrained by the implications of the

data. Moreover, there is a more difficult question. Is mobility good

or bad? Clearly, in the American egalitarian ideal, mobility in terms

of rags to riches or upward movement has been viewed as a beneficial

condition. What about riches to rags or lesser movements downward?

Mobility implies risk, and risky outcomes are generally viewed as bad.

Would completely random movement be optimal?

     The American historical and contemporary experience has been filled

with tension between economic efficiency and justice. Economic historians

have tended to judge the issue of fairness or justice largely in terms

of cross-sectional measures of inequality. The Utah experience in the

mid-nineteenth century suggests that cross-sectional measures may not be
                                 27

sufficient to make such judgments. Temporary or even lifetime inequality

may be acceptable relative to the egalitarian ideal that runs through

American history if mobility is possible or probable. These are all

historical issues worth investigating. They must be considered if

wealth mobility is an important element in the story of the egalitarian

ideal in American society.
                                     28



                                   FOOTNOTES

      Both authors are Associate Professors of Economics at Brigham Young

University. This research has been funded by the College of Social

Sciences, the School of Management and the Research Division of Brigham

Young University. We wish to thank Stanley Engerman and a referee for

useful comments.


 1.   Lee Soltow, Men and Wealth in the United States, 1850-1870 (New

      Haven and London, 1975), 180.

 2. Jeffrey Williamson and Peter Lindert, "Long Term Trends in American

      Wealth Inequality, in James D. Smith, ed., Modeling the Distribution

      and Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth, (Chicago, Ill.

      1980), 60.

 3. James A. Henretta, "Economic Development and Social Structure in

      Revolutionary Boston," William and Mary Quarterly, XXII (1965),

      75-92.

 4. Stanley Lebergott, The American Economy (Princeton, 1976), 135.

      Simon Kuznets, "Economic Growth and Income Inequality," American

      Economic Review XLIII (1953), 3.

 5. For examples see Alice H. Jones, "Wealth Estimates for the American

      Middle Colonies, 1774," Economic Development and Cultural Change,

      IIXX 1970; ____________ ,   "Wealth   Estimates for the New England

      Colonies about 1770," Journal of Economic History, XXXII (1972),

      98-127; _________ ,   American Colonial Wealth: Documents and Methods,

      (New York, 1977); __________ ,      Wealth   of a Nation to Be, (New York,

      1980); Lee Soltow, Men and Wealth; Robert Gallman, "Trends in the

      Size Distribution of Wealth in the Nineteenth Century: Some
                                 29

     Speculations," in Lee Soltow (ed.) Six Papers on the Size

     Distribution of Income, (New York, 1969), 1-25; Jeffrey Williamson

     and Peter Lindert, "Long Term Trends in American Wealth Inequality,"

     in James D. Smith (ed). Modeling the Distribution and

     tional Transmission of Wealth, (Chicago, 1980); Jeremy Atack and

     Fred Bateman, "The Egalitarian Ideal and the Distribution of Wealth

     in Northern Agriculture Communities: A Backward Look," Review of

     Economics and Statistics, 63 (1981), 124-129; Lee Soltow, Patterns

     of Wealthholding in Wisconsin Since 1850, (Madison, 1971).

6.   See as examples, Peter N. Blau and Otis D. Duncan, The American

     Occupational Structure (New York, 1967); Percy Davidson and H. D.

     Anderson, Occupational Mobility in an American Community (Stanford,

     1937); Seymour N. Lipset and Reinhard Bendix, Social Nobility in

     Industrial Society (Berkeley, 1963); Stephan Thernstrom, The Other

     Bostonians (Cambridge, Mass., 1973); Clyde Griffen and Sally Griffen,

     Natives and Newcomers (Cambridge, Mass., 1978); Michael Katz, The

     People of Hamilton (Cambridge, Mass., 1975); Alan Dawley, Class and

     Community (Cambridge, Mass., 1976).

 7. See Michael Katz, "Occupational Classification in History," Journal

     of Interdisciplinary History, III (1972), 63-68; Clyde Griffen,

     "Occupational Mobility in Nineteenth Century America: Problems and

     Possibilities," Journal of Social History, V (1972), 310-330.

 8. Katz, "Occupational Classification .   .   .", 65.
 9. For examples, see John J. McCall, Income Mobility, Racial

     nation and Economic Growth, (Lexington, Mass. 1973); P.E. Hart,

     "The Dynamics of Earnings, 1963-1973," Economic Journal, 86 (1976),

     551-65; Lee A. Lillard and Robert J. Willis, "Dynamic Aspects of

     Earning Mobility," Econometrica, 46 (1978), 985-1012.
                                30

10. Milton Friedman, A Theory of the Consumption Function (Princeton,

     1957) is the classic statement of the permanent income hypothesis.

11. For techniques of decomposition see Lillard and Willis, "Dynamic

    Aspects of Earning Mobility" and A.F. Shorrocks, "Income Mobility

    and the Markov Assumption," Economic Journal 86 (1976), 566-578 and

    McCall, Income Mobility

12. If alternative methods of measuring mobility or classifying yielded

     similar results, the issue would be moot. Unfortunately, Katz

     found poor correlation between wealth scaling and occupational

     scaling. "Occupational Classification .   .   .", 88.
13. The main problem raised by consideration of wealth mobility in an

     economy with urban and rural sectors may be the differential levels

     of human capital in the two sectors so that the ratio of physical

     wealth to total wealth (including human capital) is higher in the

     rural area.

14. Wealth represents the accumulation of savings for life cycle purposes

     and bequests. It is also a store of the changes in transitory

     income. One would expect the second aspect of wealth to be small

     relative to that aspect that reflects permanent income flows.

15. Edward Pessen, Riches, Class, and Power Before the Civil War,

     (Lexington, Mass., 1973); Robert Doherty, Society and Power: Five

     New England Towns, 1800-1860, (Amherst, 1977); Merle Curti, The

     Making of an American Community, (Stanford, 1959); Lebergott, The

     American Economy.

16. "If the logic of the egalitarian myth pointed to economic fluidity,

     the facts of American economic experience indicate that stability,
                                 31

     if not rigidity, characterized the situation of most wealthholders."

     Pessen, Riches, Class and Power, 148.

17. Soltowts sample of the 1870 manuscript census suggests that only

     .15% of males in 1870 owned more than $100,000 dollars in wealth.

     (footnote 5) While the tax assessments that Pessen uses were to

     include personal wealth as well as realestate, it is likely that

     the personal wealth was substantially underreported and that

     assessment of real estate was below market value. Hence, Pessen is

     clearly considering the extreme tail of the wealth distribution in

     his study of mobility.

18. Pessen, Riches, Class and Power, 133. Lebergott The American

     Economy examines mobility within the most wealthy stratas. He

     finds that 60 to 80% of the very wealthy are 'new" in any generation.

     (p. 174) He also finds that the children of the wealthy have

     incomes and wealth that have regressed significantly toward the

     mean. Again Lebergott's study does not compare an identical group

     at two points in time.

19. Doherty, Society and Power and Curti, The Naking of an American

     Community.

20. In later work, we plan to use the available demographic records on

    Utahns to trace the economic fortunes of out-migrants. Some of the

    migration out of Utah to the surrounding states of Idaho, Nevada,

    California and Arizona was motivated by Brigham Young's colonizing

    plans so that individual households may have undertaken migration

    out of Utah at an economic loss.

21. We have collected from the federal censuses of Utah the available

    wealth, demographic, occupation and location data for 1850, 1860
                                32

    and 1870 for the populations of households within the region in

    each of those years. Using these population data, we have linked

    all of the households that were clearly identifiable by name, age,

    birthplace, etc. across the census decades. Every time a linkage

    is made, we have at least two separate observations on the same

    household and can observe changes in wealth, demographic, occupa-

    tional or locational characteristics. Some of these linkages begin

    in 1860 rather than in 1850; some, beginning in 1850, end in 1860.

    Others begin in 1850 but miss 1860 with the household not being

    observed again until 1870. Finally, we have some households that

    are observed in each of the three censuses. These various time-

    linked households comprise our "linked" sample. Also, as indi-

    cated, we have the populations with the same information, within

    which the linked sample households were living.

         The census data include the following household characteristics:

    name of household head, gender of household head, age of household

    head, birthplace of household head, size of household, residence of

    household, real wealth of household, personal wealth of household

     (1860 and 1870 only), occupation of household head.

         We have coded alphabetic information, excepting name, into

    numeric information for ease of handling with a computer. Occupa-

    tions have been identified with a three digit code; location by

     town and county codes; birthplace by a state or country code.

22. The distribution of wealth for the U.S. has been analyzed by Soltow

     in Men and Wealth.

23. We approach these questions by considering the opportunities, as

     measured by ex post relative position in a distribution, of a
                                  33

     sample of all households that appeared in more than one census from

     1850 to 1870. We created this sample with hand rather than computer

     linkage, using place of birth, place of residence and occupation,

     as well as age and name. Some latitude was given for name spelling

     variations in the censuses as well as for age differences of more

     or less than ten years between censuses. Ambiguity about linkages

     still existed so that the sample was divided into two categories--

     those who were linked with certainty and those where the link was

     ambiguous. We were unable to detect any systematic differences

     between the certain and ambiguous linked groups and will therefore

     report analyses using the entire linked sample. We note that a

     false link may impart spurious mobility to our data since the two

     households are in reality completely different households who are

     viewed as the same household.

24. One observes the ex post proportions in each cell of the matrix.

     These ex post observations provide maximum likelihood estimates of

     the ex ante probabilities.

25. A fourth possibility would be the consideration of movement within

     a subsample where the deciles are drawn according to the distribution

     of wealth of the linked subsample. For example, one could consider

     relative mobility within the linked group of farmers compared to

    nonfarmers. Unfortunately, such matrices require more data than we

     currently have available.

26. Between 1860 and 1870 large numbers of foreign born immigrants came

    to Utah with very little wealth. This influx raised the proportion

    of households with no wealth.
                                34

27. We note one additional methodological problem at this point. If

    one considers the mean decile position, given initial decile position,

    there is essentially a monotonically increasing relationship excepting

    for the first decile position in the initial year. This decile

    position is always occupied by those with zero wealth. The problem

    is that this zero wealth estimate may be a true estimate or it may

    result if the respondent simply failed to indicate wealth to the

    census marshall. Thus, we undoubtedly have in this cell some with

    a true zero wealth position and some who simply did not respond in

    the initial year even though they did have wealth but did respond

     in the second year. Hence, the mean decile position is likely to

    be an overestimate of that for those in the "true" zero category.

     If appropriate adjustment could be made, we would likely observe a

    monotonically increasing pattern of mean decile positions given

     initial decile position.

28. See J. R. Kearl, Clayne L. Pope, and Larry T. Wimmer, "Wealth in a

     Settlement Economy: Utah 1850-1870," Journal of Economic History,

     XL (1980), 477-496.

29. The census of 1850 reports the value of real property but does not

     report personal wealth. Hence, a comparison involving the 1850

     data can only examine mobility within the distribution of propertied

     wealth. Clearly, mobility relative to a segment of total wealth is

     likely to be higher than mobility within the total wealth distribu-

     tion.

30. Kuznets, "Economic Growth and Income Inequality," 1-28.

31. Flultivariate analysis is needed to examine marginal effects of

     various characteristics on the probability of moving from one
                                     35

     decile to another. Unfortunately, very large data sets are needed

     for such analysis, since a decile breakdown yields 100 probabilities

     for analysis.

32. Atack and Bateman, "The Egalitarian Ideal," Kearl, Pope and Winimer,

     "Wealth in a Settlement Economy."

33. Once sufficient intertemporal observations have been gathered, the

     techniques developed by A. F. Shorrocks, "Income Mobility and the

    Markor Assumptions" Economic Journal, 86 (1976), 566-578; Lillard

     and Willis, "Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility"; McCall, Income

    Mobility . .     . might   be applied to wealth data even though the

     transitory element of wealth is probably small.
                                      36



                               TABLE 1

          Comparison of Wealth in Utah and the United States



                                  1850                               1870

                         United States     Utah        United States        Utah

Mean real wealth              $1001        $201           $1782             $644

Proportion holding

   real wealth                  .41         .70                .43           .64

Share of wealth held

   by top one percent           .30         .14                .24           .27

Share of wealth

   held by top ten percent      .73         .52                .70           .61

Mean wealth of foreign

   born/mean wealth of U.S.

   born (whites)                .49         .77                .61           .70

Gini coefficient

   for real wealth              .86         .69                .84           .74

Gini coefficient

   for total wealth                                            .81           .70




Note: The sample procedures are such that the means and Gini coefficients

are based on all males over age twenty for the U.S. and are based on all

male heads of household over age twenty for Utah. The top percentiles are

based on males over age twenty in both instances.

Source: United States: Soltow Men and Wealth. Utah: see text.
                                                      37
                                                                         Table 2
                              Relative Movement of the Sample Through the Population, 1860—1870
                                                           1870 DECILE                                         Mean Decile, 1870
                    1          2     3          4           5      6          7     8      9     10     N
           1                        .149       .021        .071   .092      .177   .128   .156   .206   141       7.2
           2                        .141       .077        .071   .154      .186   .115   .167   .090   156       6.6
           3                        .236       .060        .126   .132      .132   .120   .108   .090   167       6.1
           4                        .143       .059        .074   .123      .187   .153   .158   .103   203       6.8
1860       5                        .092       .048        .070   .092      .154   .202   .199   .143   272       7.3
DEC ILE    6                        .059       .029        .069   .103      .137   .186   .250   .167   204       7.6
           7                        .094       .030        .047   .082      .099   .176   .279   .193   233       7.7
           8                        .073       .026        .026   .091      .103   .181   .251   .241   232       7.8
           9                        .089       .007        .037   .037      .085   .107   .203   .435   271       8.3
          10                        .042       .006        .013   .016      .032   .086   .118   .687   313       9.2
           N                        224         73         121    185        264   319    420    586    2192
          N:   NuMBER IN DECILE,           N   = 2192
          Note:     1   is   poorest decile; 10 is wealthiest decile
                  In 1870, the first three deciles are collapsed together because more
                  than 20% of the population had zero wealth.
          Source:       see text.
                                                         38
                                                                            Table 3
                   Relative Movement of Households Within the Sample Distribution, 1860-1870
                                                              1870 DECILE                                         Mean Decile, 1870
                   1             2      3          4           5        6        7      8      9     10     N
                                                                      .081     .089    .072   .068   .033   238      4.4
         1       .170           .106   .145   .145            .085
                                              .161            .081    .058     .076    .054   .031   .031   223      3.9
         2       .179           .184   .143
                                              .147            .108    .108     .078    .078   .039   .010   204      4.3
         3       .147           .137   .157
                                              .151            .167    .113     .108    .065   .038   .022   186      4.6
         4       .113           .118   .108
                                              .126            .122    .110     .151    .092   .089   .050   271      5.4
         5       .055           .046   .114
                                              .082            .158    .117     .153    .133   .051   .021   196      5.2
1860     6       .097           .082   .092
                                               .107           .088     .116     .116   .153   .084   .051   215      5.5
DECILE   7       .060           .084   .130
                                               .085           .090     .094     .166   .135   .135   .099   223      6.2
         8       .081           .031   .085
                                               .041           .051     .106     .088   .138   .240   .212   217      7.3
          9      .055           .037   .032
                                       .014       .023        .054     .032     .054   .108   .189   .464   222      8.3
         10      .050           .014
         N:   Number in Decile,               N        2192
         Note:         1   is   poorest decile, 10            is   wealthiest decile
         Source:           see text.
                                                          39
                                                                             Table 4
                         Relative Movements of the Households Within the Sample
                                                                                Distributions, 1850-1870
                                                                1870 DECILE                                       Mean Decile, 1870
                         1         2       3         4           5      6         7      8      9     10     N
               1       .140   .180     .090      .130          .120   .060      .120   .050   .080   .030   100   4.5
               2       .086   .114     .029      .086          .143   .143      .114   .200   .057   .029    35   5.5
               3       .200   .120     .160      .093          .067   .093     .167    .093   .080   .027    75   5.1
               4       .053   .079     .211      .132          .026   .158     .158    .053   .053   .079    38   5.2
1850           5       .100   .122     .089      .144          .089   .067     .178    .089   .067   .056    90   5.2
DECILE         6       .056   .113     .127      .155          .141   .042     .085    .113   .085   .085    71   5.4
               7       .126   .057     .126      .145          .149   .115     .069    .080   .103   .092    87   5.6
               8       .092   .077     .031      .138          .092   .092     .077    .108   .077   .215    65   6.1
               9       .033   .049     .033      .066          .115   .213     .066    .082   .164   .164    61   6.6
            10         .041   .027     .041      .081          .068   .081     .081    .149   .122   .324    74   7.5
               N         69    68        64          83         67      68       71     67     63     76    696
       N:   Number in Decile,          N       696
       Note:       1   is poorest decile; 10 is wealthiest decile
       Source:         see text.
                                       40
                                                   Table 5
                                             Mean Decile Position
                             SAMPLE                 SUB-GROUP                POPULATION
                      1860            1870   1860            1870     1860                1870
                       (1)             (2)    (3)               (4)    (5)                 (6)
    Sample             5.5            5.5     --                --    6.1                 7.6
    Nonfarm            5.0            4.9     6.3               8.0   5.7                 7.0
    Farm               5.8            6.0     6.0               6.8   6.5                 8.2
    Rural              5.5            5.4     6.1               7.2   6.1                 7.6
    Urban              5.6            6.1     6.3               7.8   6.2                 7.8
    US   Born          6.4            5.9     6.4               7.5   7.0                 7.8
    Foreign Born       4.8            5.3     5.9               7.6   5.4                 7.5
    Triples            7.4            6.7     --                --    7.9                 8.4
Age 25-34, 1860        4.9            5.3     5.9               7.1   5.6                 7.5
Age 35-44, 1860        5.3            5.7     6.1               7.1   6.4                 7.9
Age 45-54, 1860        6.7            6.1     6.6               7.3   7.3                 8.0
Age 55-64, 1860        6.0            5.1     6.1               7.2   6.6                 7.2
    Source:     see text.
                                     41
                                                   Table     6
                               Stayers Within Sample Distributions, 1860-1870
                                                   DECI LE
                        1      2      3      4      5             6      7      8      9     10
Nonfarm               .295   .169   .119   .110   .058       .046      .077   .122   .171   .511
Farm                  .019   .204   .200   .180   .172       .150      .139   .142   .280   .433
Rural                 .149   .207   .168   .167   .148       .124      .125   .140   .275   .412
Urban                 .229   .119   .122   .095   .018       .074      .077   .115   .156   .568
Foreign Born          .205   .290   .106   .140   .100       .082      .125   .145   .227   .522
US Born               .154   .149   .180   .155   .117       .138      .108   .121   .263   .311
Triples               .120   .330   .077   .100   .200       .030      .151   .080   .213   .492
Age 25-34, 1860       .190   .169   .133   .086   .152       .127      .129   .136   .286   .421
Age 35-44, 1860       .180   .320   .260   .050    171       .110      .095   .159   .288   .500
Age 45-54, 1860       .059   .167   .158   .330   .063           ---   .118   .143   .050   .360
Age 55-64, 1860       .157   .170   .123   .159   .100       .133      .101   .109   .242   .515
Sample                .170   .184   .15]   .151   .122       .117      .116   .135   .240   .464
Source:   see text.
