                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          FAMILIAL LOVE AND INTERTEMPORAL OPTIMALITY



                       Herschel I. Grossman

                       Working Paper No. 695




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge MA 02138

                             June 1981




The National Science Foundation and the John Simon Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation have supported this research. I have benefited
from discussing this subject with Han Ryder and Steven
                                                        Swidier.
Robert Barro, Guillermo Calvo, and an anonymous referee gave me
helpful comments. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed of
                                                             are
those of the author and. not those of the National Bureau
Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #695
                                                   June 1981


                           SUNNARY


          FAMILIAL LOVE AND INTERTEMPORAL OPTIMLITY


     This paper analyzes the intertemporal efficiency and
optimality of steady states within overlapping-generations
models in which the utility of individual working couples
depends on the consumption of their parents and children
as well as their own consumption. The analysis considers
both a basic model in which altruistic behavior can take only
the form of gifts of consumption goods from working couples
to their retired parents and an extended model in which
altruistic behavior also. can take the form of bequests from
parents to their surviving children. In the basic model,
saving only involves storing consumption goods, whereas
the extended model includes capital and neoclassical produc-
tion.

     The following conclusions from the analysis apply to
both models: An altruistic utility function promotes inter—
temporal efficiency. However, altruism creates an
externality that implies that satisfying the conditions for
efficiency does not insure intertemporal optimality.
Nevertheless, if the utility of working couples is appropriately
;ensitive at the: margin to their own consumption, their
pirents' consumption, and their children's consumption, the
steady state that is consistent with individual behavior is
both efficient and optimal.




                               Professor H.I. Grossman
                               Department of Economics
                               Brown University
                               Providence, Rhode Island         02912
                                (401) 863—2606
     The specification of efficiency and optimality conditions
for intertemporal resource allocation and the possible
inconsistency between these conditions and the consequences of
private decision making within a context of overlapping
generations have traditionally been central issues in the
theoretical analysis of the long—run evolution of the
economy——see, for example, Samuelson (1958) , Diamond (1965)
and Cass and Yaari (1966) . Recently, the development of more
goneral behavioral models that allow for voluntary private
intergenerational giving-—for example, support of retired
parents by working children and bequests from deceased parents
to surviving children——has provided a new perspective for
analyzing these issues—-see, for example, Barro (1974; 1976)
Drazen (1978) , and Buiter (1979) . The present paper continues
this recent line of inquiry by considering intertemporal
efficiency and optimality within models of familial love,
formalized in the assumption that the utility of individual
orkinq couples depends on the consumption of their parents
and children as well as their own consumption.

     The main conclusions from this analysis are the following:
An interterriporally altruistic utility function promotes
intertemporal efficiency. However, with such an altruistic
utility function, in contrast to the models of Cass and Yaari
and Diamond, satisfying the conditions for efficiency does
not insure intertemporal optimality. Nevertheless, there
exist strong hut plausible restrictions on an altruistic utility
function that make the results of private behavior both efficient
and optimal.
                             —2—
1.   Children Love Parents

     The analysis in the first part of the paper extends the
model of Cass and Yaari by assuming that a working couple's
utility depends positively on the past and current consumption
of each set of its retired parents. This form of familial love
creates the possibility of altruistic behavior in the form. of
voluntary gifts of consumption goods from working couples to
their retired parents. Aside from this extension, this basic
model follows the Cass and Yaari setup.   Specifically, the
analysis abstracts from stochastic factors and assumes that
the life cycle consists of one working period and one retired
period, that labor services are the only productive input,
and that consumption goods, which can be storable, are the only
product.
     Historical and heuristic interest in the Cass and Yaari
model provides motivation for using this setup. More
importantly, however, analysis of this basic model yields
general results about the way in which familial love affects
the relation between private behavior and intertemporal
efficiency and optimality. The second part of the paper extends
these results by incorporating into the analysis love of parents
for their surviving children, the resulting possibility of
altruistic behavior in the form of bequests, and neoclassical
production relations involving both capital services and
labor services.

1.1 Specification of the Basic Model

     The lifetime utility of each couple who is working during
the current period, denoted by U, is given by

            =
                U(c, c, c1, c1)
where c represents consumption per couple, the superscripts
denote working and retired periods, and the subscripts identify
.a generation by the date of its working period. specifically,
                                        —3—
according to this notation,
c is the current consumption of the current working couple,
c is its prospective future consumption during retired years,
        is the past consumption of each set of its retired parents
        during their working years, and
        is the current consumption of each set of its retired parents.

Each of these arguments is nonnegative.            The function U is
increasing in each argument, concave, and twice differentiable.
Each first partial derivative approaches infinity as the value
of the respective argument approaches zero.
         specification of children's utility as depending on
        The
parents' consumption, rather than on parents' utility as in the
formulations of Drazen and Buiter, seems plausible in that it
relates the child's utility directly to the objective events of
parents' consumption, rather than to the parents' subjective
evaluation of these events. In addition, the dependence of utility
on parents' consumption avoids the convergence problems that
Buiter and Drazen encounter in defining the utility max.imand. The
present formulation effectively links all generations through the
constraints on consumption, given by equations (1.1—4) , rather than
through the utility function.
        The arguments        of the utility function   are determined as
follows:
(1.1)         c =   2w   —
                             S. —

(1.2)         c rs +
(1.3)    c1 =       2w   —
                             s_ —21       and

(1.4)    c1 =       rsi       +   ng,
where    w is real wage income per capita,
         s is saving, which takes the form of accumulation of
            consumption goods during working years,
         g is the amount of consumption goods given by a working
            couple to each set of its retired parents,
                                      —4—
          r is the physical rate of return plus unity on stored
             consumption goods, and
          n is the number of children per set of parents.

        Each of these variables is nonnegative. Note that r
ecrual to zero would represent full depreciation in storage,
that r equal to unity would represent no depreciation in
storage, and r greater than unity would represent appreciation
in   storage. Note also that n/2 equals unity plus the rate of
population         growth, which, it is relevant to recall, Samuelson
denotes as the biological rate of return. The basic model
assumes that w, r, and n are exogenously determined and
constant across generations. In the extended model of
neoclassical production in the second part of the paper, wage income
and     tie
          physical rate of return become endogenous variables.

1.2 Efficiency and Optimality of Steady States

        Denote steady—state values by the absence of the time
subscript. Thus, by definition,

(2.1)         c' = 2w —        — 2g   and

(2.2)         c2      rs +   ng.

        Following      standard usage, define as efficient steady states
in which the values of     and g maximize c2 for given values
of c', subject to equations (2.1—2). Note that efficiency
involves      specifying a consumption possibilities frontier, but
does not      concern choosing among points on that frontier.
From the      form of equations (2.1-2) and the nonnegativity restric-
tions on      c', c2, s, and g, we can infer the following efficiency
properties:

(Ta) If r   n/2, any steady state that conforms to the non—
    negativity restrictions is efficient. Specifically, if
    r = n/2, efficiency implies 2w > S + 2g > 0, with 5 >               0
    and q > 0.
                                            —5—
(Ib) If r      n/2, efficiency puts additional restrictions or
       either s or g. Specifically, if r < n/2, efficiency
       implies s = 0 and w > g > 0. Albernatively, if
       r >   n/2,   efficiency implies g =                       0       and 2w >    s   >   0.
These results indicate that, as a way to provide for retirement
consumption, saving is efficient if and only if the physical
rate of return is not less than the biological rate of return
and gifts from working children are efficient if and. only if
the biological rate of return is not less than the physical rate
of return.

      Again following standard usage, define as optima'l a steady
state in which S and g takes values that maximize
U(c1 ,c21c',c2) , subject to equations (2.1—2). Given the non—
negativity restrictions and the assumptiOn that the partial
derivatives of U approach infinity as c and c2 approach zero,
the first-order conditions for the solution to the optimality
problem require that c', c2, s, and g satisfy a pair of the
following possible restrictions:

either (3.1) — (U        + U3 )        +   r(U 2   +   Utf ) = 0 and 2w - 2g             >   s     >   0,
                  1


      or   (3.2) — (U    + U       )   + r(U 2     + U   )   < 0 and.
                                                             —
                                                                             S      0,       and
                               3



either (3.3) —      (U   + U) + (U + U) =                            0   and w —         > q > 0,
      or (3.4) - (U
                    1
                         +U)   3
                                       + 2(U   2
                                                   +U    )   < 0 and g = 0,

but not both (3.2) and (3.4). For brevity, the full func—
tional form for each partial derivative, e.g., U(c1,c21c',c2)
is not explicitly written out.
     Which of the eligible pairs of conditions (3.1—4) is
applicable depends on the relation between r and n/2.
Specifically, the implications of these first-order conditions
for  the ontimality      properties of a steady state                            are the
following:
                                   —6—
 (ha) If r = n/2,        the pairs of conditions (3.1) and (3.3)
       (3.1) and (3.4) ,     or   (3.2) and (3.3) can be relevant.
      In this case, optimality restricts only the sum, s + 2g.
      The optimal value, (s + 2g)*, has an interior value,
      2w >   (S + 2g)*   >   0,
                           such that c1 and c2 satisfy the
      equivalent conditions (3.1) and (3.3), with S > 0
      and g>0.
(lib) If r > n/2, the pair of conditions (3.1) and (3.4)
      is relevant. In this case, the optimal value, ,
     has an interior value, 2w > s* > 0, such that c1
     and c2 satisfy condition (3.1) , and the optimal value, g*,
     has the boundary value, g* = 0, that satisfies condi-
      tion (3.4)
(ho) If r < n/2,     the pair of conditions (3.2) arid (3.3)
      is relevant. In this case, s has the boundary value,
      s = 0, that satisfies condition (3.2) , and g* has an
      interior value, w > g* > 0, such that c' and c2 satisfy
      condition (3.3)

Note that these results indicate that efficiency is necessary
but not sufficient for optimality.

     It is worth stressing that these concepts of efficiency
and optirnality relate only to a normative comparison of possible
steady states. A normative comparison of nonsteady—state paths
would require additional criteria, such as the standard of
Pareto optimality. Although an analysis of such criteria is
beyond the scope of the present paper, two interesting
observations can readily be made: First, an efficient steady
state is Pareto optimal. Second, a path that went from an
arbitrary starting point Lo an efficient steady state in a
single generation generally would not be Pareto optimal.
Specifically, an immediate change from g > 0 and s = 0 to
g = 0 and s > 0 generally would make either current working
couples or then parents worse off, whereas an immediate change
from g = 0 and      > 0  to g > 0 and s = 0 generally would
make the terminal generations worse off.
                                  —7—
1.3 Individual Behavior, Efficiency, and Optimality

     Consider if, and under what conditions, individual behavior
is consistent with a steady •state that is efficient or optimal.
The choice problem for an individual current working couple is
to   select   values for s and      to maximize U(c, c, c1, c1)
subject to equations (1.1-4). In addition to the choice vari-
ables, these constraints involve the exogenous variables, w, r,
end n, the predetermined variables,       and       and the

expectationai variable,
      The formation of           is important for the results of the
analysis. One simple possibility would be to treat       as
exogenous, an assumption that would mean that the individual
couple believes that its decisions about s. and    will not affect
the future decision about           made by its children. The problem
with  thisassumption is that in general it implies that the
couple does not expect its children to perform the same choice
calculus that it itself is performing.
     A more satisfactory treatment is to assume t1at the couple
relates its expectation,       to s and     in the same way that
its own decision about        depends on s1 and            In   general,
the value of         that maximizes U(c, c, c, c1) depends on
       because        enters into c1 and c1, and depends on
because          enters into c1. If, however, the function U is
additively separable in c1, the chosen value of            does not

depend on            With this simplification, we focus attention on
the important consideration that parents' saving, s_1, and
giving to parents,     are substitutes in the provision of
parents' current consumption, c1. This substitutability implies
that, for an interior solution, the chosen value of g is inversely
related to 5tl (The lower bound on the derivative of      with
respect   to st—i would be —r/n, a value that would mean that an
increase in s1 induces a decrease in            sufficient to leave

c1     unchanged.)
                              —8—
    A reasonable specification of rational behavior would seem
to be that the functional relation between        and S iS
the same as the functional relation between      and          Thus,

rationality means that the individual couple expects that,
if it saves more, the amount that it receives from its children
during retired years will be smaller, provided that this
expected amount is not already zero. This belief implies
that the private return from saving can be less than the
physical rate of return, represented by r. Let X denote
the value of the derivative of        with respect to
     Some other aspects of the individual couple's choice problem
are worth noting. For example, equation (1.4) , which determines
c1, effectively abstracts from any free rider problem among
siblings. Specifically, this specification of the choice
problem assumes that in selecting   and    the individual couple
presumes that its siblings also are choosing to give to their
parents an amount equal to g. A possible rationalization for
this assumption is that the siblings hav a familial under-
standing according to which they act as a single decision maker
in choosing
       This
          formulation of the individual couple's choice problem
also makes no explicit allowance for borrowing and lending. This
simplification, however, is not consequential. Because the only
feasible transactions in a loan market would be between members of
the current working generation, such a market would not alter the
form of the constraints faced by the representative working couple.
       In light of the nonnegativity restrictions and the assumption
that the partial derivatives of U approach infinity as c, c,
      and cLi approach zero, the first—order conditions for the
CL1,
solution to the individual couple's choice problem require that s
and    satisfy a pair from the following possible restrictions:

               — U   + (r+nX) U = 0   and 2w —         > St > 0,
either (4.1)                                     2g
    or (4.2)   - U   + (r+nA) U < 0 and St       0, and
                                              —9—

either (4.3) — U i +            U =       0   and w     2
                                                             > gt > 0,
                            2


     or (4.4) - U
                    1
                        +
                            2
                                U
                                    Lf              t
                                         < 0 and g = 0.
Again, for brevity, the full functional form for each partial
derivative, e.g., U (ct, c, c1, c1) , and for X is not
explicitly written out. The above discussion of the nature of
implies that r+nX is positive, but less than or equal to r.
      Let S, G, C', C2, and A denote the steady—state values that
are consistent with these first—order conditions and equa-
tions (1.1-4) . Assuming that in a steady state the expectation,
      is correct and, hence, equals 0, the pair of conditions
(4.2) and (4.4) would imply C2 = 0 and cannot he relevant in a
steady state. Which of the other pairs is relevant in the
steady state depends on the relation between rU and 2 U
                                                                   2

Specifically, the implications of the first-order conditions
 (4.1-4)   for the characteristics of steady states are the
following:
(lila) If C' and C2 satisfy (r±nA)U =                       U,   the pairs of condi-

       tions (4.1) and (4.3), (4.1) and (4.4) ,                   or    (4.2) and (4.3)
       can be relevant. In this case, the sum, S + 20, has an
       interior value, 2w > S + 2G > 0, that satisfies the
       equivalent conditions (4.1) and (4.3) ,                   with    S > 0 and C > 0.

(11Th) If C' and C2 satisfy (r+nA)U >                       U, the pair of conditions
        (4.1) and (4.4) is relevant. In this case, S has an
       interior value, 2w > S > 0, that satisfies condition condi-
       tion (4.4) . Because G does not take an interior value, this
       case also has A = 0.

(IlIc) If C' and C2 satisfy (r+nA)U <                    U, the pair of conditions
       (4.2) and (4.3) is relevant. In this case, S has the
       boundary value, S   0, that satisfies condition (4.2)
       and G has an interior value, W > G > 0, that satisfies
       condition (4.3)
                                       — 10 —


Note that Drazen's paper considers what amounts to a special
case of this analysis that assumes A = 0,              U =         rU,   S >   0,       and
n = 2, and,     in       which, consequently, G > 0    requires rU =
                                                                           2
                                                                                    U


       Comparing the characteristics of individual behavior with
he efficiency and optimality properties derived above indicate
that the efficiency and oetimality of S and G depend on the
relation between r and n/2 and on the form of the function U.
With   regard   to efficiency, we can draw the following conclusions:

(IVa) From (Ia) ,          r    n/2 is a sufficient condition for S and G
       to be efficient.
(IVb) If r     n/2, either inefficient positive saving
       or   inefficient      giving to parents is possible.
       Specifically, from (lila—c) , a necessary condition for S > 0
                                                      n—           whereas,
       is tnat C and C2 satisfy (r+nA)U2 >
                     1
                                                           U   ,



       from        a necessary and sufficient condition for S > 0
              (Ib) ,
       to be inefficient is that r < n/2.     Similarly, from
       (lIla-c) , a necessary condition for G > 0   is that C' and C2

       satisfy (r+nA)U <             U,   whereas from (Ib) , a necessary
       and sufficient condition for G > 0             to be inefficient is
       that r >          n/2.
 (V)   If r    n/2, from (Ivh) , a necessary and sufficient
       condition for S and G to be efficient is that (r+nA)U                                  U

       as r .              A sufficient condition for this outcome is that

       C' and C2 satisfy (l+2A)U2 = U

       The possibilityof inefficient positive saving, indicated
in (IVb) , generalizes a result obtained b Cass and Yaari.
Cass and Yaari stress that, if r < n/2, saving is an inefficient
way to provide retirement consumption. Their model, moreover,
implicitly assumes that working couples associate zero marginal
utility with the consumption of their retired parents. Given
this assumption, only the pair of conditions (4.1) and (4.4) is
relevant .A equals zero, and s is positive for all positive values
                                 — 11 —

of  r. The analysis in the present section has derived more
general conditions for S > 0 that require (r+nA)U >            U,
but do not require U        0.

     The possibility of inefficient positive giving to parents,
also indicated in (IVb) , is a further extension of the results of
Cass and Yaari. This possibility arises if r > n/2, in which
case efficiency requires each working generation to set aside
current output to provide for its own future consumption and G > 0
would represent inefficient altruism. The present analysis indicates
he G > 0 can obtain, regardless of the relation between r and
n/2, if (r+nA)U <      U.    This condition in turn requires that
working couples associate sufficiently high marginal utility with
the current consumption of their retired parents.
     More importantly, the present analysis reveals that the
efficiency of individual behavior does not depend only on the
relation between r and n/2. Specifically, (V) indicates that,
whatever the sign of the difference between r and n/2, S and
G are efficient if the difference between (r+nA)U2       and        U
                                                                2
has the same sign. In the special case given in (V) ,    if   the
marginal utility that working couples associate with their
parents' current retirement consumption 13 equal to the marginal
utility that they associate with their own prospective retirement
consumption, with the latter weighted by a factor involving the
effect of current saving on future giving, individual behavior is
efficient regardless of the relation between r and n/2. Note
that the present model incorporates two factors, the positive
value of U    and the associated possibility of a negative value
of A, that mitigate in favor of efficiency, but were not
present in the model of Cass and Yaari.
     Turning to question of optimality, the critical factor is
the degree of correspondence between conditions (3.1-4) and
conditions (4.1-4) . As noted above, efficiency is necessary but
not sufficient for optimality. Specifically, assuming efficiency,
we can draw from (ha—c) and (lila—c) the following conclusions
about iia optimality of S and C:
                                                                    — 12 —

(VIa)    If        r    =   n/2,          implying efficiency, and if C and C2 satisfy
        (r±nA)U <                     U            then             S+    2G       (s +   2g)*   as C1 and C2
                        2—2               ,




                    -       U1       < U1+U3
        satis:y
                                          2


(VIb) If r = n/2,                         implying efficiency, and if C' and C2 satisfy
                                                                        + 2G       (.s + 2g) as C and C2

                                                   ::+:
                        2



        St1SLy              (l+2A)U
(VIa) If           r    <   n/2        and if C' and C2 satisfy (r±nA)U <                                   U,
        implying efficiency, then S =                                          s   = 0,     but C     g* as C1
                                              U1        U+U
        nu
        —
              L.
                   2.
                        saL1sy
                                                         1
                                                        u +u
                                                            3



(VId) If r > n/2                       and if C' and C2 satisfy (r+nA)U                           U,
        imelying efficiency, then C = g* =                                           0, but S s as C'
                                                    U
                                                        1           <   U+U 3
                                                                          1
        a C2 sa*isf7                          (l+2A) U              >   U +U
                                                                2         2

(VII) Sufficient conditions, from (VIa—d) , for S and G to be
        both efficient and optimal are that C' and C2 satisfy
        (1±2A)U 2                U        and U1 =                   (l+2A)U 3
Note that          these equalities refer only to the chosen values C1
and    C2, although              they would clearly be satisfied if the U function
were    such that (l+2A)U2 =                                U       and U =    1
                                                                                     (l+2A)U 3   for all   values
of    a1 and a2.
     The possibilities for efficient but not optimal values of
S and G, indicated in (VIa—d) , illustrate that satisfying the
conditions for efficiency generally does not insure optimalitv.
This conclusion also generalizes the results obtained by Cass
and Yaari. Given their setup, in which U       U = 0 and I = 0
for all combinations of c1 and a2, condition (3.1) is equivalent
to condition (4.1) , and, hence,          n/2 and S > 0 is              if r >
efficient, S also equals s*.     More generally, however, even
                                                    — 13 —

with efficiency, if working couples associate positive
marginal utility with both their own consumption and their
parents' consumption, an externality arises that can cause
non—optimality. Specifically, s or g* satisfy conditions
involving U , U  U , and U , whereas
                                ,     S satisfies a condition
                1           2           3       4

involving      only U and U and G satisfies a condition involving
only U and U
        1           4

       Concern at the margin for parents' consumption, nevertheless,
does not preclude optimality. Specifically, (VIa-d) indicate
that how closely the specification of optirnality corresponds to
the outcome of individual behavior depends on the relation
between A, U , U , U , and U .     As a special case, indicated
                                    2       3        4
               if
                        1

in   (VII) , the sufficient condition for efficiency given
in (V) is satisfied, and if, in addition, the marginal utility
working couples associate with their own current consumption
ecuals the marginal utility they associate with their parents'
past consumption, with the latter marginal uiiity weighted
by a factor involving A, individual behavior is optimal.

2.     Parents Also Love Children

       This part of the paper extends the analysis by assuming that
a working couple's utility depends positively on the prospective
future consumption of each of its children, as well as on the
consumption of its parents. This familial love of parents for
their surviving children creates the possibility of altruistic
behavior in the form of bequests. Allowing for bequests, the
specification of meaningful efficiency conditions requires
the introduction of a technology that incorporates the services
of capital goods, assumed for simplicity to be interchangeable
with consumption goods, as well as labor services, and that
exhibits diminishing returns to capital and labor. The
following analysis, like Diamond's model, specifically assumes
neoclassical production.
                                                - 14       —

2.1     Specification of the Extended Model

     Using the same notation developed above, the lifetime
utility of each couple who is working during the current period
now   is
       given by

               —1
               —  2
                Vc,ct,cti,cti,ct+1ct+i
                                 1          2          1       2



where the new arguments, c.+l and c1, are the prospective
future consumption of each of its children during their working
years and retired years, respectively. The function V is
increasing in each argument, concave, and twice differentiable.
Again, each first partial derivative approaches infinity as
the value of the respective argument approaches zero.
        The arguments of this utility function are determined as
follows:

(5.1)

                                                       —
(5.2)       c = rt(st+2ht)           +
                                         ng÷1              nht±ii
(5.3)       c1 = 2w1         —                  —




(5.4)              =                                               -
                       r1(st1+2h1)                     +
                                                                       nht,
                             —                  -                  and
(5.5)       c÷1 =      2w1           5t+l
                                                                       -
(5.6)       c1 = rt+1(st÷1+2h+1)                       +
                                                           ng2
where the new variable, h, is the bequest of consumption goods
received by a couple from each set of its parents. To avoid
the possibility of time inconsistency in the individual couple's
choice problem, assume that the amount of this bequest is
fixed before the couple begins working and its parents retire,
although the bequest is not received until the couple retires
and its parents die. Note that the sum, st-i +
represents the amount of capital, denoted by kt, that each
current retired couple is making available to provide c'ptai
services that cooperate in current production.
                                        — 15 —

     The production function is linear homogeneous in capital and
labor services, concave, and twice differentiable. Consequently,
current product per worker depends on the current amount of
capital per worker in the form
                             k          k
(6.1)      w + (rti—l)       —h =              , f'    > 0   and " < °.

Assuming that the market for capital equates the rate of return
received by owners of capital to the marginal product of capital
implies
                             k
(6.2)       rt1      1 +   f' ()
Substitution   of equation (6.2) into equation (6.1) yields a
positive relation between w and kt/fl:

                                 kt kt
                           — f' (h—)
(6.3)      w =

2.2     Efficiency nd Optimality in the Extended Model

        The steady—state levels of consumption in the extended
model are given by

(7.1)       c=2w-s-2g and
(7.2)       c2 =   r(s+2h)   + ng   -   nh =    (r    -
                                                          )k (s+2g)
Note that the equality, k = s + 2k, and the production relations
(6.1-2) imply that, for given n, c1 and c2 depend only on k
and the sum, s + 2g.
     In efficient steady states, the values of k and s + 2g
maximize c2 for given values of c1, subject to equations (7.1—2).
Assuming that f' (0) + 1 > n/2, and given the production rela-
tions (6.1-2) and the nonnegativity restrictions, we can readily
show that efficiency implies

(8)         r = 1     f' (k/n) =    n/2 and 2w >             s + 2g >   0.

Condition (8) combines the standard Golden Rule with the
                                      — 16 —

requirement that c1 and c2 be nonnegative. This result indicates
that, with neoclassical production, efficiency involves a capital
stock such that the physical rate of return equals the biological
rate of return. This equality implies that the sum of the
bequests received by a couple plus the income earned on these
bequests, 2rh, equals the bequests left by this couple, nh,
and, from equation (7.2) , that c2 = rs + ng, as in the basic
model. Beyond a prescription for k and the nonnegativity
conditions, efficiency involves no other restrictions on s, g,
or h.
     This latter conclusion is consistent with the analysis of
efficiency in the basic model for the case of r = n/2. The
difference in this regard between the models is that in the basic
model equality between r and n/2 would be fortuitous, whereas
according to condition (8) this equality is required for
efficiency. Note that, if the importance of capital in produc-
tion were so small that the production function did not imply
f' (0) + 1 > n/2, condition (8) would not apply. Instead,
efficiency would require k = 0 and, hence, s      h = 0. In
this situation, the efficiency properties derived in the analysis
of the basic model for the case of r < n/2 would be relevant.
Note also that, if, as in the basic model, r and w were
independent of k, and r were larger than n/2, the
efficient value of k would be undefined. This property is
what. necessitates the introduction of neoclassical production
when bequests are allowed.
        In an optimal steady state, the values of k and s + 2g
maximize V(c1,c2 ,c',c21c1 ,c2) ,          subject to conditions (7.1—2)
Assuming that f' (0) + 1 > n/2,            and given the production rela-
tions (6.1—2) and the nonnegativity restrictions, the first—
order conditions for the solution to the optimality problem are
that the optimal value, k*, satisfies the Golden Rule
efficiency condition,

(9.1)      r = 1 +   f' (k/n)   =   n/2,
                                — 17 —

and that the optimal value, (s + 2g)*, has an interior value,
2w > (s + 2g)* > 0,  such that c1 and c2 satisfy

(9.2)     -(V +V +V ) + 2 (V +v +v 6)    = 0.
             1   3          2  L

These optimality conditions are consistent with the analysis of
optimality in the basic model for the case of r = n/2. Note
that optimality restricts only the sums,  s + 2h   k and s + 2g,
and does not imply restrictions beyond nonnegativity on s, g,
or h individually. For example, anyone of s, g, or h can
be zero, but also all three can be positive.

2.3 Individual Behavior in the Extended Model
     The choice problem for an individual current working couple
in the extended model is to select values for s,       and

to maximize                                     ,   subject   to equa-
tions (5.1-6) .   In   addition to the choice variables, these
constrainfr.s involve the exogenous variable, n, the predetermined
variables_-we, hti w1i                              and h 1—and the
                                                                     and
expectational variables--r 9t÷l'                       r+ir

     With regard to expectations, it seems appropriate to treat
rt, +1, and r÷1 as exogenous, because the individual couple
would not expect its decisions to affect these market—determined
remunerations. The treatment of other expectational variables
should be analogous to the treatment of      in the basic model.
Specifically, the simplifying assumption that the function U
is additively separable in ct1 would imply that
        and ht+2 are independent of the chosen value of
The relations between these expectational variables and the
chosen values of s and ht+i, however, could be a significant
consideration.   In particular, for the cases of interior
solutions, rationality would seem to imply that an increase
      would cause decreases in      and      and increases
         and ht÷2, whereas an increase in ht+1 would rause
                                      — 18 —

decreases in Sb and                  and increases in                       and h+2.
These relations, which the interested reader can easily
rationalize, all reflect the substitutability between saving,
giving to parents, and bequests to children as ways to
provide consumption during retired years.
     Accounting for variability in the expectational variables,
unfortunately, makes the algebra involved is describing
individual behavior much more complex, analogously to the
complication resulting from introducing the variables A
and A in the basic model, without providing much additional
insight into the workings of the model. Consequently, the
analysis that follows treats all of the expectational variables
as constants. The interested reader can work out the more complete
case. With this simplification, and given the nonnegativity restrictions
and the assumption that the partial derivatives of V approach infinity
as c1, c,            c1, c+lF and c+1 approach zero, the first—order
conditions for tlxe solution to this problem require that s, g, and
ht+i satisfy a triple of the following possibie restrictions:

either (10.1)   -    V       +rV
                                t2     0 and 2wt —                2g t > s t
                         1


                             > max [0, —      (ht+i
                                                         -                - 2htI,
    or (10.2)   -    V
                         1+ rtz
                              V <          0 and st = 0,                  and


either (10.3)   -.
                     V       + 2V =    0    and wt - —
                                                     St >
                                                     2                    gt

                                                  rh_i
                             > max [0, ht                    (St1 + 2hti)],
    or (10.4)   -    V       + - V   < 0 and                 =   0,       and


either (10.5)   —            V + rt+1 V =     0     and               (st+2ht) +       > ht+i
                                                                          St+1
                > max [0, 2rh               t+2 —        g2)          -
                                                                            2
                            t+1

    or (10.6)   -            V + r+1 V < 0 and ht+l                             0.
                                   — 19 —

      LetS. G, H, K, R, W, C1, and C2 now denote the steady—state
values that are consistent with the first-order conditions (10.1—6) ,
equations (5.1-6) , and the productivity relations (6.1-2)
Assuming that in a steady state the expectationS-rti              w1,
                     and h+2—-are correct and, hence, are equal,
       r+i
as appropriate, to R, H, G, W, and S, conditions (10.1-6) imply
that R, C1, and 02 satisfy a pair from the following possible
restrictions:

either (11.1)     RV =    V,
     or (11.2)    RV >    V
                     2


     or (11.3)     RV < V, and

either (11.4)     22V =   RV
                               6


                  - V >   RV
     or (11.5)
                  22           6



The applicable pair of these relations implies which of the triples
from conditions (10.1-6) can be relevant in the steady state.
      The important observation to be stressed in the present con-
text is that the sufficient conditions for efficiency and
optimality in the extended model are similar to the analogous
conditions in the basic model. Specifically, conditions (8)
(10.1—6) ,   and (11.1—5) imply the following:

(VIII) Sufficient conditions for K and S + 2G to be efficient
       are that C and C2 satisfy V = V = V  2    6


To derive (VIII) ,   observe that, if C' and 02 satisfy V2 = V    = V
                                                                        6

the pairs of conditions (11.1) and (11.5) , (11.2)   and (11.4)
(11.2) and (11.5) , and (11.3) and (11.4) are obviously inconsistent,
and the pair of conditions (11.3) and (11.5) is also inconsistent,
because it would require R < n/2, but, from conditions (10.1-6) ,
it also implies K = 0 and, hence, R > n/2. Conseauently,
the only possible case from conditions (11.1—5) is that C and C2
                              — 20 —

satisfy the pair of conditions (11.1) and (11.4) and, moreover,
that K and R satisfy R = n/2. In this case, the sum, S + 2H = K,
satisfies the efficiency condition, 1 +     f'
                                            (K/n) = n/2, and
the sum, S + 2G, has an efficient interior value, 2W > S
+ 2G > 0, that satisfies the equivalent conditions (10.1) and
(10.3), with S>0, G>0, and H>0.
     With regard to optimality, conditions (9.1-2) , (10.1—6)
and (11.1—5) imply the following:

(IX) Sufficient conditions for K and S + 2G to be both
     efficient and optimal are that C1 and C2 satisfy
     V2 =V =V 6 and V1 =V =V.
                            5

To derive (IX) , recall the derivation of (VIII) and observe
that, if C1 and C2 satisfy V = V = V    6
                                           and V
                                                  1
                                                     V    V
                                                            5
                              2

conditions   (10.1) and (10.3) are equivalent in the steady state
to condition (9.2)
     These results say that if the marginal utilities that
working couples associate with their own prospective retirement
consumption, their parents' current retirement consumption,
and their children's prospective retirement consumption are
equal, individual behavior is efficient. Specifically, the
steady state that is consistent with individual behavior has
the Golden Rule capital stock. Moreover, if, in addition,
the marginal utilities that working couples associate with
their own current consumption, their parents' past consumption,
and their children's prospective consumption during their
working years are equal, individual behavior is also optimal.
                            — 21 —


3.   Concluding Remarks

     This paper is preliminary in that it does consider a
number of important issues that arise naturally in the present
context. First, the analysis has dealt only with the
description and evaluation of steady states. It has not
considered the stability of steady states or the normative
properties of nonsteady-state paths. Second, the analysis
has assumed fertility to be an exogenous constant, rather than
a choice variable. Willis (1979) analyzes the choice of
fertility in a model in which giving to parents is positive,
but exogenously determined, and there is no Saving.   Third,
the analysis has not considered the possible effects of
government financial policies, such as debt issue and social
security. Questions about the impact of these policies have
motivated the recent work of Barro, Drazen, and Buiter,
referred to above. Fourth, the analysis has abstracted from
investment in human capital, a phenomenon on which DrazenTs
paper focuses. Finally, this paper has made no attempts to
compare the present interpretation that gifts and bequests
involve altruistic behavior with the hypothesis, recently
advanced by Kotlikoff and Spivak (1979), that gifts and bequests
reflect risk—sharing behavior. Each of these issues is the
subject of currently ongoing research.
     What this paper has accomplished can be summarized as
follows: The paper has analyzed the intertemporal efficiency
and optimality of steady states within overlapping—generations
models in which the utility of individual working couples
depends on the consumption of their parents and children as
well as their own consumption. The analysis has considered
both a basic model in which altruistic behavior can take only
the form of gifts of consumption goods from working couples
to their retired parents and an extended model in which
altruistic behavior also can take the form of bequests from
parents to their surviving children. In the basic model,
                             — 22 —

saving only involves storing consumption goods, whereas the
extended model includes capital and neoclassical production.
     The following conclusions from the analysis apply to
both models: An altruistic utility function promotes inter-
temporal efficiency. However, altruism creates an externality
that implies that satisfying the conditions for efficiency
does not insure intertemporal optimality. Nevertheless, if
the utility of working couples is appropriately sensitive at
the margin to their own consumption, their parents'
consumption, and their children's consumption, the steady
state that is consistent with individual behavior is both
efficient and optimal.
                                — 23 —


                              REFE RENC ES


R.J. Barro, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of
       Political Economy, 82, November/December 1974, 1095-1117.
R.J. I3arro, "Reply to Feldstein and Buchanan," Journal of
       Political Economy, 84, April 1976, 343—349.
W.H.   Buiter, "Government Finance in an Overlapping Generations
       Model with Gifts and Bequests," in Social Security Versus
       Private Saving, G.M. von Furstenberg, ed. (Ballinger:
       Cambridge, 1979) , 395—429.
D. Cass and M.E. Yaari, "A Re—examination of the Pure Consumption
       Loans Model," Journal of Political Economy, 74, August 1966,
       353—36 7.

P.A. Diamond, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"
     American Economic Review, 55, December 1965, 1126-1150.
A. Drazen, "Government Debt, Human Capital, and Bequests in a
       Life-Cycle Model," Journal of Political Economy, 86,
       June 1978, 505—516.
L.J. Kotlikoff and A. Spivak, "The Family as an Incomplete
     Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy, 89,
       April 1981, 372—391.
P.A. Samuelson, "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest
     with or without the Contrivance of Money," Journal
     of Political Economy, 66, December 1958, 467—482.

R.J. Willis, "The Old Age Security Hypothesis and Population
     Growth," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
       Paper No. 372, July 1979.
