                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RISK AND RETURN: A NEW LOOK



                       Burton G. Malkiel


                     Working Paper No. 100




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1981




This paper was prepared for the National Bureau of Economic
Research Conference on the Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in
FinaricingU.S. Capital Formation, April 2—3, 1981, Williamsburg,
Virginia. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
project on the Changing Roles of Debt and Equity Finances in the
United States, which is being financed by a grant from the American
Council of Life Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                             LEER CONFERENCE PAPER SERIES

                      Papers Available    from the Conference

                      THE CHANGiNG ROLES OF DEBT AND EQUITY
                       IN FINANCING U.S. CAPITAL FORMATION

                               Williamsburg, Virginia

                                 April 2 and 3, 1981


   Conftrence
     Paper
      No.



    WP 699      "Inflation, Resource Utilization, and Debt and Equity Returns,"
                by Patric H. Hendershott

    WP 700      "Risk and Return: A New Look," by Burton G. Malkiel

    WP 701      "Investment Stratey in an Inflationary Environment," by Zvi Bodie

    WP 702      "Changing Balance Sheet Relationships in the U.S. Manufacturing
                Sector, 1926—77," by John H. Ciccolo, Jr.

    WP 703      "Private Pensions as Corporate Debt," by Martin Feldstein

    WP 704      "Debt and Economic Activity in the United States," by Benjamin
                Fri edrnan




These papers have been submitted to the University of Chicago Bress to be con-
sidered for publication in a volume tentatively titled, The Changing Boles of
Debt and Equity in Financing U.S. Capital Formation, edited by Benjamin Friedman.

Copies of these papers may be obtained by sending $1.50 per copy to Conference
Papers, NEER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138. Please make
checks payable to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Advance payment is
required on orders totaling less than $10.00
                   List of Participants

           THE CHANGING ROLES OF DEBT AND EQUITY
            IN FINANCING U.S. CAPITAL FORMATION

                 Wi1liams1urg, Virginia

                    April 2 and 3, 1981




Name                                  Affiliation
Zvi    Bodie                       Boston University

John H. Ciccolo, Jr.               Boston College

Martin Feldstein                   Harvard University

Benjamin Friedman                  Harvard University
Patric H. Hendershott              Purdue University

Burton Malkiel                     Princeton University
                                                  NBER Working Paper #700
                                                               June 1981



                             Risk and Return: A New Look



                                       ABSTRACT



     One   of   the best documented propositions in the field of finance is

that, on average, investors have received higher rates of return on in-

vestment   securities for bearing greater risk. This paper looks at the
historical evidence regarding risk and return, explains the funda-
mentals of portfolio and asset pricing theory, and then goes on to take
a new   look at the relationship between risk and return using some unex-
plored risk     measures that seem to capture quite closely the actual risks

being valued in the market.

     The paper concludes that the best single risk proxy is not the

traditional beta calculation but rather the dispersion of analysts'

forecasts. Companies for which there is broad consensus with respect

to future earnings and dividends seem to be less risky (and hence have

lower expected returns) than companies for which there is little agreement

among security analysts. It is possible to interpret this result as con-

tradicting modern asset pricing theory, which suggests that total variability

per se will not be relevant for valuation. As is shown in the paper, how-

ever, this dispersion of forecasts could well result from different companies

being particularly susceptible to systematic risk elements and thus the

dispersion measure may be the best individual proxy available to capture

the variety of systematic risk elements to which securities are subject.

                                                  Mr. Burton C. Malkiel
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Princeton University
                                                  Princeton, New Jersey 08544
                                                  (   609) 452—4000
                                                                                        1.




                             RISK AND RETURN: A NEW LOOK

                                           by
                                                       *
                                   Burton G. Malkiel
                            NBER and Princeton University




        One of the best documented propositions in the field of finance is that,

on average, investors have received higher rates of return on investment secur-

ities for bearing greater risk. This paper looks at the historical evidence

regarding risk and return, explains the fundamentals of portfolio and asset

pricing theory, and then goes on to take a new look at the relationship between

risk and return using some unexplored risk measures that seem to capture quite

closely the actual risks being valued in the market.


Some Historical Evidence

         Risk is a most slippery and elusive concept. It1s hard for investors --

let   alone economists --   to   agree on a precise definition.The dictionary defines

risk as the possibility of suffering harm or loss. If I buy One—year Treasury

bills to yield, say, 10 percent and hold them until they mature, I am virtually

certain of earning a 10 percent monetary return before consideration of income

taxes. The possibility of loss is so small as to be considered nonexistent.But

if I hold common stock in my local power and light company for one year on the

basis of an anticipated 12 1/2 percent dividend return, the possibility of loss

increases. The dividend of the company might be cut and, more important, the

market price at the end of the year could be much lower, so that I might suffer

a serious net loss. Risk is the chance that expected security returns will not

materialize and, in particular, that the securities you hold will fall, in price.
                                                                                 2.


       Once academics accepted the idea that risk for investors is related

to the chance of disappointment in achieving expected security returns,

a natural measure suggested itself --   the probable variability or dis-
persion of future returns. Thus, financial risk has generally been

defined as the variance or standard deviation of returns)

       Empirical studies of broad classes of securities confirm the general

relationship between risk and return. The most thorough recent study has been

done by Roger Ibbotson and Rex Sinquefield.2 Their data covered the period 1926

through 1978. The results are shown in the Table 1.




                              TABLE 1 GOES HERE




       A quick glance shows that, over long periods of time, common stocks have,

on average, provided relatively generous total rates of return. These returns,

including dividends and capital gains, have exceeded by a substantial margin

the returns from long-term corporate bonds and U.S. Treasury bills. The stock

returns have also tended to be well in excess of the inflation rate as measured

by the annual rate of increase in consumer prices. The data show, however, that

common stock returns are highly   variEble   as measured by   the   "standard deviation"

and the range of annual returns shown in the last columns of the table.
                                                                              3



Returns from equities have ranged from a gain of over 50 percent (in 1933) to a

loss of almost the same magnitude (in 1931). Clearly, the extra returns that

have been available to investors from stocks have come at the expense of as-

suming considerably higher risk.

       The patterns evident in Ibbotson's and Sinquefield's chart also appear

when the returns and risks of individual stock portfolios are compared.Indeed,

most of the differences that exist in the returns from different mutual funds

can be explained by differences in the risk they have assumed. However, there

are ways in which investors can reduce the .risks they take. This brings us

to the subject of modern portfolio theory.




Reducing Risk: Modern Portfolio Theory

Portfolio theory begins with the premise that all investors are like my wife --

they are risk-averse. They want high returns and guaranteed outcomes. The theory
tells investors how to combinestocks in their portfolios to give them the least

risk possible, consistent with the return they seek.   It also gives a rigorous

mathematical justification for the time-honored investnient maxim that diversifica-

tion is a sensible strategy for individuals who like to reduce their risks. The

basic idea was that portfolios of risky (volatile) stocks can be put together in

such a way as to be less risky than any one of the individual stocks in it. A

simple illustration will make the whole game clear.

       Let's suppose we have an island economy with only two businesses. The

first is a large resort with beaches, tennis courts, a qoif course, and the like.

The second is a manufacturer of umbrellas. Weather affects the fortunes of both.

During sunny seasons the resort does a booming business and umbrella sales

plummet. During rainy seasons the resort owner does very poorly, while the um-

brella manufacturer enjoys high sales and large profits. Table 2
                                                                                4.


shows some hypothetical returns for the two businesses during the    different

seasons.




                                  TABLE 2 GOES HERE




      Suppose that, on average, one-half the seasons are sunny and one-half

are rainy, (i.e., the probability of a sunny or rainy season is 1/2). An

investor who bought stock in the umbrella manufacturer would find that half

the time he earned a 50 percent return and half the time he lost 25 percent

of his investment. On average, he would earn a return of 12 1/2 percent.

This is what we call the investor's expected return. Similarly, invest-

ment in the resort would produce the same results. Investing in either one

of these businesses would be fairly risky, however, because the results are

quite variable and there could be several sunny or rainy seasons in a row.

      Suppose, however, that instead of buying only one security an in-

vestor with two dollars diversified and put half his money in the umbrella

manufacturer's and half in the resort owner's business. In sunny seasons,

 a one-dollar investment in the resort would produce a fifty-cent return,

while a one-dollar investment in the umbrella manufacturer would lose 25

 cents. The investor's total return would be 25 cents (50 cents minus 25

 cents), which   is   12 1/2 percent of his total investment of two dollars.

       Note that during rainy seasons exactly the same thing happens --        only
 the names are changed. Investment in the umbrella manufacturer produces a

 good 50 percent return while the investment in the resort loses 25 percent.

 Acain, however, the diversized investor makes a 12 1/2 percent return on

 his total investment.

       This simple illustration points out the basic advantage of diversi-
                                                                             5.


fication. Whatever happens to the weather, and thus to the island economy,

by diversifying investments over both of the firms an investor is sure of

making a 12 1/2 percent return each year. The trick that made the game work

was that while both companies were risky (returns were variable from year to

year), the companies were affected differently by weather conditions. As

long as there is some lack of parallelism in the fortunes of the individual

companies in the economy, diversification will always reduce risk. In the

present case, where there is a perfect negative relationship between the

companies' fortunes (one always does well when the other does poorly),

diversification can totally eliminate risk.

      Of course, there is always a rub, and the rub in this case is that the

fortunes of most companies move pretty much in tandem. When there is a

recession and people are unemployed, they may buy neither summer vacations

nor umbrellas. Therefore, one should not expect in practice to get the neat

kind of total risk elimination just shown. Nevertheless, since company

fortunes don't always move completely in parallel, investment in a diversified

portfolio of stocks is likely to be less risky than investment in one or

two single securities. While a portfolio of General Motors and its major

steel and tire supplier would not reduce risk much, if at all, a portfolio

of G1 and a defense contractor in a depressed area might reduce risk sub-

stantial ly.

      The example may seem a bit strained, and most investors will realize

that when the market gets clobbered just about all stocks go down. Still,

at least at certain times, some stocks do move against the market. Gold

stocks are often given as an example of securities that do not typically

move in the same direction as the general market. Similarly, international

diversification can reduce risk. The point to realize in setting up a port-
                                                                           .6.


folio is that true diversification depends on having stocks in your portfolio

that are not all dependent on the same economic variables (total spending in

the economy, inflation rates, etc.). Wise investors will diversify their

portfolios not by names or industries but by the determinants that influence

the fluctuations of various securities.




Modelling Risk: The_Capital-Asset PricipgJ1odeJ_ (CAPM)

Portfolio theory has important implications for how stocks are actually

valued. If investors seek to reduce risk in anything like the manner de-

scribed by portfolio theorists, the stock market will tend to reflect these

risk-reducing activities. This brings us to what is called the 'Capital-Asset

Pricing Model.u

      I've mentioned that the reason diversification cannot usually produce

the miracle of risk elimination, as it did in my mythical island economy, is

that usually stocks tend to move up and down together. Still, diversification

is worthwhile ——   it   can eliminate some risks. What the CAPM did was to focus

directly on what part of a security's risk could be eliminated by diversifica-

tion and what part couldn't.

      The theory begins by classifying the sources of the variability of an

individual stock. Part of total risk or variability may be called the

security's ystematic risk and this risk arises from the basic variability

of stock prices in general and the tendency for all stocks to go along with

the general market, at least to some extent. The remaining variability in a

stock's returns is called unsystematic risk and results from factors peculiar

to that particular company, for example, a strike, the discovery of a new

product, and so on.

      Systematic risk, also called market risk, captures the reaction of in-
                                                                              7.

Lividual stocks (or portfolios) to general market swings. Some stocks and

portfolios tend to be very sensitive to market movements. Others are more

 table. This relative volatility or sensitivity to market moves can be

estimated on the basis of the past record, and is popularly known by the

Greek letter beta. The beta calculation is essentially a comparison between

the movements of an individual stock (or portfolio) and the movements of

the market as a whole. It is a numerical description of systematic risk.

        The calculation begins by assigning a beta of I to a broad market

index, such as the NYSE index or the S&P 500. If a stock has a beta of 2,

then on average it swings twice as far as the market. If the market goes up

10 percent, the stock rises 20 percent. If a stock has a beta of 0.5, it

tends to be more stable than the market (it will go up or down 5 percent

t.ihen the market rises or declines 10 percent). Professionals often call

high-beta stocks aggressive investments and label low—beta stocks as defen-

sive.

        Now the important thing to realize is that systematic risk cannot be

eliminated by diversification. It is precisely because all stocks move more

or less in tandem (a large share of their variability is systematic) that

even diversified stock portfolios are risky. Indeed, if you diversified

extremely broadly by buying a share in the S&P index (which by definition

has a beta of 1) you would still have quite variable (risky) returns because

the market as a whole fluctuates widely.

        Unsystematic risk is the variability in stock prices (and, therefore,

in returns from stocks) that results from factors peculiar to an individual

company. Receipt of a large new contract, the finding of mineral resources

on the company's property, labor difficulties, the discovery that the corpo-

ration's treasurer has had his hand in the company till --   all   can make
                                                                                  8.

stock's price move independently of the market. The risk associated with

such variability is precisely the kind that diversification can reduce. The

whole point of portfolio theory was that, to the extent stocks don't move in

tandem all the time, variations in the returns from any one security will

tend to be washed away or smoothed out by complementary variation in the

returns from other securities.

      The following diagram illustrates the important relationship between

diversification and total risk. Suppose we randomly selected securities

for our portfolio that tended on average to be just as volatile as the market.

(The average betas for the securities in our portfolio will always be equal

to 1.) Figure 1 shows that as we add more and more securities the total

risk of our portfolio declines, especially at the start.


                                 FIGURE 1 GOES HERE


      When ten securities are selected for our portfolio, a good deal Of the

unsystematic risk is eliminated and additional diversification yields little

further risk reduction. By the time twenty securities are in the portfolio,

the unsystematic part of risk is substantially eliminated and our portfolio

(with a beta of 1) will tend to move up and down essentially in tandem with

the market.

      Now comes   the key step ii   the   argument. Both   financial   theorists nd
practitioners had   agreed for years that investors should be compensated for

taking on more risk by receiving a higher expected return. Stock prices

must therefore adjust to offer higher returns where more risk is perceived,

to insure that all secudties are held by someone. What is different about

the new theory is the definition and measurement of risk. Before the advent

of the Capital—Asset Pricing Model, it was believed that the return on each
                                                                               9.


security would be related to the total risk inherent in that security. It

as believed that the return from holding a security would vary with the in-

stability of that security's particular performance, that is, with the vari-

ability or standard deviation of the returns it produced. The new theory

says that the total risk of each individual security is irrelevant.    It is

only the systematic component of that total instability that is relevant

for valuation. Because stocks can be combined in portfolios to eliminate

specific risk (see Figure 1), only the undiversifiable or systematic part

of the risk will command a risk premium. Investors will not get paid for

bearing risks that can be diversified away. The only part of total risk

that investors will get paid for bearing is syteniatic risk, the risk that

diversification cannot eliminate. This is the basic logic behind the Capital-

Asset Pricing Model.

       If investors did get an extra return (a risk premium) for bearing

       unsystematic risk, it would turn out that diversified portfolios made

       up of stocks with large amounts of unsystematic risk would give

       larger returns than equally risky portfolios of stocks with less

       unsystematic risk. Investors would snap at these higher returns by

       bidding up the prices of stocks with large unsystematic risk and

       selling stocks with equivalent betas but lower unsystematic risk.

       This would continue until the prospective returns of stocks with the

       same betas were equalized and no risk premium could be obtained for

      bearing unsystematic risk. Thus, the Capital-Asset Pricing Model says

      that returns for any stock (or portfolio) will be related to beta,

       the systematic risk that cannot be diversified away. Any other results

      would be inconsisteritwith the existence of efficient markets.
                                                                                  10.

        The key relationship of the theory is shown in Figure 2. (For the mom-

ent, ignore the dashed line in the diagram.) As the systematic risk (beta)

of an individual stock (or portfolio) increases, so does the return an in-

vestor should expect. If an investor's portfolio has a beta of zero, as

might be the case if all his funds were invested in a very short-term

Treasury bill (beta would be zero since the returns from the certificate

would not vary at ll with swings in the stock market), the investor would

receive some modest rate of return, which is generally called the risk-free

rate of interest.3 As the individual takes on more risk, however, the return

should increase. If the investor holds a portfolio with a beta of 1 (as,

for example, holding a share in one of the broad stock market averages) his

return will equal the general return from common 5tocks. This return has

over    long periods of time exceeded the risk—free rate of interest, but the
investment is a risky one.     In certain periods the return is much less than
the risk—free rate and involves taking substantial losses. This, as we- have

said,    is precisely what is meant by risk.

                                 FIGURE 2 GOES HERE

             Figure 2 shows that a number of different expected returns are

possible simply by adjusting the beta of the portfolio. For example, suppose

an investor put half of her money in a 1-bill and half in a share of the market

averages. In this case would receive a return midway between the risk-free

return and the return from the market and her portfolio would have an average

beta of 0.5.      The theory then asserts very simply that to get a higher average
                                   simply
long-run rate of return one muct /        increase    the beta   of   the portfolio.An

investor can get a portfolio with a beta larger than 1       either by buying high-

beta    stocks or by purchasing a portfolio with average volatility on margin.
                                                                            11.




T3sts of the CAPM Model

       Tests of the Capital—Asset Pricing Model have tried to ascertain if

security returns are in fact directly related to beta, as the theory asserts.

The early evidence seemed to support the theory. The relationship between the

performance of a large number of professionally managed funds and the beta
                                 generally
measure of relative volatility was /       consistent with the theory. The
portfolio returns have varied pcsitively with beta in roughly a straight-

line manner, as is shown in Figure 3, so that over the long pull, high-beta

portfolios have provided larger total returns that low-risk ones.


                              FIGURE 3 GOES HERE



      Unfortunately, however, as more evidence accumulated, a number of dis-

quieting results came to light. First, the measured actual risk returnre—

lationships found in the market appear to be much flatter than those impUed

by the theory. In Figure 2, for example, the actual measured relationships

have usually looked more like the dashed line than the solid line, which

represents the theoretical relationship. There seems to be a phenomenon

much like that found at the race track where low risk stocks earn higher

returns and high risk stocks earn lower returns than the theory precicts.

(In the race track, long shots seem to go off at much lower odds than their

true probability of winning would indicate, whereas favorites go off at higher

odds than is consistent with their winning percentages.)
                                             even
      The divergence of theory from evidence is! more striking in the short

run. For some short periods, it may happen that risk and return are negativejy

related. In 1972, for example, which was an up market year, it turned out that
                                                                             12.


safer (lower beta) stocks went up more than more volatile securities. Fortune

magazine commented dryly on this well-publicized failure, "The results defied

the textbooks." What happened was that in 1972 styles changed in Wall Street

as institutional investors eschewed younger, more speculative companies, the

"faded ladies" of the late 1960s, and became much more enamored of the highest

quality, most stable leading corporations in the so-called "first tier" of

stocks. It became clear that beta could not be used to guarantee investors a
                                                                          even
predictable   performance over periods   of a few months or even a year. And/over
some longer periods of time --     when the market has produced a positive rate

of return ——   investors   have actually been penalized for taking on more risk.

       Another problem the theory encounters is the instability of measured

betas. The beta of a stock is measured on the basis of historical relation-

ships between returns for that stock and the returns from the market. It

turns out that these past betas for individual stocks are relatively poor

predictors of future betas. While the problem is less severe for portfolios,

which are averages of many stocks, it is clear that past betas are quite

imperfect estimates of future volatility numbers. Moreover, as Richard Roll4

has pointed out, it is impossible to observe the market's return against

which we measure beta.       In principle, the market includes all stocks, a variety

of   other financial instruments, and even norimarketable assets. The use of
the Standard &   Poor's    Index (or any other index) to represent "the market" is
the use of a very imperfect market proxy at best. Arid, when we measure
"market   risk" using imperfect proxies, we may obtain quite imperfect esti—
mates of market sensitivity. Roll showed that by changing the market index

against   which betas are measured, one can obtain quite different measures of

the risk level of individual stocks or portfolios and thus quite different

predictions of future returns. It is clear then that in judging risk, beta
                                                                                13.

cannot be a substitute for brains.



Toward a Broader Method of Risk Measurement

      To understand the logic of the risk measurement system proposed here,

it is important to remember the correct insight underlying the Capital-Asset

Pricing Model. The only risk that investors should be compensated for bear-

ing is the risk that cannot be diversified away. Only systematic risk will

command a risk premium in the market. But, the systematic elements of risk

in particular stocks and portfolios may be far more complicated than can be

captured by a beta measure --   the   tendency of stocks to move more or less

than any particular stock index.

      Let's take a look at several other potential systematic risk elements.

Changes in National Income, for example, may affect returns from individual

stocks in a systematic way. This was mentioned in the illustration of a

simple island economy used earlier. During a recession consumers might buy

neither   vacations nor umbrellas. Changes in National Income also mirror the
changes in the personal income available to individuals and    so the systematic

relationship   between security returns and salary income can be expected to
be important elements in individual behavior. For example, the worker in a

Ford plant will find that a holding of Ford common stock is particularly

risky since job layoffs and poor returns from Ford stock are likely to occur

at the same time. Changesiri National Income may also reflect changes in

other forms of property income and may therefore be relevant for institutional

portfolio managers as well.

      Changes in interest rates also systematically affect the returns from

individual stocks and are important nondiversifiable risk elements. To the
                                                                             14.

extent that stocks tend to suffer as interest rates go up, equities are a

risky investment and those stocks that are particularly vulnerable to in-

creases in the general level of interest rates are especially risky. Since

fixed income securities are included in the portfolios of many institutional

investors, this systematic risk factor is particularly important for some of

the largest investors in the market. Clearly then, investors who think of risk

in its broadest and most meaningful sense will be sensitive to the tendency

of stocks to be affected by changes in interest rates.

      Changes in the rate of inflation will similarly tend to have systematic

influences on the returns from common stocks. This is so for at least two

reasons. First, an increase in the rate of inflation tends to increase

interest rates and thus may lead to lower prices of equities as we just dis-

cussed. Second, increases in inflation may squeeze profit margins for certain

groups of companies such as public utilities who often find that rate increases

lag behind increases in their costs. On the other hand, inflation may benefit

the prices of some common stocks, such as those in natural resource industries.

Thus, again there are important systematic relationships between stock returns

and economic variables that may not be captured adequately by a simple beta

measure of risk.

      The final new risk variable introduced is a measure of the dispersion

among Wall Street security analysts concerning the future earnings and divi-

dend growth of the company. If analysts differ greatly in their growth fore-

casts for a company, we shall consider the stock to be relatively risky. At

first glance, this forecast dispersion variable may seem like a measure of

total variability for a company --   precisely   the kind of measure that was used

before the advent of the Capital-Asset Pricing iodel. While such an inter-
                                                                               15.


pretation is possible, the dispersion of analysts forecasts may actually serve

as a particularly useful proxy for a variety of systematic risks. The fol-

lowing illustration will explain why.

        Suppose we had two companies, one a steel company that is extremely

sensitive to systematic influences in the economy, the other a pharmaceutical

firm, that is quite insensitive to economic conditions. It may be that Wall

Street analysts agree completely on how economic conditions will affect the

two companies, but the analysts may differ greatly on their economic fore-

casts. If this were so, there could be a big dispersion in earnings fore-

casts for the steel company (because of the differences in economic fore-

casts   and the sensitivity of the company to economic conditions) and very
small differences in   forecasts    in the drug company (because economic conditions

riiay have little effect on that company).

        Table 3 illustrates the situation. Analyst 1 is optimistic about real

growth and convinced that inflation and interest rates will fall. Analyst 2

predicts sluggish real growth but believes that inflation and interest rates

will remain high.

                                   TABLE 3 GOES HERE


The   analysts may agree   completely on how economic conditions affect the two

companies. Nevertheless, they can differ in their earnings forecasts only

because their economic forecasts differ and the two companies are not equally

sensitive to these economic conditions. The steel company is very sensitive

to GNP growth because it affects sales, inflation because it affects raw

materiaLprices,     and interest rates because they affect borrowing costs. Thus,
analyst 1 sees strong earnings growth for the      steel   company while analyst 2
predicts a very weak performance. As for tIedrug company, since, by assump-
                                                                               16.

tion,   it is relatively unaffected by economic conditions, the analysts agree

on their earnings forecasts despite differences in their economic forecasts.

The important point to note about this illustration is that the company for

which the forecasts differed was the company most sensitive to systematic

risk factors, i.e., the company with the greatest systematic sensitivity to

economic conditions. Hence, differences in analysts forecasts may be a most

useful proxy for systematic risk in the broadest sense of the term.



Some Statistical Tests

        It is possible to test statistically the influence of variable risk

factors on anticipated rates of return for different common stocks. We

hypothesize that stocks with larger systematic risks ought to promise in-

vestors a higher expected rate of return --      the bigger the risk the larger
should be the reward.5 Several alternative measures of systematic risk

were used in the analysis:

        1) Market Risk

             Market risk is measured by beta, the historical sensitivity of

        the stock to swings in the overall market index. Stocks very sensitive

        to fluctuations in the overall-market are riskier and therefore should

        provide higher anticipated rates of return.

        2) Economic—Activity Risk

             This risk measures the sensitivity of an individual stock to move-

        ments in the level of National Income.     It is estimated on the basis

        of past sensitivity of a security's return to changes in National Income.

        Stocks    that are more sensitive to fluctuations in econoniic activity will
        have more systematic risk and hence ought to offer a larger rate of
        return.
                                                                            17.


     3) Inflation Risk

          Stocks which tend systematically to produce very poor returns when

     inflation accelerates are considered to have large systematic risk with

     respect to inflation. Hence, stocks with greater inflation risk should

     offer a higher anticipated rate of return.

     4) Interest-Rate Risk

          Stocks which are extremely sensitive to interest rates also contain

     greater systematic risk. Alternatively, stocks that do well when in-

     terest rates rise would be particularly valuable in portfolios which con-
                                            th t
     tam both stocks and bonds. Thus, stocks/are particularly sensitive to

     change in market interest rates should be considered riskier and hence

     command a larger prospective rate of return.

     5) Dispersion of Forecasts

         As indicated above, this risk variable may serve as a good proxy for

     a variety of systematic risk. The larger the dispersion of forecasts, the

     larger the anticipated return ought to be to the holder of securities.

      The hypothesis to be tested is that expected returns on individual

stocks should be related to a variety of risk variables.       In order to perform

the test, however, we reed some way   of   measuring expected returns on individual

stocks. We also need expectational data on the forecasts of security analysts

from which we can measure the forecast dispersion mentioned above. Fortunately,

a long standing study done at Princeton's Financial Research Center has

provided the expectational data we need. For each year during the 1960s, data

were collected from a number of leading investment houses on forecasts of the

long—run growth of dividends and earnings for a substantial sample of invest-

ment grade issues. We also obtained similar data for the end of 1980 from
                                                6
the Institutional Brokerage Estimate System         (IBES) of the investment firm
                                                                             18.

of   Lynch, Jones, and Ryan. The IBES provided estimates of long-run earnings

growth as well as the dispersion of forecasts.

        Anticipated rate of returns 'n individual common stocks were derived

from the standard dividend discount valuation model .   According   to that model

the worth of a common stock is equal to the present value of the future

stream of'dividends an investor can expect to receive from that stock. It

turns out that this model has a very simple implication. The expected rate

of return on any stock can be derived by summing the dividend yield of the

stock and the long-run expected growth rate of the earnings and dividends

per share. An example will make the calculations clear. American Telephone

and Telegraph is selling today at a dividend yield of approxiniately 10 1/2

percent. The average Wall Street forecast for the long-run expected growth

rate of dividends is 6 percent. It will then turn out that a long-run holder

of AT&T common stock can expect a 16 1/2 percent rate of return from.holding

AT&T stock. This is made up of a 10 1/2 percent dividend yield plus a6 per-

cent growth rate.7

        We have now discussed the measurement of all the variables used in the

study as well as the hypothesis to be tested. We turn next to the results of

the analysis. Table 4 shows the statistical relationship between expected

rates   of return for a sample of individual stocks and the various risk
measured listed in column 1. The second column presents the pairwise cor-
relation coefficients between the expected return numbers and the alternative


                                 TABLE 4 GOES HERE
                                                                           19.

measures of risk. The correlation coefficient is a statistic that takes on

values between zero and (plus or minus) one. A correlation coefficient of

(plus) one indicates perfect (positive) correlation between the variables,

while a correlation coefficient of zero indicates no relationship whatsoever.

While the correlation coefficients in column 2 are not terribly high they are

statistically significant in most instances. The results do indicate that

each of these risk variables does seem to be important in explaining the

structure of anticipated returns. The last column shows the t-statistic for

the regression coefficient for each of the risk measures. In interpreting

these results a handy rough rule is that any t-statistic larger than 2 in-

dicates a statistically significant relationship. The larger the t-statistic,

the stronger the relationship.

        While the traditional beta measure of risk does seem to be related to

expected returns in the manner described by the theory, it appears that there

are a variety of systematic risk influences on individual stocks and portfolios.

Systematic susceptibility to economic conditions as measured by changes in

National Income as well as sensitivity to changes in interest rates and in

the rate of inflation all seem to play an important role in explaining dif-

ferences in expected returns. This can be seen by looking at the correlation

coefficients relating each risk measure to expected returns and by examining

the t-values. The fact that so many of the t-values are statistically sig-

 nificant   in the table suggests that several systematic risk influences clearly
 influence expected returns. Moreover, when several of these systematic risk
 influences are used together, a far better explanation of differences in ex-
 pected returns is found than can be obtained 'sing any single measure alone.
 This can be seen by comparing the multiple correlation coefficients in    Table

 5   with the single variable correlations shown   in Table4 .   While not shown

                                 TABLE 5 GOES HERE
                                                                             20.


in   the table, it should be noted that several of the risk variables were
statistically significant    in each year. This indicates that several systematic

risk   elements influence expected security returns.
        If,   however, we wanted for simplicity to select the one risk measure

that is most closely related to expected returns, the traditional beta measure

would probably not be our first choice. The best sinqle risk proxy appears

to be the dispersion of analysts forecasts. This risk measure generally

produced the highest correlations with expected returns and the highest t-

values in Table 4. Companies for which there is broad consensus with respect

to future earnings and dividends seem to be less risky (and hence have lower

expected returns) than companies for which there is little agreement among

security analysts. It is possible to interpret this result as contradicting

modern asset pricing theory, which suggests that total variability per se will

not be relevant for valuation. As we have shown, however,     this dispersion
of   forecasts could well result from different companies being particularly

susceptible to systematic risk elements and thus our dispersion measure may

be the best individual proxy available to capture the variety of systematic

risk elements to which securities are subject.



Implications of the Analysis

        The quest for better risk measures is not simpjy an amusing exercise

that acconiplisies only the satisfaction of permitting academics to play with

their   computers. It has important implications    for protecting investors.

A good illustration of how a better understanding of the many facets of risk

can aid investors is provided by the recent fascination with so-called yield-

tilted index funds, which gained a considerable following in the investment

community by the 1980s. A yield—tilted index fund is a fund that tried to
                                                                                   21


match closely the general    composition   of   one of   the broad stock indices

sucn as the S&P 500 stock index, but whose portfolio is tilted toward

relatively high yield stocks. Such a fund has been especially recommended

for tax-exempt investors.

       The reasoning behind the yield-tilted index fund seemed appealingly

plausible. Since dividends are generally taxed more highly than capital

gains and since the market equilibrium is presumably achieved on the basis

of after-tax returns, the equilibrium pre—tax returns for stocks that pay

high dividends   ought to be higher than for securities which produce lower
dividends and correspondingly higher capital gains, hence, the tax—exempt

investor should specialize in buying high-dividend paying stocks. In order

to avoid the assumption of any greater risk than is involved in buying the

market index, however, this tax-exempt investor was advised to purchase a

yield—tilted index fund; that is, a very broadly diversified portfolio of

high—dividend paying stocks that mirrors the market index in the sense that

it has a beta coefficient precisely equal to one.

       Even on a priori grounds one might question tile logic of the yield-

tilted index fund. Many of the largest investors in the market are tax-

exempt (such as pension and endowment funds) and other investors (such as

corporations) actually pay a higher tax on capital gains than on dividend

income.9 Thus, it is far from clear that many of the most important investors

in the stock market prefer to receive income through capital gains rather

than   through dividend payments. But apart from these a priori arguments, the
statistical   results   just reviewed can be interpreted as providing another

argument against the yield-tilted index fund.

        If the traditional beta calculation does not provide a full description

of systematic risk, the yield-tilted index fund may well fail to mirror the
                                                                           22.

market index. Specifically, during periods when inflation and interest rates

rise, high-dividend stocks may be particularly vulnerable. Public-utility

common stocks are a good example. While they are known as "low-beta stocks,

they are likely to have high systematic risk with respect to interest rates

and inflation. This is so not only because they are good substitutes for

fixed-income securities, but also because public utilities are vulnerable to

a profits squeeze during periods of rising inflation because of regulatory

lags and increased borrowing costs. Hence, the yield—tilted index fund with

beta equal to one may not mirror the market index when inflation accelerates.

       The actual experience of yield-tilted index funds during the 1979-80

period was far from reassuring. The performance of these funds was    signif-
icantly   worse than that of the market. Of course, we should not reject a
model simply because of its failure over any specific short—term period.
Nevertheless,    I believe that an understanding of the wider aspects of

systematic risk, such as analyzed here, would have helped prevent what-turned

out to be (at least over the short term) some serious investment errors.


Conclusion

        I have argued here that no single measure is likely to capture adequately

the variety of systematic risk influences on individual stocks and portfolios.

Returns are sensitive to general market swings, to changes in interestrates

and in the rate of inflation, to changes in National Income and, undoubtedly,

to   other   economic factors as well. Moreover, if one were to select the best

individual risk estimate, the traditional beta measure would probably not be

our first choice. The dispersion of analysts forecasts seems to have a closer

relationship with expected returns and may be the best single measure of

systematic risk available.
                                                       Burton G. Malkiel




*
 The   research   reported in this paper has been supported by the NBER, the

Institute for Quantitative Research in Finance, the John Weinberg Founda-

tion, and the Princeton Financial Research Center. As indicated in Note 5

the empirical tests reported at the end of the paper are taken from a joint

study with John G. Cragg of NBER and the University of British Columbia.
1Variance is defined as the average squared deviation of the (periodic)

investment returns from their average. The square root of the variance is

the standard deviation and is also often used to measure variability and,

thus, risk. While it is true that only downward surprises constitute

risk, as long as the distribution of returns is symmetric, a variance

measure will serve as a good proxy for the chance of disappointment.
2Roger G. Ibbotson and Rex A. Sinquefield, 'Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and

Inflation: Historical Returns (1926-1978)," The Financial Research

Foundation, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, 1979.
30f course, the yield from a Treasury bill is risk free only in a nominal

sense. An investor will be guaranteed a certain money rate of return from

the investment but his/her real rate of return will be uncertain. The

risk-return relationships described here concern relationships between

nominal returns before inflation and before taxes.
4Richarci Roll, "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests; Part I: On

Past and Potential Testability of the Theory," Journal of Financial

Economics, Vol. 4, blarch 1977, pp. 129—176.
5A formal theoretical justification for the   hypothesis tested can be found

in   John G. Cragg and Burton G. Malkiel's "Expectations and the   Valuation of

Shares," National Bureau of Ecorioniic esearch Working Paper #471, Cambridge,
April 1980. See also S.A. Ross, "The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset

Pricing," Journal of Economic Theory,   Vol. 13,   December 1976, pp. 341-360.
6Data received from Institutional Brokerage Estimate System of the invest-

ment firm of Lynch, Jones, and Ryan.
                                                                       does not
71f we assume that the price-earnings multiple and dividend yield

change,   even a short-run holder can expect the same 16 1/2 percent rate of
return. This is so because by assumption the    stock's value will grow at 6

                                                                 1-lence, an in-
percent   because of the increase in dividends and   earnings.

dividual selling AT&T stock a year from now would realize 6 percent appre-

ciation as well as a 10 1/2 percent dividend return. While not reported

here, anticipated rates of return were also derived from a somewhat dif-

ferent version of the standard valuation model that allowed for variable

long-term growth rates. The results were quite similar to those obtained

 from the simple model and only the results from the standard model are

 reported here.
    general, the correlations are not as close for 1980. 1980 used a dif-

ferent data set and is therefore not directly comparable. The general

findings for 1980 are similar, however.
9For corporate investors, 85 percent of dividend income is exc]uded from

taxable income while capital gains are taxed at normal gains rates.
                                     REFERENCES


Ibbotson, Roger G. and Sinquefield, Rex A. 1979. "Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and

  Inflation: Historical Returns (1926-1978)," The Financial Research Founda-

  tion, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.

Malkiel, Burton G. and Cragg, John G.     1980. "Expectations and the Valuation

  of Shares," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 11471,

  Cambridge, MA, April.

Ross, Stephen. 1976. "The Arbitrage Theory of Capital Asset Pricing,"

 Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 13, December, pp. 341-360.

Roll, Richard. 1977.      "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests;

  Part I: On Past and Potential Testability of the Theory," Journal of

 Financial Economics, Vol. 4, F'larch, pp. 129-176.
                                                                                                            Burton G. 1al!ie1



                                                                                 Table 1

                                                 • Se'ected 1cformance Statistics: 1926—la

          •
                                   •
                                                Annual     Number of Number of Highest Lowest St&n!ad               .

      .            .                   .       (geometric)   years       years    annual  annual   deviat!nn
          ••   .                   :            mean rate returns are returns are return  return of annual
  Serià                .
                               •
                                                of return positive 'negative (and year) (and year) returns Distribution
  Common stocks                                    8.9        35          18      54.0%   —43.3      22.4
                                                                                        (1933)     (1931)             eILJl;1
  Long.terrn corporate bonds                      4.0         43            10            18.4      —8.1       5.8
                                                                                        (1970)     (1969)
                                           •

  U.S. Treasury bills                             2.5        52             1              8.0       —0.0       2.1
                                                    .                   •
                                                                                        (1974)     (1940)         .
  Consumer Price Index

2/—                        —
                                                  2.5         43         10


 SoocE: Roger G. Ibbotson and Rcx A. Sinquefieid. Sloth, I3op4, BIfr. and 1njta1iot
                                                                                    •   ,
                                                                                    • (1946)
                                                                                            18.2   —10.3.
                                                                                                   (1932)             __
                                   Burton G. 1a1kiel


                Table 2




               Umbrella Manufacturer         Resort Owner
Rainy Season              50%                     -25%
Sunny Season          -25%                         50%
                                             Table 3




                       How Economic Forecasts Affect Earnings Forecasts

          Economic Forecast          Steel Company Forecast    Drug Company Forecast
          GNP up sharply            Sales up                   Sales up whatever happens.o GNP
Analyst   Inf1ation: down           Raw material prices down   Uses few raw materials--no effect
   1      Interest rates: down      Borrowing costs down       No borrowing--no effect

                                    Strong earnings growth     Strong earnings growth
          GNP no growth             Sales flat                 Sales up whatever happens to GNP
Analyst   Inflation: remains high   Raw material prices up     Uses few raw materials--no effect
   2      thtërest rates: remain                               No borrowing--no effect
                                    Borrowing dosts up
           high                                                                         -

                                    Weak earnings growth       strong earnings growth
                                                  Table 4
                                    of Risk Measures and Expected Returns
                          Association
                (Correlation coefficients and t-values of regression coefficients)
                                                                  —
       MARKET   RISK                                                            INTERiS?      DISPERSIONO
                                                  INFLATION_RISK            R2Th RISK         2-N2LYSIS FORECASPS
         BE2
       Corr.                   Corr.              Corr.                   Corr.               Corr.
                                                  Coef.     I'-   value   Coef.     P-value   CoefT-va1ue
YEAR   Coef. T-value       -   Coef.T-value

1961   .32       3.6            .32    .98         .11       1.31         .          o.6       .25     2.57
       .26                      .29     3.8L       .08       1.03         .07        0.93      .LJi.   6.30
 962              3.32
       •OL1       0.55          .21     2.70       .10       1.29         .10        1.22      .28     3•7L.
1963
       .13        1.65          .22     2.87       .18       2.2k         .22        2.89      .12     5,95
1964
                  3.79          .26     3   .L2    .21i      3.17         .25        3.31      •L7     6.97
1965   .29
                                .25     3.27       •)40      5.L1.O       •37        L..9O     .22     2.79
1966   .39        5.35
1967   .31        3.)49         .30     3.85       •147      6.59         .43        5.7k      .20     2.51i.
1968   .27        3.35          .32     3.91       •]49      6.sO         .39        4.97      .7      12e86


1980   .27        1 .56         .21    3.24        .16        2.56        .05        0.78      .31      5.29
                                                                                                                    '1
                                                                                                                    rt
                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                    (t
                                      Burtcn G. ia1kie1


                   Table   5

M3LTIPLE CORELION COEFFICIENTS USING
   LL   FIVE RISK VARIABLES TOGETHER




                        Multiple
                       Correlation
           Year

           1961

           1962
                               .
                       Coefficient



                               •1.9


           1963                .37
           l964                ,52
           .1965

           1966                j4.5

           1967                .5)4

           1968                .80

           1980                .38
                              Figure 1

               How Diversification Reduces Risk

Risk of Portfolio
St.aridard Deviation of Return)




                        Total Risk


                                   Unsystematic Risk


                                                                Systematic Risk

                                                       I
                                   I



                                                           Number of
                                  10                       Securities in
                                                           Portfolio
                           Figure 2




       Risk     and Return According to the Capital-Asset
                          Pricing Mdel—-
        Rate of Return




                                                         Theoretical Relationship



 Return from                                             Actual Rei.Etionship in
   Market                                                  Many Studies



Rhk.Iree Rate




                0                      1                        •2
                                                 Systematic Risk (Beta)
  * Those who remember their high school algebra will recall that any
 straight line can be written as an equation. The equation for the
  straight line in the diagram is
  Rate of Return Risk-free Rate + Beta (Return from Market — Risk-
                               free Rates
 The equation says that the return you get on any stock
 or portfolio increases directly with the beta value you
 assume.
                                                              Figure 3



                                           -
              Avorate Annual R,(urn
              %A.
                      -




                                                                /
              12



                      —




--   -   -.   •                       Inco     Funds
                                               0                 ton-Tecm Growth Funds

                                   Gro4hafld              F
                  6                 Income funds A c Stocks (SaP 500)

                          Batznced Funds
                          (Stocks and Bonds)D 0 9 Insurance Co. Portfolios




                                                       1.0                               20

                                           Risk (Bets)


                                  Average Annual Return            Risk: Selected
                      Institutional Investors (14 Yearc, 1965—1978).

                      5(ouKCc: Buck Consultants,   !nc.
