                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIRS




                PRIVATE PENSIONS AS CORPORATS DEBT



                        Martin Feldstein

                      Working Paper No. 103




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF C0NOMIC RESNAECH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambrilge MA 02138
                            June 1981




This paper was prepared for the National Bureau of Economic
Research Conference on the Changing Roles of Debt and Equity in
Financing U.S. Capital Formation, April 2—3, 1981, Williamsburg,
Virginia. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
project on the Changing Roles of Debt und Equity Finances in the
United States, which is being financed by a grant from the American
Council of Life Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Econor:iic Research.
                           LEER CONFERENCE PAPER SEP IES

                     Papers Available from the Conference

                     THE_CHIIGING POLES OF DEBT PND EQUITY
                      IN FINANCING U.S._CAPITAL FORMATION

                             Williamsburg, Virginia

                               April 2 and 3, 1981


   Conference
     Paper
      No.



    WP 699      "Inflation, Resource Utilization, and Debt and Equity Returns,"
                by Patric H. Hendershott

    WP 700      "Risk and Return: A New Look," by Burton 0. Malkiel

    WP 701      "Investment Strater in an Inflationary Environment," by Zvi Bodie

    WP 702      "Changing Balance Sheet Relationships in the U.S. Manufacturing
                Sector, 1926—77," by John H. Ciccolo, Jr.

    WP 703      "Private Pensions as Corporate Debt," by Martin Feldstein

    WP 701      "Debt and Economic   Activity in the United States," by   Benjamin
                Friedman




These papers have been submitted to the University of Chicago Press to be con-
sidered for publication in a volume tentatively titled, The Changing Boles of
Debt and Equity in Financing U.S. Capital Formation, edited by Benjamin Friedman.

Copies of these papers may be obtained by sending $1.50 per copy to Conference
Papers, NEER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138. Please make
checks payable to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Advance payment is
required on orders totaling less than $10.00
                     List of Participants

           THE CHANGING BOLES OF DEBT AND EQUITY
            IN FiNANCING U.S. CAPITAL FORMATION

                 Williamsturg, Virginia

                     April 2 and 3, 1981




Name                                    Affiliation

Zvi    Bodie                          Boston University

John H. Ciccolo, Jr.                 Boston College

Martin   Feldstein                   Harvard University

Benjamin Friedman                    Harvard University

Patric   H. Hendershott              Purdue University
Burton 1kie1                         Princeton University
                                                NBER Working Paper f7O3
                                                             June 1981




                                    Summary


                      Private Pensions as Corporate Debt


           This paper begins by examining the ways in which pension liabil-

ities are and are not like corporate bonds. Some conceptual issues involved

in valuing future pension obligations are then discussed.

          The second section considers the advantage to firms & fully funding

their pension obligations and the reasons why many firms nevertheless choose to

have unfunded obligations. The third section then summarizes the results of

research on the effect of unfunded pension liabilities on the equity value of

firms.

          The first three sections thus consider the role of pensions at the

level of the individual firm. The two sections that follow focus on the current

and future role of pensions in the national economy. More specifically, section

4 examines the effect of private pensions on the nation's saving rate, paying

special attention to the implication of unfunded pension obligations. The fifth

section then discusses the impact of inflation on the private pension system and

the likely future for indexed and unindexed private pensions.


                                              Martin Feldstein
                                              National Bureau of Economic Research
                                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                              Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                              (617) 868—3905
                      Private Pensions as Corporate Debt

                                Martin Feldstein*


         Private pensions are now a central feature of the asset and liability

structure of the American econonr. More than half of all employees have some

form of pension coverage. The value to employees of their prospective pension

benefits is a major part of their total financial wealth and generally repre-

sents the only way in which these individuals hold the debt of American cor-

porations. Indeed, since the great majority of American households have little

or no other financial assets,    the substitution of future pension benefits for

current wages is their only contribution to financing the accumulation of

non—residential capital.

         Similarly, the promised pension benefits represent major liabilities

of corporations. For many corporations, the present actuarial value of these

future benefits constitutes a greater liability than the conventional debts in

the form of bonds, commercial paper, and bank loans. By the end of 1981, the

aggregate value of just the vested pension liabilities of non—financial cor-

porations will probably exceed the corresponding value of all of their other net

liabilities.



*president, National Bureau of Economic Research, Professor of Economics,
Harvard University. This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on Debt and
Equity, April 2 and 3, 1981. The paper is in part a summary of two earlier
technical studies that were done in the current project and presented in
Feldstein (1980) and Feldstein and Seligman (1980). The paper also draws on
Feldstein (1978),

1 In 1912, nearly half of personal tax returns reported no interest and
dividend income and more than 15% reported interest and dividend income of less
than $500. These figures are quite consistent with survey data that indicate
that in that year more than half of the households with a head under the age of
65 held no financial assets and 80% held financial assets of less than $5000.
See Feldstein and Feenberg (1981).


05048l
                                       —2—

          It is worthwhile therefore, as part of the NBER general study of the

changing character and role of debt and equity in the American econonr, to

examine the private pension as a form of corporate debt. This paper begins with

an analysis of the ways in which the pension liabilities are and are not like

corporate bonds and then considers some of the conceptual issues involved in

valuing future pension benefits. In the second section, I discuss the advantage

to firms of fully funding their pension obligations and reasons why many firms

nevertheless choose to have unfunded obligations. The third section summarizes

the results of research on the effect of unfunded pension liabilities on the

equity value of firms.

          The first three sections thus consider the role of pensions at the

level of the individual firm. In the two sections that follow, I focus on the

current and future role of pensions in the national economy-. More specifically,

section 14 examines the effect of private pensions on the nation's saving rate,

paying special attention to the implications of unfunded pension obligations.

The fifth section then discusses the impact of inflation on the private pension

system and the likely future for indexed and unindexed private pensions.

          I should emphasize that the ideas presented in this paper are more in

the nature of a progress report than a finished body of research. The final

section of the paper comments briefly on a number of questions that remain to be

investigated.


1.   Evaluating Pension Liabilities

          The typical pension plan is a corporate promise to pay retirement bene-

fits based on the retiree's number of years of employment and his level of ear-.

flings during his immediate pre—retirement years. Although an employee generally
                                         —3—



 forfeits any claim to benefits if he leaves the company after only a few years of
 employment, the benefits of an employee who     stays   with the firm for some minimum
number of years become "vested," i.e. , the employee becomes entitled to bene-
 fits even   if he subsequently leaves the   company before retirementS age. Firms
can set aside tax deductible funds to meet these vested future benefits obliga-

tions and the income on these assets is not taxed to either the corporation or

the pension plan itself. Some firms fund all of their vested pension obliga-

tions, but many do not.

            Because the promise to pay future pension benefits is like the promise

to pay interest and principal, a pension obligation is similar in many ways to

an outstanding corporate bond. This is particularly true when the promised

benefit is fixed in nominal terms, as it generally is when an employee is

already retired. For an employee who is still working, the level of future

pension benefits is not fixed but depends on future earnings. But even for such

current employees, the level of vested benefits is fixed in nominal terms.

           There are, however, a number of significant differences. First, pen-

sion obligations are less visible. IJnlike corporate bonds, the pension obliga-

tions are not recorded on the corporate balance sheet. Present accounting rules

require    only that firms indicate the extent of their unfunded pension benefits
in the notes that accompany the balance sheet. Although this information must be
provided   in the annual 10—K report that is filed with the Securities and

Exchange Commission and that is available to the public, there is no requirement

to include any information about pension obligations in the firm's annual report

to its shareholders.
                                        _14_



         Second, pension obligations are more flexible. Although the ERISA

(Employee Retirement Income Security Act) rules require firms to follow a

policy of funding all new pension obligations within 30 years (and all pre-

vious pension obligations in ho   years),   firms have considerable discretion about

timing in the choice of a specific funding plan. Moreover, if a firm experien-

ces temporary financial difficulties, getting permission to delay funding is

both easier than postponing debt service and likely to have fewer serious con-

sequences for the firm.

         Third, the consequences for the firm of not being able to meet its pen-

sion obligations are also limited by government guarantee. If the pension plan

or the company becomes bankrupt, the pension obligations become the respon-

sibility of the federally financed Pension Benefits Guarantee Corporation (PBGC)

which has recourse to the firm only to the extent of 30% of the firm's equity.

         The flexibility of timing and the PBGC guarantee reduce the value of

the pension obligation relative to a bond with the same potential annual cash

outlay. How much the flexibility and guarantee are worth depends upon the cir-

cumstances of the particular firm, with a greater effect the less sound the

firm's financial position. In the remainder of this section, I shall ignore

both of these features, implicitly assuming that the firm's position is so

strong that they are irrelevant.

         There is a fundamental difference in the tax treatment of bonds and

pension obligations that has an important quantitative effect on the valuation

of pension obligations although it does not imply a qualitative difference

between bonds and pensions: all the payments made to a pension fund are tax

deductible while the principal repayments on a bond are not tax deductible. If
                                         —5—


the corporation pays a marginal tax rate of 50% (including both federal and

state taxes) a $1 payment of pension benefits by the firm reduces the firm's

after tax profit by only fifty cents. Similarly, a $1 contribution to the pen-

sion fund to meet future benefit obligations also reduces the firms tax by

fifty cents and therefore only reduces its after tax earnings or assets by fifty

cents. In contrast, repaying $1 of corporate debt involves no tax reduction and

therefore reduces assets by a full dollar.          It is wrong therefore to regard pen-

sion liabilities as equivalent to bonds or loan balances. Indeed, it may be

more accurate to treat each dollar of ordinary debt obligations as equal to $2

of net pension obligations. Equivalently, it is important to measure pension

obligations in terms of their net-of-tax cost.2

           Going beyond the comparison of pension liabilities and bonds, it is

important to recognize that the tax deductibility of pension contributions is

logically different from the non—taxability of the earnings of pension fund

assets. The fact that these earnings are not taxed has important implications

for calculating the present value of future benefit obligations. In general,

the present value of future benefit obligations cannot be calculated by

discounting future benefits in the customary way by either the pre—tax or after

tax   rate of interest but depends on the extent to which (or the speed with
which) those benefit obligations are funded.
          An example will clarify why   this   is   so.3 Consider   a firm with an obli-
gation to pay a single pension benefit of $100 ten years from now. The firm can



2 Note also that a debt repayment reduces gross assets without changing ear-
nings while the payment of a pension obligation reduces both earning and assets
according to accounting conventions.

3   A more formal analysis is presented in section one of Feldstein and Seligman
(1980).
                                            —6—


borrow at an interest rate of 12% on its high quality bonds.       Alternatively it

can buy the high quality (i.e., virtually riskiess) bonds of other firms for its

pension fund and receive a yield of 12% on those bonds.        Its combined federal

and state marginal tax rate is 50%. These figures imply that the net cost of

borrowed funds to the firm is 6% and this is the rate that it should use to

calculate the present value of any future pension benefit contributions.

However, once a dollar has been contributed, it accumulates at 12% inside the

pension fund.

           Thus if the firm chooses to fund its future obligation immediately, it

needs only contribute $32.20 since, at 12%, this will accumulate to $100 at the

end of ten years. Moreover, since the current contribution would be tax deduc-

tible, the net cost to the firm would be only $16.10; equivalently, the

existence of the $100 promised benefit reduces the current equity value of

the firm below what it would otherwise be by $16.10. In contrast, if the firm

does no funding of the benefit, it must pay $100 at the end of 10 years. This

will have a netof—tax cost to its shareholders at that time of $50. Like other

future costs and benefits that are known with (virtual) certainty, this $50 can

be discounted to a present value of the firm's net interest rate of 6%. The

present value calculated in this way is $27.92.

           The decision to postpone funding the benefit or to fund it gradually

over the ten years implies a present value that depends on both the pre—tax

 interest rate (12%) and the net—of—tax interest rate (6%). For example, if the

 firm   decides   to wait 5   years and then to fund fully at that time, it must make


   This assumes that a small increase in borrowing does not change the interest
 rate that the firm must pay.
a contribution then of $56.7 for a net—of—tax cost of $2cS,3i;   i.e. $56.Ilt
                                                                     ,



accumulates at 12% to $100 at te end of 5 years. The present value of the

$28.31, discounting at 6%, is $21.20.

         Note that, as these calculations suggest, immediate funding is cheaper

than any postponement. This implies that firms should in principle fund their

obligation as soon as possible. I will return to this subject in the next sec-

tion.

         In practice, firms typically calculate the present value of the vested

pension obligation by discounting the future actuarially expected invested pension

obligations by an estimate of the yield that they will obtain on their pension

portfolio.5 The value of the unfunded vested pension obligation is then calcu-

lated by subtracting the value of their pension assets from this measure of the

pension obligation. For the funded portion of the benefits, this is an

appropriate comparison; the discount rate is conceptually correct, there is no

need to adjust the funded obligation for its tax deductibility since no further

tax deduction will be allowed. But for the unfunded benefits, the usual method

of calculation typically overstates the true value. To see this, note that the

$100 promise benefit would conventionally be valued at $32.20 instead of $21.92.

Only if the benefit obligation is very far in the future (or growing very

rapidly) does the conventional procedure of using a discount rate that is too

high more than offset the error of not reflecting the tax deductibility of the

contribution or of the direct pension payment by the firm.




5 In many cases, this is not even a realistic estimate of the risk—free return
but only a conventional assumption designed to be conservative.
                                         —8—


         In addition to the issues of tax deductibility and of the choice of the

discount rate for funded and unfunded obligations, there is the very basic question

of whether the obligation should be defined to include only vested benefits or a

broader measure of actuarially expected benefits. The narrow focus on vested

benefits may understate the true value of a firm's obligation. The accounting

requirements focus on the vested benefits because a future benefit does not

become a legal liability of the firm until it is vested, i.e., until the employee

is entitled to the benefits even if he quits the firm or is fired. The typical

plan might provide that an eriployee with 10 years or more of employment has

vested benefits of 2% of his final year's earnings per year of service; e.g., a

20—year employee gets Lo%   of   his final year's earnings. In this case, the

vested pension obligation completely ignores the employee with nine years of

service even though he is very likely to stay long enough to become vested.

Similarly, the vested benefits of the 6)-i year old, employee makes no allowance

for the fact that he is very likely to wait until he is 65 before retiring. The

calculation of vested benefits is intentionally myopic. Should it be?

         The purpose of evaluating pension liabilities is to assess the firm's

future expenses in excess of the value of the services it will receive for those

payments. The clearest case to consider is the vested benefits of a retired

worker. Since the worker is already retired he will provide no further

services; the present actuarial value of his pension rights is a net liability

of the firm. Consider next a 6)-i—year—old worker with 20 years of experience who

will get )40% of his final wage if he retires at age 6L and )42% if he waits another

year. Jerenr Bulow (1919) has noted, in a very provocative paper, that the
                                       —9—



employee's opportunity to obtain higher pension benefits by waiting an extra

year is irrelevant if the firm and the worker take the extra benefits into account

in setting the wage for the extra year of work. More specifically, if the wage

for that year is set so that the wage plus the increased value of pension bene-

fits equals the value of the employee's services for that year, there is no

excess cost to the firm associated with the employee's postponed retirement.

The same argument applies to the individual who has had 9 years with the firm

and is just about to become vested. If his wage during the tenth year of

employment is set so that the sum of the wage and the initial value of the

vested pension are equal to the value of the tenth year's services, there is no

excess compensation in the prospective benefits.

          Although Bulow's analysis is logically sound, it is not clear how rele-

vant it is in practice. I know of no evidence that wages are adjusted to offset

unusually large accruals of benefits. But the relationship between wages and

pension benefits accrual is an empirical question that remains to be investi-

gated. Moreover even if there is not a perfect offset with the implied large

jumps   in a few particular years, there may   be a general tendency for the rela-

tionship between   earnings and seniority to reflect the accruing pension bene-

fits. If enirical work establishes that there is less than a full wage offset

of the accruing benefits, then the evaluation of pension obligations must go

beyond vested benefits in order to give an accurate picture of the firm' s net

obligation.
                                     —10-.



2. The Pension Funding Puzzle

         As I noted in the previous section, the firm can reduce the real net

cost of its pension obligations by funding them as fully as possible. This can

be shown even more explicitly as follows. Recall that, in the example in the

previous section, the firm has a pension benefit of $100 to pay in 10 years,

with a constant 12% interest rate on its own debt and on the obligations that it

can hold in its pension fund, and has a marginal tax rate of 50%. Funding the

benefit imriediately would involve the net cost of $i6.io.

         Assume now that the firm does not wish to fund the future benefits out

of its current earnings since it wishes to use those funds for internal invest-

ment and dividends. It therefore borrows the $16.10 and uses the borrowed

money to fund the future benefit. At the end of one year, it owes interest of

12% on the loan of $16.10 or $1.93. Since this interest is a deductible

expense, the net cost of the interest is 91 cents (or 6% of the loan). 4ssume

that the firm borrows the 97 cents and thus increases it loan to $17.01. The loan

grows in this way at 6% a year until, at the end of the tenth year, it has grown

to $28.83. The firm can repay this loan in the tenth year and use the accurnu—

lated pension fund of $50 to discharge its pension obligation. In this example,

there is no change in the firm's cash flow under either method except in the

tenth year at which time the immediate funding method saves more than 140% of the

cost that would be incurred with no advance funding.

         The implications of the example are perfectly general. The firm can

borrow at a net—of—tax interest rate and then use the funds to earn a pre—tax

interest rate within the pension fund. Since borrowing and holding debt do not
                                      —11--



 change the total debt position of the firm and pension fund combined, it is esen—

tially an arbitrage opportunity.6 The puzzle then is why many firms are not

fully funded.7

         Some firms may not fund more rapidly because the tax law limits the

speed with which unfunded benefit obligations can be funded with tax deductible

contributions. I suspect that this can account for at most a small fraction of

the firms, although evidence on this point remains to be collected.

         One potential explanation of the apparently irrational behavior of

firms is that the management of those firms believes that the securities market

is irrational, i.e., that portfolio investors would recognize the additional

debt that appears on a firm's balance sheet but not the unfunded pension liabi—

lity or the asset that it holds in its pension fund. If that were true, it

would be in the interest of current share holders to leave the pension liability

unfunded. Although the evidence sumsiarized in the next section of this paper

indicates that securities investors do not make this mistake, some firms nay

still be attributing that error to them.

         A closely related explanation is that firms may be reluctant to fund

more rapidly because the pension contribution would reduce the year's reported

earnings (even if financed by borrowing) and this in turn might reduce the firm's

market value if securities investors do not understand the reasons for the lower

reported earnings. Firms should in principle be able to avoid this problem by




6
  There is a separate issue of the type of asset in which the firm should
invest its pension fund. Black (1980) and Tepper (1980) have argued that firms
should hold only debts in their pension funds since equity investments (if any)
are best made on the corporations' own accounts.

7 In a sample of large manufacturing firms, Seligman and I (1980) found that
about 25% of vested benefits were unfunded.
                                          —12—



providing    such information to shareholders and to the market if it   decided   to

accelerate the funding of. pension liabilities.

            Firms may be reluctant to borrow in order to finance pension contribu-

tions because of the irrational rules of credit rating organizations, bank

regulators, and the like. In an irrational world, it is optimal to behave

irrationally ——    or   at least in a way that by logical standards appears to be

irrational. Credit ratings, for example, depend on the amount of conventional

debt that a firm has, on the ratio of earnings to assumed debt service obliga-

tions, and the like.      Arì increase in conventional debt used to finance a pension

contribution would appear incorrectly to increase the leverage of the firm and

this might result in a lower quality rating for the firm's debt obligations.

Because certain classes of portfolio investors cannot invest in securities with

a low rating, reduction in the credit rating would raise the firm's cost of

capital even if informed portfolio investors recognized the error in the lower

rating.     Similarly bank loan officers may             regulators and by
                                                 be judged by                their

superiors   on the basis of the conventional balance sheet characteristics   of the

firms   to which they make   loans.   A firm that weakens its conventional balance
sheet   may lose more through higher costs of borrowing or reduced credit availabi-

lity than it gained by earlier funding of its pension obligation. Again, we

lack evidence on the actual or presumed importance of these effects. Moreover,

the entire argument of this paragraph assumes that there are not other investors

and lenders who are prepared to arbitrage away such "irrational" credit—rating

yield differences. With sufficient arbitrage, the arguments of this paragraph

are not valid.
                                        —13—



            The existence of the Pension Benefits Guarantee Corporation may

encourage firms to remain less than fully      funded   in order to increase the

expected value of that compulsory insurance. Since the P.B.G.C. guarantees the

benefits to the employees, it removes the natural concern of the enloyees or

their unions to keep pensions more fully funded.

            Finally, there is the possibility that managers whose salaries or

bonuses are based on performance may want to see accounting profits and assets

increased    even if that means lower real net—of—tax profits to shareholders.
Again, such behavior should not be necessary to satisfy the self interest of
management since the company's board of directors couldmodify the rules at the
suggestion of management to make the interest of shareholders and management
coincide.
            In short, the pension funding puzzle ——     or,   more accurately, the non—

funding puzzle —— remains to be solved.


3. Pension Obligations and Share Prices

         As part of the NBER Project on the Changing Role of Debt and Equity,

Stephanie Seligman and I studied the effect of unfunded pension obligations

on the equity value of a sample of manufacturing firms. The analysis used

the inflation—adjusted income and assets that large firms have been required to

provide for 1916 and subsequent years.

        The basic approach of the study was to relate the market value of a

firm's equity to the replacement value of its physical assets, its earnings and

history of earnings growth, and the value of its debt. The firm's expenditure
                                        -l4-

 on research and development and the "beta" coefficient relating movements in the

 firm's share price to movements of an aggregate share price index were also

 included in the basic specifications of the statistical valuation equation. By

 taking these determinants of the market value of the firm into account, we

 could estimate whether there was an additional statistical effect on the

 equity value of the unfunded vested pension liabilities reported by the firm.

          The evidence for our sample of nearly 200 manufacturing firms was con-

 sistent with the conclusion that share prices fully reflect the value of

unfunded pension obligations. Since the conventional accounting measure of the

unfunded pension liability has so many problems, it would undoubtedly be more

accurate to say that the data are consistent with the conclusion that the

securities market appears to accept the conventional measure as the best

available information and causes share prices to be reduced by a corresponding

amount.

          Of course, not all shareholders need be aware of unfunded pension

liabilities for this to be true. If a sufficient nur-iber of securities analysts

and investors representing a significant amount of assets take these liabilities

into account, they can make it unneccessary for others to do so.

          For nearly 200 major   manufacturing   firms in the sample, unfunded pen-

sion liabilities averaged 4.9% of the replacement value of physical assets in

1911. Since the pension assets themselves averaged 13.5% of the replacement

value of physical assets, these firms had funded approximately 15% of their

vested pension liabilities. These figures also imply that the value of vested

liabilities are extremely large, i8.L% of the total value of plant, equipment

and inventory.
                                          —15—


           It is of course possible that the statistical estimates are spurious.

For example, firms that do not fully fund their liabilities may have other

characteristics that also depress share values and that were not taken into

account in our analysis. For example, firms in very strong financial positions

may choose to fund fully while firms with weak earnings may seek to increase

reported earnings by not funding as much. The bias could however go in the

opposite direction. The firm that expects to have more cash flow in the future

may postpone funding. Similarly, the firm with cash that it does not know how

to invest may choose to fund more at present. Further analysis of the reasons

that firms do not fully fund would help to resolve this statistical issue.

           s I noted in the previous section, if the conclusion that the market

reflects unfunded liabilities and share prices is correct, this eliminates one

reason why firms might wish to be less than fully funded. The evidence that the

market recognizes unfunded liabilities also helps to explain why the stock

market has not risen more in the past decade. The specific estimates derived

from the current snple of firns implies that the unfunded vested pension liabi-

lities were 1%   of   the market value of the firm's equity in 1911. If the equity

value of the firm was reduced dollar for dollar by its unfunded liability, the

recognition of these liabilities lowered the average share value by about 7%.

Stating   this in different words, in judging the extent to which shares are

currently undervalued, the measure of the "true" equity value of the firm (i.e.

the replacement value of physical assets minus net debt) should be reduced by an

amount equal to about 7%    of   the current market value of equity.
                                     —i6—


         Our investigation of the effect of unfunded pensions liabilities on

share prices was motivated by the relevance of this issue in assessing the effect

of private pensions on the national saving rate. Before commenting on the

implications of our findings, I shall discuss the more general issue of the

impact of private pensions on national saving.


. Private   Pensions and National Saving8

         Although private pensions represent a very substantial amount of capi-

tal accumulation, it is not at all clear from a priori considerations alone that

they actually achieve any net increase in the nation's capital stock. Private

pensions ry only represent a change in the form in which individuals save, a

substitution of pension assets for an equal amount of direct saving. Indeed,

since the untaxed pension fund earns a higher rate of return than the tax-

paying individual, the pension permits the same level of retirement consumption

to be financed with a smaller initial volume of' savings.

         The existence of private pension plans increases aggregate national

saving only if it induces individuals to postpone consumption, i.e. ,   to   consume

more in retirement and less when they are working.9 Pensions may of course

induce such a shift in consumption in response to the higher rate of return.



8 For a more complete discussion of this subject, see Feldstein (1918).

9 This statement implicitely assumes that the existence of the private pension
does not alter the total amount of government spending in each year. The pri-
vate pension plan per se involves a postponement of tax liability from the
earning years to the retirement years. This in itself increases private
savings. But the lower tax payments imply an equal decrease in government
saving or increase in government borrowing. This change in the timing of tax
payments therefore leaves national saving unchanged.
                                        —11—

If the increase in retirement consumption is large enough, saving will rise.

While this condition will not be satisfied for all taxpayers, it will be for

some.

            In addition to those who increase their desired saving, there is

another important group for whom the private pension represents forced saving.

The very substantial fraction of the population with little or rio directly held

financial wealth implies that forced saving may be quite important. These indi-

viduals may be imjopic or may believe that their Social Security benefits will

provide at least as imich as they want for retirement. In any case, they are

forced by their private pensions to have more retirement consumption than they

would otherwise choose. Although they might in principle offset this extra pen-

sion wealth by borrowing, it is extremely difficult to borrow any substantial

amount without specific collateral. Whether it is this difficulty or just an

aversion to the accumulation of debt, few individuals reach retirement with

enough financial liabilities to offset a significant fraction of their pension

benefits.

            Pensions may also increase saving by inducing individuals to retire

earlier than they otherwise would. Since pensions are only paid when an indivi-

dual re-tires, individuals have a strong financial incentive to retire as soon as

they are eligible for the maximum pension. When an individual retires at an

earlier age, he has more years of consumption to finance and fewer years in

which   to accumulate the retirement assets. Induced early retirement would
therefore increase saving even among individuals who do not respond at all to
the   higher rate of return.

            Although the empirical evidence on this issue is weak, it seems likely
                                        —18—



on the basis of existing data that the promise of private pension benefits does

not induce an equal or greater reduction in direct personal saving. But, even if

direct personal saving falls by less than the amount required to fund the private

pension, total private saving may fall if the pension is in fact not funded.

say "may" rather than "will" because, even with no funding, total saving may

increase.     What happens depends crucially on the response of shareholders.

            To understand this, consider the case in which the firm trades a

promise of a future pension benefit for a reduction in current wages below what

they would otherwise be. Assume that the employees recognize the value of the

promised pension and reduce their saving by enough to keep retirement consump-

tion unchanged. If the firm uses the extra profits that result from the lower

wages to fund the pension, there is just a substitution of one form of saving

for anotherj°

            But what if the firm does not fund the pension liability and instead

adds the extra profits to retirement earnings and invests them in the firm.

This too is just a substitution of one form of saving for another unless the

shareholders respond to the increased earnings and assets by consuming more.

This increase in consumption would occur if the firm's share price rose in

response to the increased plant and equipment, i.e. ,   if the shareholders ignored
the increased pension liability in valuing their shares. The evidence

(presented in the previous section) that share prices do reflect the unfunded

pension liability implies that shareholders would not be misled by the increase



10 This ignores the differences in tax treatment between pensions and direct
saving, a simplification that greatly facilitates discussing the current point
without losing anything essential.
                                      —19—

 in assets. Instead, the change in corporate assets and the change in pension

 liability would offset each other and leave the share price and therefore share-.

 holder consumption unchanged.

          A similar argument applies if the firm uses the extra profits to

 finance higher dividends. Since the higher dividend does not reflect higher

 real earnings or greater assets, the share price would remain unchanged and

 shareholders should not increase their consumption response to the higher level

of dividends. Unlike the analysis of retained earnings, this argument requires

both that the share price does not rise and that shareholders base their con-

sumption on the value of their wealth and not on dividends per Se. Since some

macroeconomic evidence does suggest that dividends are irrortant as a deter-

minant of consumption, unfunded pension liabilities may induce some additional

consumption on the part of shareholders.

         The effect on the nation's savings of an increase in private pensions

is thus quite complex.   It seems likely that there is some increase in retirement

consumption and that employees do not reduce their direct savings by the present

value of the pension obligation. To the extent that these obligations are

funded or used to increase retained earnings, aggregate savings increase. To

the extent that the extra cash flow that results from unfunded benefits goes

into dividends, the net effect is more ambiguous.

         In concluding this discussion, it is worthwhile to erhasize the dif-

ference between unfunded private pension benefits and unfunded Social Security

benefits. Because the promise of future pension benefits is an obligation of

corporate shareholders, it is reflected in a market price that reduces the

net wealth of current shareholders. Because the promise of private pension

benefits makes current shareholders poorer, they have an incentive to save more
                                       —20—


either directly or through corporate retained earnings. The same is not true

for Social Security. The promise to pay future benefits implies a higher tax on

future employees but involves no incentive for current employees to save more.11

Thus whatever the depressing effect of either type of pension on the direct

savings of employees, private pensions will result in a larger increase in

national savings (or smaller decrease) than would result from an equal amount of

Social Security.


5. Private Pensions and Inflation1-2
         Much of the recent discussion about the relation between private pen-

sions and inflation has emphasized the adverse impact that the unexpected rise

in inflation during the past 15 years has had on pension recipients and on the

performance of pension funds. Some of those who have commented on the problem

have even concluded that the private pension system cannot survive in an infla-

tionary economy. It is important, however, not to confuse the unfortunate conse-

quences that followed when inflation caught pensioners and pension fund managers

by surprise with the inability to adjust to future conditions, even uncertain

future conditions.

         In a previous study, I concluded that a steady rate of inflation, far

from destroying the pension system, would actually increase the share of total

savings that goes into private pensions. The reason for this conclusion is that

the advantage that the private pension has in exempting its portfolio income from



11 This ignores the observation of Robert Barro (1916) that current individuals
may wish to save more in order to increase their bequest to compensate their
children for the higher taxes that those children will face as a result of
increased Social Security benefits.

12 This section summarizes conclusions developed in Feldstein (1980).
                                        —21—


taxation becomes greater when there is inflation. This in turn reflects the fact

that individuals pay tax on the full nominal interest income that they earn on

direct saving and therefore pay a tax per unit of capital that rises with the

rate of inflation; in contrast, of course, since pensions pay no tax on their

interest income, the tax differential per unit of capital rises with inflation.

Similarly, individuals pay tax on nominal capital gains on stock (as well as on

dividends) and this capital gains tax also implies a tax per unit of capital

that rises with the rate of inflation. Thus on both debt and equity, inflation

increases the yield differential between household and pension funds in favor of

pensions.

            The relative yields on debt and equity are likely to move in opposite

directions for households and pensions. If the real pre—tax interest rate

remains unchanged, the pensions have a constant real yield on debt while the

yield on equity falls slightly because of the extra taxes paid at the corporate

level. For households, the real net—of—tax yield on debt falls sharply while

the real yield on equity falls by less. Households would thus be induced to

sell debt to pension funds and hold more equity directly.

         The uncertainty of inflation influences the optimal extent of pension

indexing and the likely composition of pension assets. Without indexing, the

vested pension obligations are nominal long—term liabilities of the firm. The

firm can hedge these liabilities by holding long—term bonds. Of course, firms

may nevertheless invest in equities because they believe that the equity yield

is high enough to compensate for the reduced hedging. But, since the extra risk

of equity investment is borne by the firm's shareholders, the employees who par—
                                         —22—


ticipate in the pension plan should earn an implicit nominal return on their

 foregone wages that is only equal to the nominal return on riskiess bonds.

             A fully indexed pension would make all pension obligations real.

Long—term bonds are clearly an inappropriate investment for funding such real

obligations. Stocks can provide a hedge against price level uncertainties only

by accepting substantial general uncertainty. Zvi Bodie (1980) has emphasized

that a portfolio with a minimum—variance real return would be invested almost

corrletely in short—term debt (with a small amount in commodity futures) and

that the expected return on such a portfolio is approximately zero. If

employees are so risk averse that they choose a fully indexed pension, the

implicit real return that they earn on foregone wages should therefore also be

approximately zero. Again, firms may invest in equities, but the shareholders

rather than the pensioners should receive any extra yield in return for bearing

that risk.

             If employees choos-e a partially indexed pension, i.e., one in which

benefits rise less than one—for—one with the price level or in which benefits

depend on the return on the pension fund assets, the firm can invest in a way

that permits giving a higher return to pension participants while compensating

shareholders for any additional risk that they bear. The optimal extent of pen-

sion indexing depends on the risk aversion of employees and the cost, in terms

of   the   reduction in the expected yield, of investing pension assets to produce a

constant    real return.
            As Paul Samuelson (1958) noted years ago, an unfunded social security
program can provide an annuity with an implicit real rate of return equal to the
                                      —23—


 real growth rate of the econorrr, probably about 3 percent a year over the next

decade or longer. Although 3 percent is substantially less than the real return

of more than 10 percent that the nation as a whole earns on additions to the

stock of plant and equipment (Feldstein and Poterba, 1980), the political

pressure to substitute unfunded Social Security benefits for private pensions

(or vice versa) is likely to depend on the real after—tax yield that partly

indexed pensions can offer and on the associated risk. If employees were

completely risk averse, the low 3 percent yield on Social Security would look

good in comparison to Bodiets zero yield on a minimum—variance real return port-

folio.   But if employees are willing to accept the risk inherent in a partially

indexed pension, they can expect to receive an implicit yield that is much

greater than three percent.

         In summary, the form and funding of private pensions will probably

change in the coming decade if inflation continues at recent levels but, unless

employees become much more risk averse, private pensions are likely to continue

to finance a growing share of retirement consumption.


6. Future Research

         The substantial size and rapid growth of private pensions makes it

important to understand their impact on capital markets and capital formation

From the basic problem of pension liability measurement to the more complex

issue of the impact of unfunded obligations on shareholder consumption, we are

only beginning to do the necessary research. This paper has indicated a number

of questions on which further research should be done. How do employeest ear—

flings reflect their accruing pension benefits? Why do firms not take advan—
                                    —2)4—



tage of the tax benefits of full and immediate funding? How do financial

markets and financial institutions respond to the extent of a company's pension

fund? And how does the existence of partly funded private pensions influence the

nation's aggregate rate of saving? As the answers to these questions become

known, we will better understand the impact of private pensions on the American

economy.
                                         —25—



                                      References



 Barro,   Robert, 197)4, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political
           Economy 82: 1095—1117.

 Black, Fisher, August 1980, "The Tax Advantages of Pension Fund Investments in
         Bonds," NBER Working Paper No. 833, 1980.

 Bodie,   Zvi, February 1980, "Purchasing Power Annuities: Financial Innovation
           for Stable Real Retirement Income in an Inflationary Environment,"
          NBER Working Paper No. )4)42, 1980.

 Bulow, Jeremy, November 1979, "Analysis of Pension Funding Under ERISA," NBER
         Working Paper No. 402, 1979.

 Feldstein, Martin, December 1978, "Do Private Pensions Increase National
         Savings?" Journal of Public Economics 10: 277—293.

Feldstein, Martin, 1980, "Private Pensions and Inflation," American Economic
        Review, forthcoming.

Feldstein, Martin and Feenberg, Daniel, 1981, "Alternative Tax Rules and
        Personal Saving Incentives: Microeconomic Data and Behavioral
        Simulations," paper presented at the NBER Conference on Behavioral
        Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, January, 1981.

Feldstein, Martin and Poterba, James, July 1980, "State and Local Taxes and
        the Rate of Return on Nonfinancial Corporate
                                                     Capital," NBER Working
        Paper No. 508R, 1980.

Feldstein, Martin and Seligman, Stephanie, July, 1980, "Pension Funding, Share
        Prices and National Saving," NBER Working Paper No. 509, Journal of
        Finance, forthcoming.


Samuelson, Paul, 1958, "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest with or
         Without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy,
         December 1958, 66, )467—82.

Tepper, Irwin, "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy," mimeo, 1980.
