                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              REAL AND MONETARY DISTURBANCES IN AN
                       EXCHANGE-RATE UNION



                       Richard C. Marston

                      Working Paper No. 105




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            June 1981




The author would like to acknowledge the financial support of the
German Marshall Fund and the National Science Foundation. The
research reported here is partof the NBER'S research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #705
                                                            June 1981



            Real and Monetary Disturbances in an Exchange—Rate Union



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper investigates how a small country fares in an exchange—
rate union if that country is subject to real and monetary disturbances
originating at home and abroad. By joining a union, the country can fix
the exchange rate between its currency and the currency of another country
or countries. The paper asks whether or not fixing this exchange rate
helps to modify the effects of disturbances on the domestic economy.

     Thisquestion is investigated within a model consisting of an aggre-
gate demand equation dependent upon the terms of trade, an aggregate supply
equation in which labor supply is responsive to the general price level,
and a financial equation that determines the exchange rate of the domestic
currency relative to one of two foreign currencies (the other being determined
by triangular arbitrage). Aggregate supply behavior varies depending upon
whether wages respond to prices with a lag or are indexed to current changes
in the general price level. Because the small country model cannot be
used by itself to analyze the effects of foreign disturbances, the paper
introduces models of two foreign countries with the same analytical structure
as the domestic country model. Foreign disturbances are studied in two
stages, first within the foreign model, then within the domestic model.

     The analysis shows that one of the most important factors determining
the effects of the union is the degree of wage indexation in the domestic
economy. The greater the degree of indexation, the less difference there
is between output variation in the union and in a flexible regime. Apart
from wage behavior, two other factors are important: the sources of the
disturbances and the pattern of trade. Contrary to common belief, the
case for a union is not necessarily strengthened if disturbances primarily
originate outside the union and if the domestic country trades primarily
with other members of the union.



                                       Richard C. Marston
                                       The Wharton School
                                       University of Pennsylvania
                                       Philadelphia, Pennsylvania        19104
                                       (215) 243—7626

                                       Visiting Professor (Spring 1981)
                                       Ecole Superieure des Sciences
                                       Economiques & Commerciales
                                       BP 105
                                       95021 Cergy—Pontoise Cedex
                                       France
                              —1—

      Although   the current period is often characterized as one of flexible
exchange rates, many currencies are tied together in joint floats against
other currencies, forming exchange-rate unions within a system of flexible
rates. This paper investigates how a snail country fares by joining such
an exci-iange—rate union 1)

      The country is assumed to be buffetted by real and monetary distur-
bances originating at hane and abroad. By joining the union, this country
is able to fix the exchange rate between its currency and the currencies
of the union countries. The central question addressed in the paper is
whether or not fixing this exchange rate helps to modify the effects of
disturbances on the danestic econany2 The specific sources of the dis—
tubances clearly• matter in determining the inact of the union and so
also does the pattern of trade between hane and foreign countries. The
paper will investigate tv intuitively plausible propositions about these
factors that the case for a union is stronger when disturbances primarily
originate outside the union and when the hane country trades primarily with
other countries in the union. The paper shows that neither proposition holds
in general.
(1) The terminology here is potentially confusing. In this study, the term
    exchange—rate union refers to an arrangement in which rnanber countries
    of the union maintain fixed exchange rates between member currencies,
    but with each country retaining its own central bank with control over
    its national monetary policy. This limited type of union, which Corden
    (1972, p. 3) calls a "pseudo-exchange-rate union", is to be distinguished
    from a "canplete exchange rate union", or rronetaty union, with a single
    central bank and a union—wide currency.
(2) Tower and Willett (1975) provide a comprehensive survey of the literature
    on optimum currency areas which examines the conditions necessary for
    successful exchange-rate or monetary unions ; McKinnon (1963) and Mundell
    (1961) are t early contributions to this literature. Among other studies
    are Allen (1976), Corden (1972), and Ingram (1973). The method of analysis
   used in the present study is more similar to that of the internal-external
   balance literature, of which Mundell's (1963) study of fixed and flexible
   rates is the best known.
                                —2—




      The macro model used to address these issues consists of three basic

 equations : an aggregate demand equatic    dependant upon the tarms of trade
 as ll as foreign output, an aggregate supply equation in which latxor supply
is responsive to the general price level, and a financial equation that de-
teniiines the exchange rate of the daistic currency relative to one of the
to foreign currencies (the other being determined by triangular arbitrage).
The paper shows to what extent aggregate supply and demand behavior are
important in detennining the effects of the union. Supply behavior varies
depending upon whether wages respond to prices with a lag or are       indexed

to current changes in the general price level, while demand behavior is
particularly sensitive to price elasticities.
      The small country model has the advantage of analytic simplicity,
but by itself gives misleading results when foreign disturbances are
examined. The model can be used to show, for example, that variations
in foreign incone due to foreign disturbances anywhere abroad unambi-
guously lead to greater donestic output variance in the union. But without
a model of the two foreign regions, the union countries arid the rest of
the world, it is difficult to determine the total effects of the under-
lying foreign disturbances, since these disturbances affect the daiestic
econany through a variety of channels. For example, in addition to chan-
ging foreign output, a foreign demand disturbance concentrated in one
of the two foreign regions will change the terms of trade between the
foreign goods   iirrted   by the small country and   the   exchange rate between
the to foreign currencies. The total effects of this foreign disturbance
thus nay be quite different fran the effects of a change in foreign incane

alone.
                                      —3—
        To study foreign disturbances, the paper introduces a rrodel of the

two foreign trading regions with the same analytical structure as the small
country model. This model determines the exchange rate and terms of trade

between   the two regions       as well as the prices, interest rates, and output
in    each region. Foreign disturbances are studied first within this model,

then are traced through the domestic model to determine the effects                   on
the small country.
        The first section of the paper introduces the small country model,
and the next two sections successively examine the effects of disturbances
within the one country and extended models.


I. OUThINE OF THE      M)DE[J

        Country 1     is a small country which has      economic    ties with two
countries        Country   2 is the potential parther of Country        I    in an ex-
change—rate union, while Country          3   represents the rest of the world.
Country 1 has      fliortant trade    and   financial   ties with the other two
countries    ;   the relative importance of these economic ties will be an
issue   in the analysis below. Country 1          is assumed to    be too    small to

influence   conditions in either foreign country.3 The two foreign coun-
tries affect Country 1 through their outpits (Y, Y3), the prices of their
goods (P,        P), both expressed in logarithms,       and interest
                                                                         rates (r, r).
        In this three country world, there are three exchange rates to be
determined. If the franc is the currency of Country 1, the mark                 the   cur-
rency of (buntry 2 and       the dollar     the currency   of   Country 3,   then   the
three exchange rates are as follows (all expressed in logs)

(3) The two foreign countries could represent blocs of countries with fixed
    exchange rates within each bloc, in which case Country 1 does not need to be
    small relative to individual countries in each bloc. Country 2, for
    example, might represent a group of countries in an existing union
    (e.g., the European Monetary System) and Country 3 represent a second
      group of countries tied to the dollar.
                                      —4—

               the   franc price of the dollar,

     X. : the mark price of the dollar, and
     x2 = X -      the franc price of the mark.

Figure 1 illustrates the relationships among the three currencies.                 is
exogenously determined for Country 1, while a second exchange rate is•
deteimined by triang-ular arbitrage.
A. Demand Behavior
      Unless purchasing power parity is assumed, demand behavior in a
country trading with two other countries is inherently complicated. Three
national prices      are   involved   as well as   at least ts.o exchange rates. We
begin by defining the prices of the three countries' goods expressed in
francs

     P               price of Country l's good,
         + X price of Country 3's good in francs,
         +
             x2    : price of Country 2's good      in francs.
It is convenient for later analysis to measure Country            2's prices   relative

to Country 3. Define the teims of trade between Countries 2 and 3 as


     Tt=P- (P--X).
Then the price of Country       2' s good in                   written as
                                               francs can be
                                                                            P + Tt + X.
The general price level in Country 1 can be expressed as a weighted average
of the prices of the three goods
         =         P + a12(P + Tt + X) +
             a11                               a13 (P + X), where a1. is the
                                               —5—

      expenditure   weight for country j 'S          good • 4)

           There    are two relative prices affecting demand in Country 1, the price
      of Country 1' s good relative to each of the foreign goods. The demand for
  danestic      output can       be expressed as a function of these relative prices,
  output in the to foreign countries, the real rate of interest, and a
      stochastic factor with mean zero and serially uncorrelated'5:

                =
                             g2(P + Tt + X P) + g3(P + 4 - P)
                         +                -
  (1)               g0

                             2             3         1           1    1,          dl
                                                           (tEIt+i_J+ut
 A rise in foreign prices relative to the danestic price is assumed to

 increase aggregate demand as is a rise in foreign output6 A rise in

 the     real interest rate is assumed to reduce aggregate demand. In                     the

 case     of perfect substitution between foreign and domestic goods, where

 g beccnes infinite in size, this aggregate demand equation reduces
 to     the familiar purchasing power parity relationship.

 B. Supply Behavior
           When a country imports many of the products it consumes, two prices are
  importantfor sply decisions, the price of dariestic output (Pt) and the ge-
 neral price level (I) based on foreign and dcrnestic prices and foreign ex-
 change rates.

(4)     When expressed in levels, this price index has a gecmetric form with
        weights a11 + a12        +         = 1.
                                     a13
(5)    In the appendix this demand function is derived fran a irore standard
       dner1 function, and the coefficients, g and g •,                     are   expressed in
       terms   of conventional incane ard price             elasticities.

(6) We assume that the Marshall-Lerner condition Ilds, so that the price
    coefficients are positive. (See the appendix).
                         l's general price level at period t+1 expected at period t,
                is Country
       so (tEIt+i —     is the expected change in that price level.
       sumed to be formed rationally fran the rest of the mcdel.
                                                                    tE+i   is as-
                                        —6—


Output     decisions   are    responsive   to   nominal wages   relative to the price

of domestic output, while wages are             sensitive to    the general price level.

In   many modern economies, moreover, wages are at least partially indexed
to current changes        in the general price level. As        a result, supply as
well as demand can respond to current changes in foreign prices and
exchange rates.
          The model chosen to represent this supply behavior consists of a
production function of the Cobb-Douglas form and a wage equation based
on the partial or complete indexation of wages.8 The wage equation as-
sumes that labor ties its wage to the general price level in an attempt
to maintain a constant value of purchasing power despite frequent changes
in prices and exchange rates. Because of lags in labor contracts, the cur-
rent wage is based on last period's expectation of current prices. Wages
may be indexed, however,            to protect the wage earner from unexpected changes
in   the price level'9

 (2a)          Y. =    (1 —   c')   4+c
                               1
               W1 ——          It + b(I1_ t_1E
                                                   1
 2b                      E
                                                    '•

(8) As with the other structural equatiors in the model, the supply equations
    were kept relatively simple. Since this model is used to represent all
    three countries (as modified below) any additional complexities are mul-
        tiplied by a factor of three.


(9) For studies of wage indexation behavior, see Fischer (1977), Gray (1976),
    Modigliani and Padoa-Schioppa (1978), and Sachs (1979), the latter two
        dealing with open economies. Flood and Marion (1980) provide an inte-
        resting analysis of how indexation behavior may respond to the choice
        of exchange rate regime. Here we have assumed that the degree of indexa-
        tion has been fixed institutionally, leaving optimal indexation behavior
        in a   union for later analysis.
                                        —7—

 The coefficient, b, the indexation parameter, typically varies between zero
 (no indexation) and one (full indexation)
         If domestic producers choose an output level where the marginal pro-
 duct of labor is equal to their real wage, W. -
                                                            P. , then output can be      ex-
 pressed as follows

 (2)         =
                 c0
                      + c (P —
                                 I) +    C (1 — b)   —
                                                         t_1E   It),

                 where C     = (1   —   Ct)/C
                             = (log c)/c' + c
                        c0                    log(1—&)

Whatever the degree of indexation in the economy, output depends upon the
price of domestic output as well as the general price level. With full in-
dexation, only current       prices     matter, but with partial indexation output

responds to unanticipated changes in the general price level through the

differential     impact of changes in prices on      the real wages faced by pro-
ducers arid rkers, respectively. Notice that when indexation is complete
(b=1), equal increases in Pt1 and 1 leave supply unaffected. When indexa-
tion is less than ccmplete, however, equal increases in P and I. increase
supply since the real wages faced by producers fall.
C. Financial Behavior
        The three countries have t financial assets each               rioney   and   bonds
(thelatter bearing interest rate r). To keep the financial sector simple,
hever, the three bonds are assumed to be perfect substitutes so that their
expected returns expressed in the same currency are equal (11)


(10)   Note that there are some countries (notably Italy) where indexation has
       been greater than 100 %. See Mdigliani and Padoa-Schioppa (1978).
(11) For a nre general study of financial behavior in an exchange-rate union,
    see Marston (1980 b). In that study where the effects of various finan-
    cial disturbances are analyzed, foreign and domestic bonds are assumed
    to be imperfect substitutes.
                                     —8—



       r r
        1    =    3
                       +        1
                           (tE X1
                                    -   1
                                        X)
        2
             = rt3     +        2       2
                           (tE X.bfl - Xt).
The demand     for money   is expressed as a function of domestic prices and

output as well as the interest return,


(3)          =

where for convenience the expected            franc   return on Country 3's   lond   replaces

Country     1 's interest rate.
       The behavior of the money supply depers upon the exchange rate regime.
Urer   flexible       exchange rates, the money supply is assumed      to   be exogenously
determined as follows

       NM'+ u'.
The current money supply is equal to a base level plus a random term, where
the latter has mean zero and is serially uncorrelated. The supply of money
in the exchange—rate union is described below.

D. Foreign Behavior
       AU foreign variables in the model with the exception of X are exo-
genously determined by the small country asstion. We express each foreign
variable as a constant plus a random variable where the latter is the inno-
vation in that variable for period            t.


       P =P+            u,
       Y =?+            u,
                 52 2,
                                        —9—

         Tt =   T   +u
         ri =   r—i +    ri
                        Ut    ,   i   = 2,3.

In the third part of the paper, the random variables will be expressed in
                                           (12)
terms of the underlying foreign disturbances. Until then, these variables
are assumed to have zero mean, to be serially uncorrelated, and to be Un-
correlated with each other.(13)
E. Description of the T Exchange Pate Regimes

         The exchange rate union will be ccmpared with a regime       of   flexible

exchange    rates where no exchange market intervention occurs. The flexible
regime    is discussed first.
Flexible Exchange Pates
        The basic equations of the model, (1) - (3),        determine three dcmestic

variables,   Y., P., and X, as functions of all the stochastic and nonsto—
chastic variables .(X.2 is then determined by triangular arbitrage). To fa-
cilitate cararison betwaen the to regimes, equations (1) and (2) are
                   1
first solved for     and Pt1 as functions of X.1 and the exogenous variables.
The    resulting expressions, equations (I) and (II) in Table 1, describe
aggregate demand and supply behavior in both exchange-rate regimes 14) The
stochastic variables influencing           and P. include the domestic aggregate
demand disturbance, u1, as well as the random ccaionents of X and the
foreign variables.
(12)   The foreign variables can be expressed in this sirrple form because the
       underlying disturbances are assumed to be of mean zero and to be serially
       uncorrelated (see Section III).

(13) As a result, tE+l =          , and   similarly   for the other variables.

(14) Y', P1 and       are the reduced form solutions for Y, P1, and when
       all disturbances are equal to zero. To obtain the coeficients of
           in Table 1, we have assumed that the shares of the t foreign goods
       in the price indices are proportional to the respective price elastici-
       ties in the aggregate demand equation : a12/a13 =
                                                         g2/g3. This restric-
       tion allows trade to be biased toward one foreign country or the other
       (see below), but the bias must be equally reflected in the       and
                                                                        a1 1
                                       10 —


       Under    flexible rates, the franc price of the dollar,             can be
expressed as a function of exogenous variables only by solving all three
equations, (1) — (3), for the reduced form. Equation (lila) in Table 1
presents the expression for X.
Exchange—Rate Union
       If Country 1 joins an exchange-rate union with Country 2, the monetary
authorities must intervene in the exchange market to ensure that X2 = 4                  -
ranains constant. For convenience we assume that the franc price of the mark
is initially equal to one (so that the log of this exchange rate, 42, is
initially equal to zero). In that case, intervention keeps 4 =                  at all
times. Suppose that the foreign intervention is carried out by the monetary
authority of Country 1     which buys (or sells) Country         2's currency and sells
(or   buys) Country   l's currency to keep 42 fixed. (The results would be the
same   if Country 2   carried out this intervention).(15) In that case, equation (3)

describing money market equilibrium simply determines the money supply con-
sistent with    keeping X
                          1
                              equal   to X.2   In place   of equation (lila)   determining

4 on the basis of Country 1 's behavior, we have an exogenously determined
exchange rate

       4    =       =2        +


By joining the union, Country 1 has not only fixed its mark             exchange rate, but
has effectively surrendered control over its dollar exchange rate.


(15) The choice of which country to intervene would be important    the in-    if
     tervention took the form of buying or selling foreign bonds (as would
       be the case if the foreign currency were used as a reserve currency),
       but here we assume a simple form of intervention with no sterilization
       of the intervention effects. For an analysis of different tyoes of in-
       tervention policy, see Marston (1980 a).
                                        — 11   —




II.    EW½LUATION OF THE UNION : LOMESTIC DISTURBANCES

            In order to judge the usefuhiess of the exchange—rate union, we need
to    formulate appropriate criteria. A variety of criteria are                   possible since
the eonomic effects of the union have many dimensions.                       In this   paper,   we
concentrate      our attention on one traditional criterion for judging any change
in policy, the effect of the policy on the variance of domestic output

        V=             (Y1 - E(Y'))2
                        t
                 E
                                    t
For each disturbance in the model,                 we ask if introduction of the union in-

creases or decreases the variance of output due to that                      disturbance.   Because
of the siile stochastic structure described below, moreover, we can deter-
mine the relative sizes of the output variances by ccnaring the increases
or decreases in output in response to a single (one period) disturbance.

A. Domestic Disturbances

        The two disturbances to be analyzed are a money supply disturbance

and    an   aggregate demand    disturbance.        We assume initially that      there   is
no wage indexation in the domestic economy, then                   consider   the effects of
full   indexation.
        The    monetary disturbance        is particularly easy to analyze         given the
small   country      assurrption.   This   disturbance      has   no   effect on output in an

exchange—rate union. A monetary                expansion,   for exarrple, leads to pressure

on   1x)th franc     exchange rates because of the incipient fall in              domestic
interest      rates, but intervention in the exchange market ensures that
x = x (where the latter is exogenously detennined). The disturbance
sirrly results in an equal and offsetting capital flow6 In a flexible
(16) If Country 1 were not small, its dollar exchange rate could change
    because the monetary expansion together with the acconanying foreign
     exchange   intervention would also significantly affect the money
       sply in Country 2.
                                   — 12   —




regime,    in   contrast, a monetary    expansion leads     to a depreciation and      to
an   increase in output.(17) Thus as in the case where only one foreigTl country
is involved (see Mundell, 1963), donestic monetary disturbances                  cause varia-

tions   in output only under flexible exchange rates.
        In contrast, an aggregate demand disturbance in Country          1   leads     to

greater changes in output in       an exchange—rate     union. An increase in aggre-
gate demand     raises domestic output and prices. There is pressure on }x)th franc

exchange      rates because of the incitDient rise in darstic interest rates, but
once again intervention in the exchange market ensures that                  =
                                                                                 X.   Under
flexible exchange rates, in contrast, the increase in output leads to an
appreciation of the daaestic currency (X and 42 fall) which modifies
the overall increase in aggregate demand (8) Thus there is less output va—
nation under flexible rates.
        When wage indexation is complete (b=1),         however, these familiar results

break   down. Aggregate demand disturbances or monetary disturbances then have
identical effects in the to regimes ; that is, the variance of output is
the same regardless of the exchange rate regime. The reason can be seen by
examining Figure 2 showing how aggregate demand and supply adjust to these
disturbances.


(17) The effect of u on 4 in equation (I) can be rewritten for the general
        casewereOb 1)
               ' + (gp2 + gp
            1 =—                    +
                                    —         a11) c(1—b)   xl
                                                            u , where the coefficient
        of u must    be   positive as long as b is less than one.

(18) Under flexible exchange rates, the direct (positive) impact of u' on
       in equation (I) is modified by the fall in u' (which reduces 4).
    Output nonetheless increases even under flexible rates. In contrast,
        Mundell's   study of internal-external balance        showed that output      did
        not  increase at all in response to a demand disturbance ; given his
        assunptions that domestic prices were fixed and exchange rate expec-
        tations static, only a constant output was consistent with money mar-
        ket equilibrium. In this study, an appreciation of the exchange rate
        leads to a change in the expected exchange rate and therefore to a
        change in the darstic interest rate, so output can increase despite
        a constant noney supply.
                                   — 13 —


         First consider the monetary disturbance. Under flexible rates, the
resulting depreciation leads to an outward shift in the aggregate demand
function (to point B) because of the sensitivity of aggregate demand to
relative prices and the real interest rate. When wages are fully indexed
to the general price level, however, there is a corresponding leftward
shift in aggregate supply (to point C) because the depreciation leads to
rise in the nominal wage. The price of domestic output accordingly rises
further ; in fact, the price of domestic output and the exchange rate in—
crease by the same amount, with the constant terms of trade ensuring that
output     remains fixed at its original ievei.(19) In     the union, in contrast,
no depreciation occurs, so the aggregate suly and demand curves remain
at   point A.                                                        distur-
                With full indexation of wages, therefore, the monetary

bances     leaves output unaffected in lx)th regimes. The t regimes differ

with respect     to   price behavior,   ho\ever,   since prices increase only under
flexible    rates.


       The   aggregate demand disturbance does change real output in both
regimes. In the union, the demand disturbances shifts equilibrium to
point A'. Under flexible rates, the increase in demand leads to an appre-
ciation of the franc and to a smaller increase in aggregate demand than
in the union (to point B'). With complete indexation of wages, however,
the appreciation of the exchange rate also raises aggegate supply by

lowering real wages faced by producers. Point' is reached where the



(19) Under full indexation, the aggregate supply equation becaTes a simple
     function of the terms of trade, while the aggregate demand equation
     is    a function of the terms of trade and the real interest rate (as
      well as foreign output which is exogenous). Because the expected
      change in the exchange rate is equal to the expected change in the
      dcxnestic price as well as in the general price level, there is no
      change in the real interest rate. The real interest rate could change
      if the disturbances took a more carlicated form, in which case there
      would be sane changes in output (proportional to g ) even under full
      ition.                                             r
                                        — 14   —




 change    in output in the same as in the union. Thus, when wages are fully
 indexed, the variance of output is the same in either regime.
          The case for an exchange—rate union thus depends upon whether dcntestic
 rrnetary or demand disturbances are mere important. But with respect to both
 types of disturbances, the difference batween regimes diminishes the mere
 highly indexed are wages in the econcilly.


 III. EV2LUATION OF THE UNION FOREIGN DISTURBANCES


         Foreign   disturbances affect the dcxnestic econany through a variety

of   channels

          (a) Changes in foreign output directly affect dcanestic aggregate

demand (proportionally to g2 and
                                          g3).
          (b) Changes in foreign prices or in the foreign terms of trade induce

substitution with the domestic good           (depending   upon the price elasticities,


g2    and g3).

          (c) In the union,   changes in the mark price        of the    dollar affect ag-
gregate   demand (through     those   same   price   elasticities).

          (d) Foreign interest rates affect domestic demand indirectly by chan-

ging   the franc price of the dollar under           flexible rates and directly   through
the   real interest rate effect on aggregate demand.

All of these channels are potentially important. For many disturbances, mere-
over, Country l's    output is pushed in contrary          directions.
                                      — 15   —




           The   net effect of foreign disturbances on Country 1      depends   upon
 which of these channels are Itkcst irrortant. That, in turn, depends upon
 the types of econanic disturbances encountered as well as on the pattern
 of trade. We might expect the union to be nore desirable if economic dis-
 turbarices predominantly originate from outside the union and if the pat-
 tern of trade is biased so that Country 1 trades primarily with Country 2.
 Both of     these propositions will be explored in the analysis below.


           In order to investigate foreign economic disturbances, we need           to
specify mDdels of the two        foreign countries. To keep the nodels relatively

sirr?le,   we adopt the following assurrptions

1.   Countries 2 and 3 have identical economic structures. That is, all the
structural parameters      in   the aggregate supply and   demand   equations and   in

the financial equations are the same for the two countries. Thus we can
specify    one national nodel which can apply to both countries.20         This as-

sunption does not restrict the nature of Country l's relationships with
the two foreign countries since any asyrrinetries in Country l's links with
the foreign countries could not affect the latter given the small country
assumption. Mcre specifically, Country 1 may choose to trade with one country
nore than the other, or ny be rrore sensitive to one country's prices or out-

put.
(20) The   countries' price indexes, for example, are mirror images of one ano-
       ther ; the weight of each country' s own gocx in its price index is the
       same for both countries, a22 =     = a. Note that Country l's prices
                                             a33
       and output are assuned to have a negligible impact on the foreign coun-
       tries ; for example, a21 and a31, the weights of Country l's good in
       the foreign price indexes, are assuned to be negligibly snail.
                                                  — 16 —



2. In both foreign countries, there is cariplete wage indexation so that equal
increases in darestic prices and exchange rates (or foreign prices) leave ag-
gregate supply unaffected. Foreign output is then solely a                      function of the

terms    of trade. This assumption considerably simplifies the analysis of the
two foreign countries making it easier to show the channels through with

foreign disturbances affect Country 1. Even with the simplifying assumption,

the    effects of foreign aggregate demand               disturbances   are   ambiguous, but we
are able to distinguish clearly which factors are                   important in     determining
the effects of these disturbances.
We leave for later analysis cases where foreign countries are asyrrmetric in

econanic structure or size and cases                  where they exhibit   significant money
illusion or       lags in adjustment of wages to prices.

A. The Foreign Country Model

       The   model closely parallels that             one   specified for Country        1. Diffe-

rences arise primarily because only two countries are involved, given the

small country assumption for Country 1, and because the aggregate supply

equation     takes a simple form when wage             indexation is complete. Each na-

tional model can be           expressed in three equations (where i = 2,3                ,   ji)
(1)
          i   =
                   g0
                       f fi
                        -.
                             g
                          Tt +
                               fj - f
                                         g
                                                        i-
                                                      Ert    (tE 1+ -
                                                                           ii
                                                                         I)J    +   di
                                                                                    Ut

(2)   :i      =
                   c0
                        +    cf (1_a)Tt

(3)'
         +ul=p_krl+ky1+k,
       2 =
where Tt
                   Tt
                         =       2   -    3
                                              +
                                                  2


         T=        - Tt
         I    =    a P + (1-a) (P + X)
         I =       a P + (1-a) (P -
                                    X).
                                        — 17 —




 Aggregate       demand is a function of the terms of trade, Tt, foreign output,
 and the real interest rate as well as a disturbance term, di
                                                           u.                Aggregate
 supply is a simple function of the terms of trade. Money demand and supply
 in the foreign countries are assind to be identical in form to that of
Country (21)
     The two country model is naturally carplex, but its behavior can be
 analyzed relatively easily by focusing on two variables, the terms of trade
 of Country 2 and the price of Country 3's good.22 The remaining variables
 can then be expressed in terms of these two.
        The terms of trade of Country 2, defined as Tt =            P - (P + X), can
 be expressed as a function of the two aggregate demand disturbances, u2 and
 d3
  t plus a non-stochastic term
                 d3 d2
             -
        Tt = T+ (ut-ut)         -

                         (N —N")

where     N' =    - g - c(i-a) (1 + g + k2g/k1) + g(1-a) <              0,

          N2 =
                  g + c(1-a)    (1 +   gf - k2g1)      +    a > o23)

A rise in aggregate demand in Country 3 lowers             the   terms of trade (since

N1 - N2 <       0),   while a rise in aggregate demand in Country 2 raises the terms

of   trade. With full indexation, monetary           disturbances   have no effect on the

terms     of   trade.


(21) More specifically, we assune thatthe interest and income elasticities
     of the money demand functions are the same as those in Country 1. The
     disturbance terms,   and u, are assumed to have mean zero and to
     be serially uncorrelated.
(22) The price of Country 2 's good, alternatively, could have been singled
      out since the model is synirretric with respect to the two countries.
      You will recall, however, that         in
                                         Country           l's
                                                     model, the foreign prices
      were defined relative to Country         3's
                                            price.

(23) The real interest rate effect on aggregate demand is assumed to be small

      enough      so that   N' and N2   have the signs indicated.
                                                 — 18   —




        The   price of Country 3's good is a function of the aggregate demand
disturbances as well as the nonetary disturbance in Country 3
                                                  1d2 N2d3
                                                                                  um3
                                                 r
        Pt =
         3
                         +          k1           LN u- u]
                    P          -ç                                -)       +
                               r
                              gL(1+k1)                (N'   —
                                                                N)            (1+k 1


A rise in aggregate demand in either country increases the price of Country
3's good (as well             as Country 2 's good), while an                 increase in Country 3' s
ironey supply also raises this price.

       Output in either country                  is   a simple function of the terms of trade

as shown in equation (2)'. Note that                        a   rise in the terms of trade increases

Country      2' s   output (because it reduces the real wage faced by producers) but

decreases Country 3's output. In fact, the increase in Country 2 ' s output

is   entirely at the expense of Country 3 when                        identical
                                                                       the two countries are

and    each country's output is a function of the terms of trade alone.
       The two remaining foreign variables appearing explicitly in Country l's
model, 4       and      X, can be expressed in terms of p, Tt, and the rronetary dis-
turbance by solving the rrney market equilibrium conditions (24)


       4      =         +                 - 3) -
                                                      k2c(1-a)        (Tt -   )-
       x=2              -      1
                                         [(1 +   2k2c(1-a))(Tt
                                                                      - T)    +
                                                                                  (u - u')]
                                                                                        t
                             (1+k1)

Ivbnetary     disturbances          naturally affect both naninal                  variables, although an
equal increase          in both       noney   supplies leaves the mark                  price   of the dollar

unaffected        since      there are     no asyrrtries between the two econamies. 1n

(24)   In    deriving the expression for X, we have assumad that                                the   interest
       rates are        initially                    2=
                                           — 19 —




aggregatedand disturbance affects both variables by changing the terms of
trade and, in the case of the interest rate, by changing Country 3 's price.
B. Foreign Ibnetary Disturbances
        Under flexible exchange rates, monetary disturbances abroad have no
           iPr prices1
effect on output1n Country 1. With full indexation, a foreign monetary
disturbance only affects naninal variables abroad. A flexible rate can
insulate the home country canpietely from changes in these variables •(25)
This is true regardless of the degree of indexation in Country 1                ; what
matters is that the foreign countries be fully indexed.26
       A general monetary expansion in the two foreign countries, where
u = u = u,              raises the price of Country        3's good (or Country 2's good)
by

              =     -     = u/(1+k1),
but    has no     effect on the terms of trade or foreign output as long as the
foreign      countries are fully indexed. The interest rate in Country          3 (or
Country 2) falls by


       ur3= r3 - -3
                 r =         (up3   - urn3 )/k   =     m
                                                     - ut/(1+k
                                             1

in   fact,   nominal interest rates fall enough to keep real interest rates

abroad constant.


(25) We discuss below,   however, an aggregate demand disturbance which             has
       effects only on nominal variables, but for which a flexible rate             does
       not provide effective insulation.

(26)   It is interesting to note that the converse is not true. If Country 1
       is fully indexed, but the foreign countries are not fully indexed,
       then foreign monetary disturbances have real effects on Country 1.
       A general monetary expansion raises output in Country 1 in a flexible
       exchange—rate regime as ll as in an exchange-rate union. But with
       full indexation in Country 1, the increase in output is identical in
       both regimes ; that is, the choice beteen reginEs has no effect on
       the variance of output.
                                                   — 20 —


        As    far as Country 1 is concerned, what matters under flexible rates
 are the franc prices of the to foreign goods and the franc return on the
 dollar (or mark) security, since these are the only variables that can af-
 fect Country l's aggregate demand or supply. Both of these remain constant,
 however, since the franc price of the dollar (or of the mark) falls by
         xl
        u =X-X-1 =-u m3(1+k1),
                   1


thereby caletely insulating Country 1 from the disturbance.
        In   an exchange-rate union,              a monetary disturbance in         Country 3 still
has   no effect on Country 1. Flexibility in the i2ark price                        of the dollar,
which    falls by

        ux2 =      - urn3/(1+k1)      =     u
                                             xl

sinply    replaces      the franc price of the dollar as the insulating factor.

        If the monetary        disturbance        is in Country 2, however, then in the
union the fixed         exchange   rate with that              country' s   currency ensures that
the   disturbance is transmitted to Country                      1.   Consider first the effects
of the monetary        expansion      on the t foreign countries. The price of
Country      2's good rises     while its interest rate falls

              =
                  u/(1 + k1) = - u2.
The   mark price       of the dollar        rises enough         to insulate   Country 3   from   the   dis-
turbance : u =          u/     (1 +
                                      k1)    ;   as   a result1 Country 3        price and   interest
rate remain       fixed.
        In    terms    of   the franc, Country          1 's   currency,    the prices   of both foreign

goods   rise in the union             the   franc price of Country            2' s good rises because
its mark price rises, and the franc price of Country 's good rises because
of the depreciation of the mark (and hence the franc) relative to the dollar.
                                        — 21    —




     In   addition, Country l's interest rate fans. So output in country 1 rises (27)


                   Ut
                         c(1-b) (g2 +
                                    Z
                                        g   +
                                                ga11) u
                                                       (H-k1)
                                                                 >   •
     Thus, if there is a union between Countries 1 and          2, nonetary disturbances
     originating     in Country 2 are transmitted to   Country    1.
C.   gregate Demand Disturbances
          Demand disturbances generally do affect Country 1 under }x)th flexible
exchange rates or the union. How a country fares in the to regimes depends
upon the specific form which the disturbance takes. We will consider three
types of demand disturbances        because they all provide insight into the ef-
fects of the union


          (1)   A shift in demand from the prcxucts of Country 3 to those of
       Country 2. The shift in demand affects Country 1 primarily by changing
       the terms of trade and shifting output (and hence demand for Coun l's
       prcxlucts) from one foreign country to another. This disturbance serves
       to illustrate the irrprtance of the pattern of trade between Country 1
      and the other countries.

          (2) A generalized increase in demand in   loth countries.      This disturbance,
      in contrast, si-ows why price sensitivity in Country 1 is ijtortant, since
      aggregate demand disturbances originating abroad have different effects
      on the franc exchange rate depending upon Country 1 's price elasticities.
      (3) An increase in demand which is concentrated in one country more than
      the other, a third case combining the first t to show the irtportance
      of where the disturbance occurs.
 (27) Country l's interest rate falls because with a fixed rate between the
                       1                     2
     franc and mark, r must decline
                                       with r. Only if there is full wage
           indexation in Country 1 (b=1) does this purely nominal disturbance
           leave Country 1 's output unaffected in the union. The flexibility
           of wages and prices then makes up for the fixity of the exchange rate.
                                           — 22     —



        All of these disturbances have the effect of changing interest rates
  abroad. If the real interest rate effect on aggregate demand in Country 1 is
  large enough, ho\ever, even a generalized demand expansion abroad will have
  aiubiguous effects on Country l's output since the resulting rise in foreign
  interest rates runs counter to other effects on the foreign demand expansion.
  To avoid this additional ambiguity, v assume in this section that the real
  interest rate effect in Country 1 is zero (g = 0). Under this assumption,
  higher foreign interest rates can still have a significant effect on Country
  l's output, but indirectly by changing exchange rates.

       Equation (I) can then be written in the following simplified fonn

 (I)          =   1 + c(1—ba                   [u1 +          + g3u]
                      gp3c(1—b)
                  +                  -
                                         (u3   + u) + g c(l—b)
                                                          z       (u3   + u + u1),

       where xi
             u = uxl , flexible rates,
                      =         exchange—rate union,
                          u2,
              Z =g2+g3+c(1-ba11).
Note that any aggregate demand disturbance originating aboard affects Country l's
output either through changes in foreign output or changes in the (franc) prices
of foreign gcods.
1. Shift in Demarx
     Suppose that there is a shift in demand to Country 2 ' s products from those
of Country 3 with
       d2                        d3 =
       Ut =   St ,              Ut    — st      ,       St > 0.
                                      — 23   -

Then    the terms of trade of Country 2 rise by
             u  =
                  T - T = - 2 st/(N' - N2) > 0.
Output rises in Country 2 and falls in Country                 3   proportionately   to the change

in the terms of trade. Interest rates rise in Country 2 but fall in Country 3
as a result, the mark appreciates by
            x2 —[ 2k2J(1—a) + ii T
             U=                              U   <0.
                        (1 +
                                k1)
Since    the two foreign econciiuies are identical, this shift disturbance rroves
each econcniy in equal but opposite          directions.


        With the two foreign countries responding symaetricafly to the distur-
bance, the effect on Country 1 clearly depends upon its pattern of trade with
the two countries. First, consider the neutral case where Country 1' s trade
is evenly balanced betven Country 2 and Country 3, so that the output and
price coefficients (or elasticities) in equation (I)' are equal,
    = g (28) In this case, the shift in demand has no effect on
                                                                                     g2 y3
g2                                                                                   Country   l's
output   under flexible rates. The foreign output term in equation (I)' is zero

since   u2 = - u3,     so the   shift   in demand has no direct output effect on Coun-

try 1 's aggregate demand.      In addition, it can be shown that the            franc prices

of goods   fran the   two countries move         in   equal   and opposite   directions as

follows

       Country 3 s good :      p3
                            ut +
                                      xl
                                      Ut =-       T

                                            T
       Country   2 s good up3 + uxl+ UtT = ut/2.
This   change in relative prices also has opposing effects on aggregate demand.
So Country 1' s output is insulated frai' the disturbance.
(28) Country 1 's trade is evenly balanced in the sense that its exports (and
     inorts) to the foreign countries are equal. The incane coefficients also
    depend upon the incane elasticities of demand for Country l's good in the
    two foreign countries, while the price coefficients also depend upon the
    export and inort price elasticities. (See the Jppendix). We assume these
    are equal for the two countries throughout the discussion in this section,
    although the trade pattern could alternatively be interpreted in terms of
    asyrrinetries in these underlying elasticities.
                                          — 24   —



          Under   flexible rates,    the franc appreciates relative to the dollar, but

by   less than the mark      appreciates         since the franc depreciates relative to the

mark.      (Recall that the shift in demand towards Country 2 's products raises
Country 2 's interest rate and lowers Country 3's interest rate). In fact,
the appreciation of the franc is exactly half as large as that of the mark
                     [2 k2c(1 —     a)   +]
          uxl =-         2(1 + k1)
                                                     T
                                                  ut=ut/2.
                                                          x2


In the union, the franc is tied to the mark,                     so it   appreciates more than under

flexible     rates    (i.e., twice       as much). The        franc prices of lxth   foreign goods
fall, so output in Country 1 must                fall    in   the union, and   Country 1 is accor-
dingly worse off.

     For similar reasons, Country 1 fares better under flexible rates when
trade is biased towards Country 3 (g,3 >      g3 > g2). In that case, the
                                                          g2,
direct effect       of the shift in foreign output is to reduce Country                l's aggre-
gate demand since the output of its closest trading parther, Country 3, drops.
Since the appreciation of the franc in the union is greater than under flexible
rates, Country 1' s output falls even further in the union than under flexible
rates. The greater appreciation associated with the union adds to the defla-
tionary effects of the shift in demand. (29)

 (29) This result holds even if there is no foreign output effect (ie, the
     output coefficients are equal, g2 g3), since the price effects of
     the disturbance are also greater in the union than in the flexible re-
     girre. Under flexible rates, the price effects on   can be simplified
     to
                     c(1-b) (g2 - g3)k1 u/(-2B).
          If g3 > g2,       expression must be negative. In the union, the franc
                         this
      •


          appreciates even more than under flexible rates, thereby adding to the
          deflationary price effects of the shift in demand.
                                 — 25   —




       If Country l's trade is biased towards Country 2 (g2 < g3, g2 < g3),
which may be the more likely case for a country joining a   union,   then the
direct output effect is positive. That is, the shift in output towards Country
2 tends to raise Country l's output. Now the greater appreciation of the franc
in the union than under flexible rates    help to stabilize Country l's out-
put.30 So the union may be superior to flexible rates when trade is biased
towards Country 2. If the price elasticities (g 's) are large enough so that
the price effects in equation (I') daninate the output effect, however, then
once again the greater appreciation of the franc in the union becomes a draw-
back. Country 1 's output then varies more in the union than under flexible
rates.(31)
2. General Increase in Demand
      There is no longer the same presurrtion in favor of flexible   rates when

the   demand disturbance is a general one,
      d2         d3   d
      Ut =Ut =Ut.
(30) In the union, equation (I)' can be written
        =    + c(1 -
                     ba11) (y2 — gy3) c(i-a) U/Z — g3 c(1-b)u/Z


            (g2 + g3) c(1—b) [k2 J(i-a) — k1/2] u/Z(1+k1).
             —



      The output effect is positive if g 2 > g 31 while the price effects are
                                        y     y
      negative (assuming that k2 c (1-a) > k1/2) because of the appreciation
      of the franc. Since the price effects run counter to the output effect,
      one may neutralize the other thus helping to stabilize Country 1' s out-
      put.
 (31) In equation (I'), the price terms increase in (absolute) value relative
      to the foreign output term as the price elasticities (g2, g3) increase.
                                     — 26 —


Flexible rates are superior to the union only when price elasticities are high.

     If demand increases (or decreases) by the same auunt in both countries,
there is no change in the terms of trade nor in the mark price of the dollar.
Since foreign output is a function of the real wage, which is constant as long
as the terms of trade remain fixed, output in both countries is constant.(32)
                                      •               •




So this demand disturbance has effects only on nominal quantities. DiTstic
prices in both countries rise

     up3 =         fd
              (k1/g)u /      (1 +   k1) =   up2 > 0.
Similarly,    both rates of interest rise

         r3
        p3              r2
     u =ut/ki=ut.
     In    the exchange—rate union,       there   is no change in the   franc   price of the

dollar    since the mark price of the dollar is fixed. But the rise in foreign
prices increases output in Country 1 with the increase proportional to the
price elasticities, g2 + g3. (See equation (I')).
     Under flexible rates as well, Country            l's output is increased. Whether
output   is increased rrore or less under flexible rates depends upon whether

the franc appreciates or depreciates. There are tw influences on the ex—

change rate : higher foreign interest rates lead to depreciation of the

franc, while higher danestic interest rate due to the increase in dcwnestic

transactions lead to an appreciation. How much the domestic interest rate

increases depends upon the price elasticities,                 and g3, since higher
                                                          g2
price elasticities imply greater increases in darestic output. The franc

appreciates   if the product of these price elasticities and the income

(32) If indexation were less than complete in the foreign countries, this
     type of demand disturbance would lead to increases in output as well
     as prices, with the relative importance of changes in output increasing
     as the degree of indexation fell.
                                             — 27    —


elasticity of             noney demand exceeds       unity, and depreciates     if the product is

 less than unity33

         xl <         0    as k2(g2 +
                                                 >
                                                                  -

        u.        ;                        g3)
                                                      1




If the franc appreciates, then darrestic output increases less under flexible

rates    than in the union. A depreciation, on the other hand, causes domestic
output to increase irore under flexible rates. Thus in the presence of this
general demand disturbance, the union increases or decreases the variance
of output depending upon whether                         k2 (g2 + g3) is greater or less than
one.(34)

3. Increase in Demand Concentrated 'bre in One Country
        Shifts in demand between the two foreign countries and general increases
in demand abroad have very different effects on Country 1, but in each case
the cloice between flexible rates and the union is relatively siniple. Unfor-
tunately, actual demand disturbances that occur seldom fall solely in one

(33) In the union (when uxl.
                          is constant), the foreign interest rate rises
     by u3 = u3/k1, whereas the domestic interest rate rises by
             u1 + k u'1        2t                              u3
              =
                           k
                                       =   [i + c(1-b) (k2 g2 + k2 g3       -   l)/Z]
        If k2(g2 +
                            g3)   >   1, then the danestic      interest rate   rises rrore       than
        the   foreign interest rate ;            thus     under flexible rates, the franc appre-
        ciates relative to the dollar                and mark. But    if k2 (g 2 +   gp3)   <    1, the
        franc depreciates.                                                    p

        An analogous condition uld apply to a small country
               and flexible exchange rates (i.e., where only onechcosing
(3L1)                                                                                           between
        fixed                                                     foreign country
        is involved). The abeve condition resembles the Marshall-Lerner
                                                 — 28 —




 category, but more often take                 the form   of expansions or contractions of
aggregate demand that are highly correlated across cOuntries but are con-
centrated more in one foreign country or the other. Such demand disturban-
ces can either strengthen or aken the case for an exchange—rate union
depending upon which country experiences the greater change in demand.
     The analysis of this more general case, however, can draw on the first
t cases, since this disturbance can be regarded as a canbination of the
first t'o. Suppose that both countries experience a demand                    expansion,    but
that the expansion is greater in Country 2 (or 3). Then the to disturbances
take the form,
        d2     =     d+
       Ut           Ut   (-)
                                 St,
        d3
             = ud (+)-
where each disturbance includes a carron element (u) medified by                     the shift
term         (35)

       The general increase in deirand (represented by the u factor) raises

output   in Country 1          under both      exchange   rate regimes. Under which regime

output   expands more depends again on the price elasticities. Suppose that

k2 p2 + g3) = 1,               so that   the                     the same
                                               general, increase in demand has

effect on    output in the union as under flexible rates. Then the choice

between regimes depends upon which country is more                  subject   to the demand
disturbance.
(34)       condition, which requires that the sum of the elasticities of export
       and import demand exceed 1. These elasticities, however, are those of the
       aggregate demand function as a whole ; in fact, as the Zppendix shows,
       the Marshall-Lerner condition is required in order for these elasticities
       to be positive. When indexation i less than complete in the t foreign
       countries, the effect of foreign demand disturbances depends not only
       upon these price elasticities but also upon the relative degree of in-
       dexation in the darestic and foreign countries.

 (35) We assume that s is proportional to d,                        =   d, where s   is a
        fraction     less than one so that u. = (1-s) u. > 0.
                                           t           t
                                      — 29   —




       Consider   the case where trade is balanced between Country 1 and the
 twD foreign countries (the neutral case considered in Section 1), but where
 the increase in demand is more concentrated in Country 2. Then strangely
 enough Country 1 is better off in the exchange-rate union -- tying itself
 to the country with greater demand disturbances. That is simply because
 changes in relative prices counter the effects of the general expansion.36
With the disturbance more concentrated in Country 2, the terms of trade of
that   country rise   and   the   mark appreciates.     Under flexible rates, the franc
also   appreciates relative to the dollar, but by less that the mark. By

joining the union, Country 1 ties the franc to the mark and finds its output

increasing less because of the dampening effect of the mark's appreciation.

       If Country l's trade is biased toward Country           2, however, then   the

advantage of   a union over flexible rates is diminished. This           paradoxical
result arises because the pattern of trade helps to determine how much
the franc appreciates relative to the dollar under flexible rates. The
franc appreciates more under flexible rates when trade is biased toward

the country with the greater expansion           of   output than when trade is ba-

lanced, since Country 1' s interest rate rises more in the former case. So
the advantage of moving to a union, where the franc is tied to the appre-
ciation mark, is correspondingly diminished.

     When trade is balanced but the increase in demand is more concentrated
in Country 3, in              , Country   1 is worse off in the union. Now the mark
depreciates more than the franc. So joining the union further increases the
effect of the disturbance on Country 1 's output.

(36) We assume, however, that the demand shift is not large enough to lower
    Country l's output in either regime.
                                    — 30    —




     Thus   the net impact of this more general disturbance depends not only
on price elasticities, but on the         location   of the disturbance, with output
variation being   smaller   in the union when    the   disturbance is concentrated
in the union country. nd the pattern of trade is also important, but greater
trade with the union country can actually weaken the case for a union. This
disturbance serves particularly well to illustrate the pitfalls in easy ge-
neralizations about how the source of econcmic disturbances or the pattern
of trade affect the case for a union.

                                    o0o



     The form which a foreign demand disturbance takes clearly determines
how desirable an exchange rate union would be. Only in the case of a demand
shift between countries is there a definite presumption in favor of one re-
gime or the other, but that presumption is in favor of flexible rates. In
the second case, that of a general increase in demand, the union is superior
only if prices   elasticities are   low. In the final case, where the disturbance
is concentrated more   in one country      than the   other, the result   also depends
upon where the disturbance is concentrated as well as upon the pattern of
trade. If foreign demand disturbances are a major source of concern, the
case for or against an exchange—rate union will have to be based on a va-
riety of considerations including the type of disturbance typically en-
countered, the pattern of trade with union and non—union countries, and the
price sensitivity of the darstic economy.
                                 — 31   —




 IV.    CONCLUSION

        This paper has shown how a union uld affect a country subject to rrone—
 tary and aggregate demand disturbances originating at home or abroad. How much
 difference a union makes depends first of all on domestic wage behavior. Iny
 disturbance has an identical effect on the home country under flexible rates
or in an exchange-rate union if wages are fully indexed to the general price
 level. Short of full indexation, the case for a union is stronger if rirnetary
disturbances originate at home rather than abroad and weaker if domestic de-
mand disturbances are important. But the advantage of one regime over another
diminishes the closer is the country to full indexation.

      Zpart from wage behavior, t other factors are important : the pattern
of trade and the sources of disturbances. But a pattern of trade biased toward
the potential parther in the union does not always beister the case for a union.
Such a pattern of trade will not rrdify in any way the effect of domestic dis-
turbarices as long as Country 1 is small.      In   the case of sane   foreign   demand
disturbances, rrcreover, trade weighted toward the union country actually re-
duces the advantages of a union. The sources of econan.ic disturbances also
play    a caiplex role in the choice of regimes. With respect to foreign mone-

taxy disturbances, the case for a union is weaker, as might have been expected,

when the monetary disturbance is concentrated in the union country.          But with
respect    to foreign dnand   disturbances,   the case for a union is actually

strengthened when the demand disturbance is larger in the union country. The

effects   of   a union are indeed complex, with easy    generalizations tenuous at
best.
                                    — 32   —




                                 REFERENCES




Allen, Pofly Reynolds, Organization and inistration of a i'lonetary Union,
     Studies in International Finance N° 36, ?rinceton, June 1976.
 Corden, W.M., Monetary Integration, Essays in International Finance N° 93,
      Princeton, April 1972.

FlcxxI, Robert P. and Marion, Nancy P., "The Trannission of Disturbances
     Under Alternative Exchange-Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexing", NBER
     Working Paper n° 500, July 1980.

Fisher, Stanley, "Wage Indexation and Macroeconomic Stability", in K. Brunner
     and A. Meltzer, Stabilization of the Danestic and International Economy,
     Vol. 5 of Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
     Amsterdani North—Holland, 1977, 107—148.

Gray, Jo Anna, "Wage Indexation : A Macroeconomic Approach", Journal of Mone—
     ta.ry Econanics, 2, April 1976, 221—235.
Ingram, James C., The Case for European Monetary Integration, Essays in Inter-
     national Finance, N° 98, Princeton, April 1973.
Marston, Richard C. ,"Cross. Country Effects of Sterilization, Reserve Currencies,
     and Foreign Exchange Intervention", Journal of International Economics,
     February 1980, 63—78.

Marston,   Richard   C.,   "Exchange-Rate Unions and   the   Volatility of the Dollar",
     NBER Working Paper n° 492, June 1980.

MoKinnon, Ronald I., "Optimum Currency Areas", American Economic Review, 53
     September 1963, 717—725.

bdigliani,  Franco and Padoa-Schioppa, Toninaso, The Management of an Open
     Economy with "100 % Plus" Wage Indexation, Essays in International
     Finance N° 130, Princeton, December 1978.

Mundell, Robert A., "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy Under Fix
    and  Flexible Exchange Rates", Canadian Journal of Economics and Political
     Science, 29, November 1963, 475—85.

Nundell, Robert A., "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas", American Economic
     Review, 51, September 1961, 657—665.

Sachs, Jeffrey, "Wage Indexation, Flexible Exchange Rates, and Macro-Economic
     Policy", International Finance Discussion Papers N° 137, Washington
     Board of Governors, April 1979.

Tower, Edward and Willett, Thomas D., The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas
     and Exchange Rate Flexibility, Special Papers in International Economics
     N° 11, Princeton, May 1976.
                                        — 33 —


APPENIJIX: THE AGGREGATE DEMAND FUNCT ION


          The foreign output and price coefficients in the aggregate demand
equation play a major role in the analysis of foreign disturbances. This
appendix derives the aggregate demand equation from a more traditional
equation (in level form) and interprets the output and price coefficients
in terms of this more traditional model.
          We begin with an expression relating output to consumption,

exports, and imports:


(Al)      Q1    = c1() + EX2(Q2,R) +      EX3(3,R)   - R   2(Q1,R) -   IM(Q1,R)

All variables are expressed in level form with the time subscripts omitted.

   and C'      are domestic output and spending in Country i,    respectively,

while EX' is the demand for exports of Country 1 by Country i and IM' is

the demand for imports from Country i by Country 1. To simplify the

analysis, we assume that there are no changes in the terms of trade

between the two foreign countries and that the dollar prices of the two

foreign goods are initially equal. Thus R can represent the terms of

trade between Country 1 and either foreign country. We also assume that

trade is initially balanced with each foreign country so that EX' = R IM'.

          Define the following elasticities (where the partial derivative

with respect to the first (second) argument of a function has the subscript

1 (2)):

       h. = income elasticity of foreign demand for Country l's good,

          =
           EX (Qi/EXi)
       fi = price elasticity       of foreign desand for Country l's good,

           =
                EX (R /Ex'),
          =    price elasticity   of domestic demand for Country i's good,

          =
               -IM (R/INi).
                                                        — 34   —



Also,   define d =         sum    of the marginal propensities to save and to import

                                                               Then equation (Al) can be written
by Country 1              (1 -
                                 c) + IM + IM.
in terms of percentage changes as follows:

        dQ       =    1         EX2 dQ2
                      — [h2 —i----
                      d                   Q.
                                                 + h EX3           dQ
                                                                        + f2   +
                                                                                   n2
                                                                                        -   EX2 dE
                                                                                             Q
(Al)'
                                      —          EX3 dE
                       (nf3 +    n3        1)        (—)11.


Thus the coefficients of the aggregate demand equation in the text,

which is expressed in logarithms, can be written:

                      g.         h. () / d,

                      g. = (nf.                + n. -   i) () / d.
The relative sizes of the g. coefficients depend •upon the income elasticities

in the two           foreign countries (h1) as             well as the share of exports to

country      i   as    a fraction of total domestic output. The relative sizes                       of

the g. coefficients depend upon the underlying price elasticities as
well as the share of exports. The Marshall-Lerner condition for the trade
balance between Country 1 and Country i is
               nf. + n. - 1 > 1,
a   condition which is necessary for                            to be positive.
                                       — 35   —




          $                                                       Mark

                                    2: M/$




               X: F/$                                 X2: F/N




                                    Franc             1: Home Country
                                                      2: Union Countries
                                                      3: Rest of World

 Figure 1. Currencies and Exchange Rates




1
Pt        \                 S                               \           S



                   B                                              \         //
                   \
                        \
                            \                                               \
                                                                                 1
                                t                                               Yt
 Monetary Disturbance                             Aggregate Demand Disturbance

 Figure 2. Domestic Monetary and Aggregate Demand Disturbances
                                                                                   Table           1:       Country l's Model
                     —l           c(l                                                                   y3                                  -
(I)                               _____________                             +     y2 +
                                                                                                                  +       (g3c(1                b) - g c                          xl
                                      -_b_a1l[u                                                                                                            a13)[P3           +
                                      z                                                                                                         z                                Ut
                                                   -           -
                     +            c(i   b)                                                                            -           c(l -         b                   xl
                             (g2
                              ______________________
                                             gc a12[U                                  +                +                                                r3    -
                                                       z                                   U                                            z                          ut    •
                                          dl +                           y2 +           y3                                -
(II)        p1   =            + [U                                      Ut                     I                                            +    c   b
                                                           g                     g3 Ut                  +     (g3                                                  +              +
                                                                        z                                                          z
                                  -                            +    C   b                       xl                            g
                                                                                       +           + T-1              -                 r3
                                                                            a12[U              Ut    Ut                            [Ut
                                                                                                                                                - Utxl
                                               z

(lila)      Flexible Rates

       =             Z       ml        +       - h
                 -                + [1   k2c(1     a11 )I
                                                                                   dl +                                            -
                                     ____________                                                             +
                                                                                 (ut
            l                                                  B                               g2U2               g3u)                  Lz +g(l + k2c(1-b a1i)1 UfJ
                                                                                                                                                           B
                         ÷                 -               +                -              +
            +   [g(1          k2c(1                                             r(1            k2c u3
                                                       B
                         +                 -   b)) +                        -
            + [g2(1           k2c(l                                a12cb
                                                                                                                              Ut),
                                                                                2g(1 ÷ k2c)I (u3 +
                                                       B

(Ilib)      Exchange-Rate Union
      =              —2               x2
                 =   x       +
x                                  Ut


                                                                                   >0                                 =             -       X1.
                          p
whereZ=g2            +3+1+c(l_b1)                                                              and Utxl

           B = -(1 +                  -                                      -
                         )z                    c(1 - b)[k2g a1i + k2(g2 +
                                                                          g3) 11
                                                                                                                                  < 0.
