NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ADDED WOHKER EFFECT: A REAPPRAISAL

Shelly Lundberg

Working Paper No. iO6

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
July 1981

I am indebted to Stephen Cosslett, Nicholas Kiefer, Dale Mortensen,
George Neumann, Paul thubman, and participants in workshops at
Columbia University and the University of Pennsylvania for comments
on this work, and to Paul Silver for programming assistance. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #706
July 1981

The Added Worker Effect:
A Reappraisal

ABSTRACT

In this pacer, the added worker effect is interpreted
as a response to uncertain returns to labour supply offers
by ce:rbers of a household. A model of household labour
supply is develboed in which each member's current labour
force

status affects the

decisions

of

job search and participation

the other and thus the probabilities of observed

transitions between the states of employment, unemployment,

and non—participation. The determinants of actual household transitions are then inestigated using continuous
employment histories for a sample of low—income famiUes.
Simulations using the estimated

tr3 esit

on functions show

that increased unemoloyment among married men has a size—
able short-run effect on both participation and e:nmloyment
of married women.

Shell y Lundberg
Deoart:Tent of Economics

University

of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
(215) 243—6775

I. INTRODUCTION
"After three decades of research and occasionally animated
controversy, the short—run behavior of the labor force is still not
well understood."
Jacob Mincer [1966]

Cyclical fluctuations in the size of the labour force, and their effect
on measured unemployment, have been controversial topics since the Depres-

sion1. The

response

of labour force participation rates to a transitory

increase in the unemployment rate is usually described in terms of two
components of opposite sign ——

the

added worker effect and the discouraged

worker effect. The discouraged worker effect refers to a widespread
deterioration in expected wages or employment opportunities among potential

workers which leads them to drop out of the labour force or to refrain from

entering it. In families whose employed members lose their jobs, this may be
offset by the added worker effect, as secondary workers enter the labour force
in response to the reduction in family income.

Much of the attention in this area has been focused on the relative
importance of these two forces in determining movements in the size of the
total labour force as demand conditions change, but the concern of this paper

is with the added worker effect alone. The Impact of unemployment on the
distribution of family incomes, and on the demographic composition of the
labour force, depends crucially upon the responses of individual households to

unemployment among their members. The nature and magnitude of these short—run
adjustments in household labour supply have been the subject of some
disagreement in recent years.

A spell of unemployment experienced by the male head of household affects
the labour supply of the wife in two ways; the transitory reduction in

1

household income and the increase in husband's non—market time both tend to

reduce the relative value of the wife's non—market time. Mincer [1962] argued
that such a transitory reduction in income due to spouse's unemployment has a
greater effect on the labour supply of married women does than a permanent
income loss and appealed to the permanent income theory of consumption for an

explanation. Cain [1966] presented evidence to the contrary and is supported
by Beckman and MaCurdy [1980], who find no supply response to transitory
income variations among married women and note that this is consistent with a
life—cycle theory of household labour supply.

In a life—cycle context, the wife's participation decision is equivalent
to deciding what proportion of her lifetime to spend working in the market.
This time is allocated over the lifetime according to the relative value of

home time in each period. The husband's unemployment causes a substitution of
market work from other periods to the present, but if the household is not
credit constrained, the wealth effect of a short spell of unemployment will be
negligible.

It is necessary to depart from this deterministic life-cycle framework
once we recognize that the labour force entry of secondary workers is a
response to disequilibrium it-i

the

household's labour supply and that there are

uncertain returns to a labour supply offer. Conditional upon current income
and the nature of credit markets, the household's response will depend upon
stochastic elements affecting the duration of unemployment and future wages,

for both the principal earner and any potential labour force entrant. The
approach followed in this paper, therefore, is to present a unified treatment
of job search and participation decisions within a household labour supply

framework, with search activity serving as the link between the participation

decision and actual employment. Since the decision to eater the labour force

2

can be distinguished from the decision to accept a job offer when offer
arrivals are subject to uncertainty, the appropriate focus for an empirical
investigation of the added worker effect in this case is on flows into and out
of employtent and unemployment by wives, rather than on labour force status
per Se.

A detailed investigation of actual labour force transitions reveals that
increased unemployment among husbands has a sizable short—run effect on both

unemployment rates and employment rates for married women. Aithough this
increase in labour supply takes a variety of forms, including a reduction in
the probability of leaving employment, the principal effect of husband's
unemployment is to increase the probability of labour force entry for the

wife. The fact that these strong results come from the analysis of low—income
households suggest that the role of a credit constraint in generating the
added worker effect may be an important one.

A two person model of household labour supply under uncertainty (based on

Burdett and Mortensen [1978]) is developed in Section II. The optimal
decision rules derived from this model are analogous to those implied by
individual job search theories and static models of household time allocation,

offering a basis for comparison with these approaches. Events such as the
loss of a job by one member change these decision rules, which in turn affect

the stochastic movement of the household between labour force states. Section
III presents a technique for estimating the determinants of household
transition rates from actual employment histories, and is followed by a

description of the data and empirical specification. Section V contains the
transition rate estimates for female household heads, and the final section
employs the entire household transition matrix to simulate the effects of
increased unemployment among husbands on the labour supply of wives.

3

II. THE DEL: HOUSEHOLD LABDUR SUPPLY UNDER UNCERTAINTY

Burdett and

Mortensen present a dynamic labour supply model in which the

employment history of an individual is generated by a Markov process. In the
two—person case, the transition probabilities of individual household members
are interdependent, since the employment status of one member affects the

labour supply decisions and search strategy of the other. In this section, a
version of the model is presented in which non-participation is considered to

be a state functionally distinct from the state of unemployment. The
household time allocation problem is simplified by assuming that the amount of
time devoted to market work, if employed, and to search, if unemployed, are

fixed constants. The opportunity for time-substitution between household
members is thus limited to a choice between states. To provide a more
complete account of random forces operating on the household and, in
particular, those which influence movements in and out of the labour force,
the utility value of non-market time is permitted to vary in a stochastic
manner.

It will be shown that the optimal decision rules derived from the

householcFs joint utility maximization under

uncertainty

are analogous to the

reservation wages arising from standard search and participation analyses.

A.

Household Preferences and Time Allocation

A two—person household chooses a strategy in each period so as to
maximize the expected value of household utility, U(t), where

U(t) =

_______ (u(t)t

+ U(t + At))

The instantaneous utility flow associated with consumption during the short
interval [t,t + At) is assumed to be a strictly concave function

u(x,2) where x is household income and & is a vector l'2 such

4

that

is the fraction of the time period devoted to leisure by member

It is assumed in the sequel that income and leisure are complements in
household production, and that the leisure times of the two household members

are substitutes, such that an increase in Li reduces the marginal utility

of

Future utility flows are discounted at the subjective rate p.
The strategy is denoted by (x,Z.,s), where s =

(s1,s2)

fraction of the period devoted to search by member 1.

such that Si is the

At this point, we

restrict the possible values of Si to zero and some fixed amount s. The
residual fraction of the time period not spent in leisure or search, h =
1 —

L

si, is interpreted as the time spent working and is restricted to

zero and some fixed h. Obviously, it must be true that hi + s ' 1.

Utility maximization is subject to the constraint x y + w1h1 + w2h2
where wi is the wage earned by member i when employed and y is non—labour

income. This constraint can be re—written in a "full income" sense as

x +

÷

w22.2 + w1s1 + w2s2

y + w1 + w2

given the definition of hi.

B.

The State Space and Transition Functions
At any date, the household occupies a participation state j, which is a

vector (j1,j2) representing the employment status of both members. If j =

then person i is employed, while Jj =

U

implies that person i is unemployed

and searching for a job, and ij = N implies that person i is not participating

in the labour force. Therefore, jJ = CE,U,N} for i = 1,2.
We now

introduce

a stochastic movement of the household from one state to

another over time, where Pjk(t) is the probability of a transition from state

j to state k during the interval [t,t +t). Of course, these probabilities
are influenced by the household's allocation of time to search and market

5

work, and the household's choice of a strategy is affected by uncertainty

regarding future state occupancies. Assume that the transition function can
be written as
P.k(tIt) =

Xikt

+ O(t)

,

j* k

where Aikis a constant and O(t)/t + 0 as t +

liin

t ÷

0

0.

This implies that

tLt\_{hifik
0 if j * k

jk'

'

so that the probability of making any transition in a sufficiently short time
interval is negligible.
In interpreting the parameters {A .,}, we follow the discussion in Burdett

and Mortensen. Suppose that the job offers received by worker I arrive
randomly in sequence according to a Poisson process with mean ct.s where s1 is
the fraction of any time period allocated to search activity and a1 is the
expected number of offers received per unit of search time by person 1.

If

fi@i) is the probability that an offer is equal to w.c W where W is the set
of all possible wage rates, then the probability that member i will receive an

offer Wj during a short time interval [t,t +t) is asf1(w1)Lt + O(t).
This implies that, for a one—person household,
=

as1[l

— Fi(wi)]

where F1(w1) is the c.d.f. corresponding to fi(wj) and w is the minimal
acceptable wage. That is, the instantaneous transition rate from unemployment
to employment is equal to the arrival rate of acceptable job offers.
Similarly, the probability that I is separated, given employment, is

denoted 51tt + O(t). The probability that both members receive job offers,
or that of any other joint event, is negligible when tt is small.

6

C.

The Intertemporal Decision Problem
The household's optimal strategy can be derived using dynamic

programming. A full description of the problem is contained in Lundberg and
will not be repeated here, except to note a number of assumptions imposed to

make it tractable. In the infinite horizon case, the household's optimal
strategy is stationary, transition rates are constant over time, and it is
appropriate to characterize the household's employment history as a Markov

process. To allow for changes in asset holdings over time or a finite time
horizon would, on the other hand, result in time—dependent strategies and
transition rates.

If job search while employed is ruled out, the household's time allocation is uniquely determined by the state occupied or, conversely, the choice

of a strategy (x,L,s) is equivalent to a choice among feasible states. The
optimal allocation of time can be derived by comparing the expected utility
associated with occupying alternative states.
First, consider the value to the household of alternate allocations of

member l's time, given that member 2 is working. To represent this, we

introduce the function V , which is the sum of the current utility flow when
member 1 is in state j1, plus the expected utility gain attributable to the
current allocation of l's time, given that an optimal policy is followed
subsequent to any event.5

Let w(w2) be the solution to VE(w(w2),w2) =

V(O,w2)

(la)

and w(w2) be the solution to V(c4(w2),w2) =

VN(O,w2)

(ib)

Then member 1 will continue to work at a job paying w1 if and only if
*

> w1(w2), where the minimal

acceptable

*
wage w1 can be interpreted as

max[wf(w2),4(w2)]. If member 1 is unemployed, the household will accept a

7

job offer w1 if the value of member 1 working at that wage exceeds the value

associated with 1 continuing to search, or VE(w1,w2) > V1(O,w2). This implies
that a job offer w1 is acceptable only if w1 > wf(w2). 6
In deciding whether member 1 should participate in the labour market,

given

no job attachment, the household will compare VU(O,w2) and VN(O,w2).

This implies that 1 will participate as an unemployed job searcher if the cost

of search, in teris of the utility loss from foregone leisure, is less than
the expected return to search, which is the expected rate at which acceptable

offers arrive times the conditional expectation of household utility gain from
an acceptable offer.

AlL equivalent participation condition, in view

of

(1),

r

is w1(w2) > w1(w2).

By following a similar procedure for the case when member 2 is not
employed, and for 2's time allocation given the employment status and wage of

member 1, we can see that the household's optimal strategy in terms of market

work and search activity can be completely described by (w('),w()) for i =

1,2.

The function w(. )

represents

the wage—equivalent value to the household

of unemployed search by member 1, and is analogous to the reservation wage in

individual job search models. The wage—equivalent value of non—participation

by member i, 4(.

), is

similar to the "reservation wage" in a static

participation analysis (and would, in fact, be equivalent were job durations

not uncertain). The decision rules relating to the time allocation of each
member are interdependent and, when combined with offer arrival and separation
rates, can be used to describe household transition rates between labour
market states.

3w
Proposition 1: -—
_______

>

3wf

-—

> 0

This proposition, which is proved elsewhere, states that an increase in
the wage of an employed member of the household makes the other member less

8

likely to participate in the labour force and, if they do participate, less

likely to accept a job offer. This leads directly to the result that member 1
is more likely to search for work and to accept a given wage offer if member 2
is unemployed, rather than employed at any acceptable wage, and provides a
rationale for the "added worker effect" under conditions of uncertainty.7

D. Stochastic Value of Non—Market Time
The model outlined above is capable of capturing a variety of
interactions between the labour supply and search behavior of household
members, and clearly demonstrates the source of an added worker type of

response to unemployment in the household. Transitions in and out of the
labour force, however, will occur only as an immediate result of a change in

the other member's employment status. We could expand this range of
possibilities by allowing the job searcher to acquire information about the
wage distribution while unemployed, or introduce some other type of time—

dependence t household strategies. An alternative approach is to consider a
wider variety of random events which may be experienced, and to some degree
anticipated, by the household.
A simple way to allow a stochastic value of non—market time in the

current model is to introduce individual—specific parameters b which affect
the productivity of leisure time, so the current utility flow is now

u(x,b11,b2i2). Suppose that each b1 is the current value of a random
variable, which changes over time in a manner analogous to the arrival of job

offers. Thus the waiting time between changes in b1 has a negative

exponential distribution with mean l/. For each member of the household the
value of b is selected at random from a known distribution with a cumulative
distribution function Gi(bj) such that the density gi(bi) represents the

9

probability that the new value is equal tob1.
These random changes in the productivity of non—market time are intended

to reflect a variety of uncertain events. Of these, the most obvious may be
changes in the individual's health status. Other possibilities include
alterations in family composition 8uch as deaths or the departure of older
children, unexpected pregnancies, changes in the availability of child care,
or even the weather, to the extent that it affects the value of non—market
pursuits.

It is now clear that the household decision rules represented by

(w,w) depend upon both the prevailing b1's and the distributions from which
they are drawn.

r

3w1

3w1

< 0
3b
2
2
If member 2's leisure is relatively more productive in household

Proposition 2:

3b

production, then member 1 will be more likely to participate, and will have a

lower reservation wage. This result also holds if member 2 is assumed

to be

employed throughout or, even more strongly, if the increase in

raises w enough to induce member 2 to drop out of the labour force.
The effect of events which change the value of household non—market time
in general can be analyzed by assuming b1 = b2 = b.

In this case, the impact

of a change in b on w and s4 is ambiguous, even if the employment status of
member 2 is held constant. An increase in b is more likely to have a positive

effect on w and w if member 2 is working, compared to when member 2 is
unemployed or not participating. We might expect, therefore, to find that the
usually—discouraging effects of children, age, and poor health on the labour
force participation of married women are less pronounced when the husband is
unemployed.

10

We can now express the transition rates of a household among labour force
states in terms of the arrival rates of random events and the jointly

determined decision rules of household members. The next section discusses a
methodology for estimating these transition rates which is compatible with the
stochastic properties of the development above.

III. ESTThIATING LABOUR FORCE TRANSITION RATES

In

the previous section, the instantaneous transition rates of a

household over labour market states, {Xjk} were derived as functions of the
arrival rates of random events and the household's strategy. The arrivals of
job offers and changes in the value of non—market time were assumed to be
Poisson, while the household's strategy (Wr wL) was asserted to be stationary,
i' i

given

the restrictions placed on the model. These assumptions result in

transition

rates which are time—independent and can be simply estimated if the

date of each transition is known.9
The advantages of applying maximum likelihood methods to continuous—time

models for the analysis of event histories have been pointed out in several
recent works.lO The alternatives, including a cross—sectional analysis of

state—occupancies using probit or logit and a regression analysis of
durations, all have serious shortcomings which will not be reiterated in
detail

here. A few aspects of the continuous time method, however, are

particularly relevant to the problem at hand.
1.

Estimating the transition rates, themselves, rather than state

occupancy probabilities, permits the different types of household response to
unemployment to be treated separately. Th,e added worker effect can appear in

various manifestations, including an increased rate of labour force entry
11

(given g1() and the arrival rate of shocks to the value of leisure), a
reduced rate of labour force exit from either employment or unemployment, and
an increased rate of job acceptance from unemployment.

2. The average length of a spell of unemployment is short relative to
the periods over which labour supply measures are aggregated in most cross—

sectional or panel methods. A transitory labour supply response to a short—
run change in the household's circumstances is therefore not likely to be

observed. A continuous—time technique, on the other hand, is capable of
examining the process of adjustment to a temporary event.
3.

As Tuma and Robins have noted, a binary logit model is the

appropriate representation of the equilibrium state distribution resulting
from a two—state transition process with exponentially—distributed

durations. This result, however, does not generalize to more than two states,
so there is no obvious cross—sectional counterpart to a household transition
model.

For constant transition rates, state occupancy durations have a negative

exponential distribution which depends upon the Xjk In particular, the
cumulative distribution function representing the probability of a transition
from state j before t1, given that the household occupies state j at time to,
is

=

F(t1It0)

where A =

A

k

•k

I

-

eAji - t0)

(2)

or the rate of leaving state j.

j

The density function is

f j(t1 k 0)

dF(tt
1 0

=

A.e

j

1

0
(3)

dt

12

Given that a transition does occur from state j, the conditional probability

that the destination is state k is X.kA., so that the probability of a spell
in j which ends in a transition to state k at time t1

—X

f(t1lt0)

= X.e

.

is

.(t1—t )

We can now construct a likelihood function for any sequence of state

occupancies by a sample of households, including both completed and
uncompleted spells, and form maximum likelihood estimates of the transition
rates.

As an example, consider a household which begins at time t0 in the state
(E,N), so member 1. is employed and member 2 is a non—participant. At time t1,

this household is observed to make a transition to (U,U). It then returns to
(E,N) at time t2

and remains there until the end of the observation period,

T. The contribution of this household to the likelihood function, then, is

[e
whereX EN

[e

=

E

A

—(t2—t1)A .

X]

. [e

ENk.

We do not, of course, wish to assume that transition rates are identical
for households, but rather examine their dependence upon observable

characteristics. A convenient specification, since Ajk must be positive for
all households, is

Xjk(i) =

exP(O.kXj(i)}

for i =

l,...,N
j, .

where

..

is a vector of parameters to be estimated for each transition rate

and X(i) are observable explanatory variables for household i which may be

13

state—dependent.

The above specification has some very convenient properties. The log of
the likelihood function is separable in the individual transition rates, so
that each parameter vector, @

,

can be estimated independently. In addition,

jk

each spell in state j can be easily divided into sub-spells to allow the

values of exogenous variables to vary. These same properties, of course, are
sources of the major limitations of this method. The assumed time—
independence of the

rules out any duration dependence in the rate of

leaving a state.1]. Parameterizing the Ajk as exact functions of household
characteristics which is not necessary, but sufficient, for the separability
of the likelihood function does not permit the isolation of unobserved
individual effects, and thus fails to take advantage of one of the major

opportunities presented by longitudinal data. Such a formulation may also
lead to biased coefficients if such unobserved heterogeneity is important.l2
Both of these shortcomings can be readily overcome by a more complicated

model. For analyzing the movements of a large sample over a number of
employment states, however, the simple exponential model offers obvious
computational advantages while maintaining a close correspondence with the
theoretical framework.

IV. DATA AND ESTIMATION
Household transition rates were estimated using longitudinal data from a
sub-sample of two—head families from the Seattle and Denver Income Maintenance
Experiments (SIME/DIME). These experiments were the largest of several
federally—funded programs designed to test the effects of a negative income

tax (NIT) on labour supply. About 4,800 families were initially enrolled in
the experiment; data are available for 2,038 families in Seattle and 2,657

14

families in Denver. These families did not constitute a random sample from
the populations of the two cities, but were chosen both to facilitate the
analysis of labour supply response, and to correspond as closely as possible
to the

were

target population of a future, hypothetical NIT program. Four groups

therefore excluded from the sample:

1. Families with heads over 58 years of age or under 18 years of age.

2. Families with disabled heads who were unable to work.
3.

Families with pre—experiment earnings in excess of $9,000 for a family of
four with one working head, or above $11,000 for a family of
working

four

with two

heads.

4. Individuals who did not belong to a "family," defined as a unit consisting
of either a married couple, or a single parent with a dependent child,
plus other relatives permanently residing with this unit.
Race and family structure, plus pre—experiment earnings adjusted for
family size, were used to assign families in a non-random fashion among eleven
different financial treatments, and a financial control group containing 40%
of the total sample.

The sample actually

consists

used in the estimation of household transition rates

of 1 ,388 families living in Denver and 993 in Seattle. All were

required to satisfy the following criteria:

1. The family contains two heads ——

i.e.,

consists of a married or cohabiting

couple plus dependents.

2. The family was one of those originally enrolled in the experiment. This
excludes families formed during the course of the experiment, and
guarantees that a full year of pre-experiment data is available for each.

3. The family remains in the sample until the second periodic interview has

been

administered, or approximately 6 to 8 months after enrollment.
15

Earlier attrition, due to the structure of the periodics, results in
considerable missing data, including the absence of education and real
property information.

Some aggregate evidence of the added worker effect can be found in Table
1, where the unemployment of the male head is seen to be associated with a
markedly higher probability of female head unemployment in the DD4E subsample

13

TABLE 1
Unemployment and Labour Force Participation Rates
for Female Heads by Employment Status of Male Head
(DThIE sub—sample — 1972 annual averages)

Male Head
Employed

Unemployed

Out

of

Labour Force

White
Participation rate

41.5

26.5
50.0

17.3
42.6

Black
Unemployment rate
Participation rate

9.2
51.0

31.1
52.5

22.8
47.2

8.5
26.1

22.9
19.2

——
9.9

Unemployment rate

Mexican—American
Unemployment rate

Participation

rate

7.7

I have shown elsewhere that household strategies, and therefore household
transition rates, should be affected by the flow of non—labour income
received, and by the parameters of the wage offer distribution facing

unemployed members. Use of the SIME/DD{E sample in estimating these effects
presents some difficulties, since the operational equivalents of these

concepts are not straight—forward. Individual households are faced with a
variety of support levels, tax rates, and other financial parameters which

16

result in very complicated non—linear budget constraints. Even if the wage
offer distribution appears in the transition equation to be estimated only as
a single value representing the conditional expectation of an accepted wage,
it is still the net predicted wage we are interested in and no family faces a
constant marginal tax rate over all levels of family labour supply.
Rather than attempting to control for these effects by including
SIME/DIME treatment parameters in the form of dummy variables, the estimates
in the next section represent the family's opportunities in the form of a

current income flow and an estimated hourly tax on predicted earnings. The
tax is disaggregated into one component associated with the SIME/DIME program
and another due to other tax and transfer programs, and is calculated by
comparing current net income with a predicted level of net income resulting

from a change in the household's employment status. This procedure requires
not only a predicted wage for the unemployed, but also predicted hours of
work, which is proxied by mean hours of work over the employed sample (by year

and sex). The fixed hours assumption avoids the complete specification of the
non—linear budget constraint in the actual estimation of transition rates,
though of course it is required to construct the hourly tax rates.
Predicted gross wage rates are derived from regressions on average annual
wage observations for the entire sample of controls, run separately by race

and sex. Other current income includes monthly receipts from all sources —

earnings of family members other than the two heads, AFDC and other government
transfer payments, SIME/DIME payments, alimony, and asset income. All dollar
amounts are deflated using Seattle and Denver Metropolitan Price Indices and

are reported in July 1972 dollars. Age and number of children under six years
of age are included in the transition rate equations to represent the relative
value of non—market time.

17

The log of the likelihood function described in Section III was maximized
with respect to the parameters of each transition rate separately using a

Newton—Raphson technique. Since the function is globally concave, any maximum
must be unique. The values of the independent variables are held constant at
their initial values for the duration of each household employment spell, but
allowing them to vary freely each month does not seem to alter the results
significantly.

V. PIRICAL RESULTS: TRANSITION RATE ESTIMATES
This section presents maximum likelihood estimates of the transition

rates specified in Section III. The determinants of transitions between the
three labour market states — employment, unemployment, and non—participation —

are

discussed for female household heads, with emphasis on the effects of

intra—household interactions. The section concludes with a summary

of

the

major results.

A. Labour Force Entry
Column 1 in Table 2 contains the estimated coefficients of the transition
rate from non—participation directly into employment (N*E) for all female
heads who were non—participants during the sample period (male heads may be

employed, unemployed, or out of the labour force). One of the most striking
aspects of this equation is the effect of the male head's employment status.
If the male head is employed, the female head is less likely to make a
transition from non—participation to employment, and the effect is highly

significant. In fact, controlling for other observable characteristics, the
transition rate of women whose husbands were unemployed or not in the labour
force is some 1.4 times the transition rate of those with employed husbands.14

18

The hourly wage rate of the male head (predicted or actual, depending on
employment status), does not have a significant effect on the rate at which

the female head enters employment from outside the labour force. The
predicted wage of the female head herself serves as a proxy for the mean of
the wage offer distribution and was expected to have a positive effect on

probabilities of moving into the labour force and into employment. This
expectation is strongly confirmed in this case and in most of those which

follow. Age and the number of children under six years of age have a negative
effect on the NE transition, presumably because both variables are positively
related to the value of non—market time.

The dummy variables for race and ethnic origin are significant

determinants of this transition rate, and of many others. The magnitude and
direction of the effects vary considerably across experimental sites and
according to employment status of spouse, and in another context it would be

interesting to attempt an interpretation of these results. This will not,
however, be undertaken here, nor will a detailed examination of income and tax
effect.

Columns 2 and 3 in Table 2 present estimates of the NE transition rate
with the sample split according to employment status of the male heaad. In
general, the number of observations on households with male heads who were
non—participants was too small to estimate female head transition rates, so

these cases are excluded. A comparison of the two disaggregated models with
that estimated on the entire sample reveals some interesting patterns. In
particular, the number of children under six has a negative influence on the

N*E transitions of female heads only if the male head is employed. As was
shown above, this pattern of influence among factors increasing the value of

non—market time is a likely result of the household utility model. A

19

comparison of age effects across equations also supports this contention.15
The estimated coefficients of the transition rate into unemployment for
non—participating female heads are not reported here, but can be briefly

summarized. Employment of the male head does not have a significant effect on
this transition rate. However, this apparent absence of a household effect on
the N+U transition rate reflects the behavior of the Seattle subsample only.
If this model is estimated on the Denver subsample only, the coefficient on
the dummy variable representing spouse's employment status is negative, as

expected, and significant at a 90 percent level. Age and children under six
once again have a discouraging effect on labour force participation.

B. The Outcome of Unemployment Spells
The most surprising results contained in Table 3 are that employment of
the male head increases the rate at which unemployed female heads accept jobs
by nearly 50 percent, and that this positive effect is reinforced by a higher

wage. Given the analysis of Section II, we had expected that employment of
the male head would increase the reservation wage of the female head, thus

making job acceptance less likely. An increase in the male head's wage, if
working, or predicted wage, if unemployed, should have a similar effect.

There are two possible explanations for these anomalous results. First,
an employed husband may be able to assist his wife's job search by providing
contacts or simply information, thus making her search time more productive.
The second possibility is that unobserved individual characteristics which
affect wage offer distributions and/or search productivities are positively

correlated within households. It may be possible in the future, by making
explicit use of repeated unemployment spells over the sample period, to separate the
effects of spouse's employment status from such marital matching effects.

20

TABLE 2

Out of Labour Force + Employment Transition Rate for Female Heads
(ML estimates of effects on the logarithm of the transition rate)*
Total

Sample
Constant

— 3.34
(—

1 = Male head employed

—

(—

0.01
0.35)

Hourly tax — SIME/DIME ($)

— 0.01
(—

0.13)

—

0.35
7.23)

(—

Other current income ($/100)
Age in years/1O

0.01
(0.45)

— 0.19

1 =

—

—

0.19
2.79)
0.49
8.64)

0.76)

0.57
( 26.88)
—

(—
—

0.50
4.85)
0.14

(—4. 60)

4.65
8.24)

— 0.17
(—

—

(—

0.30
8.40)
0.18
5.29)

0.20
( 3.01)
—

(—
—

(—

0.15
1.94)
0.48
7.09)

1.48)

1 .25
( 8.25)
—

(—
—

(—

0.75
3.14)
0.36
2.62)

0.03

0.004

( 0.37)

0.14

(—

2

(—

—

(—

Seattle

— 0.02

— 0.17
(— 5.97)

( 2.50)

1 =

(—

(—

Black

1 = Mexican—American

(—21.67)

6.31)

(—

Number of children under 6 years

—

0.67
( 28.77)

tax — other
tax and transfer programs ($)

— 3.22

5.12)

Predicted
hourly wage — female head

Hourly

Male Head
Unemployed

— 0.32
(—

Actual or predicted
hourly wage — male head

9.43)

Male Head
Employed

( 0.62)

0.04
0.35)

—

(—

0.09
( 0.78)

0.25
1.08)

—

(—

0.59
2.05)

—

(—

— 0.94
(—

4.10)

x

660.12

511.88

Number of spells

3658

4212

1687

Number of transitions

1817

1343

106

*(asynptotic t—statistics are in parentheses)

21

76.12

The predicted wage of the female head has a positive effect on the
probability of entering employment, though the own—wage elasticity of this

transition rate is lower than that of the U*E rate. Other income discourages
job acceptance, as expected, and so do children under six. Age, however, does
not affect the entry rate into employment, conditional upon the participation

decision. Columns 2 and 3 reveal a familiar pattern in the coefficients on
age and children; they are significantly negative only when the male head is
employed.

The effect of spouse's employment status on the rate at which unemployed

female heads drop out of the labour force (UN) has the right sign, but falls
short of significance at the 90% level (results not reported). In fact, very
few of the independent variables appear to contribute individually to an
explanation of the dropout rate, though the x2

statistic

confirms the

explanatory power of the model as a whole. The own—wage effect is significant
and negative, other income has a significant positive coefficient, and Seattle

residence discourages a U*N transition.
It is clear that these models are more successful in explaining
transitions into employment than transitions between unemployment and non-

participation. Part of this can probably be traced to the measurement errors

in timing the U+N and N+U transitions which resulted from the data
collection procedures. Another part of the problem may be that the random
events we expect to affect the relative values of non—market time and search
activity, such as illness and changes in family size, are not well represented

by the available independent variables. The issue arises, however, of whether
any meaningful distinction can be made between the states of non—participation

and unemployment. In this context, the continuing importance of own predicted
wage in the U*N model provides a reassuring indication of economic content.

22

TABLE 3
Unemployment ÷ Employment Transition Rate for Female Heads
(ML estimates of effects on the logarithm of the transition rate)*
Total
Sample
—

Constant

2.21

(—10.45)

1 = Male head employed

Predicted
hourly wage —

(

— 2.77
(—4.27)

3.35)
2.21)

0.02
(

0.32

female

head

(

Hourly tax — other tax and
transfer programs ($)
Other current income ($1100)

0.29

—

—

(— 0.76)

(—

0.05
0.59)

0.39
2.30)

0.06

—

—

1.72)
0.06

1.27)
0.14

—

3.05)

— 0.31

3.67)

— 0.29

2.19)

—

7.45)

(—

0.01

(—

0.36)

—

0.17
2.96)

(—

0.12
C

(

(—

(—

—

0.28

—

(—

2.89)

— 0.27
(— 1.90)

0.64
(—

6.31)
75.78

1.46)
0.10

0.15
2.91)

—

— 0.64
131.82

Number of transitions

0.30

2.56)

(

—

(—

Number of spells

—

4.06)

— 0.06

(—

Seattle

0.47

0.29
C

0.62)

1.26)

C—

1 = Mexican—American

(—

C—

(—

Black

0.08

1.67)

(—

Number of children under 6 years

0.18)

1.56)

—

(—

(—

Age in years/10

4.85)
0.02

(

1 =

— 1.51
(—6.16)

0.03

Hourly tax — SIME/DIME ($)

1 =

Male Head
Unemployed

0.34
(

Actual or predicted
hourly wage — male head

Male Head
Employed

—

(—

0.92)
0.22

1.46)
0.32

1.40)

— 1.14
(—

1.82)

—

0.47
1.83)

(—

19.08

1263

1102

376

676

519

90

*(asymptotic t—statistics are in parentheses)

23

An examination of transitions out of the two states should also provide a

basis for disaggregation on behavioral grounds. A combined estimate of the
U+E and N*E transition rates with all coefficients constrained to be equal
permits a likelihood ratio test of whether a disaggregation of the initial
states gives a significantly better explanation of transitions into

employment. This test was performed on observations from the last three years
of the Denver subsample, and strongly rejected the hypothesis that all
coefficients are equal.

C. Leaving Employment
In the total sample results presented in column 1 of Table 4, the
employment status of the male head and his hourly wage have no significant
effect on the transition rate from employment to unemployment (E+U) for female

heads. Age and number of children decrease the E+U rate, so the increasing
relative value of home time which these variables represent seems to be
outweighed by influences such as tenure and experience effects on job
separations, and the effect of children on the marginal utility of income to
the household.

Both

the employment of the male head and the wage of the male head when

employed have positive effects on
labour

the

rate at which female heads leave the

force from employment (E÷N). These influences, together with the

positive coefficient on the number of children under six years, suggest that

these E÷N transitions are a response to some change in the relative value of
non—market time. A comparison of these results with those in Table 4 provides
some justification for disaggregating flows out of employment in this manner,
though a formal test of the non—equivalence of unemployment and non-

participation in this context has not been undertaken)6

24

D. Summary of the Transition Rate Estimates
In general, the results presented above offer considerable support for
the hypothesis that individual labour force transitions depend upon the

employment status and wage of other household members. The estimates of these
household effects are not, however, uniformly consistent with those predicted

by the theory. Where an anomalous result appears to be caused by some
deficiency in either the data or the empirical specification, this has been
noted in the preceding discussion with a view towards implementing more

effective tests in the future. It is clear, however, that household
influences are not equally important in the determination of all labour force
transitions, and some interesting patterns emerge.

1) In particular, the labour force participation decisions of female
heads appear to be strongly influenced by spouse's employment status. This is
most evident in the case of transitions between employment and nonparticipation.

2) Transitions between non—participation and unemployment are rather
poorly explained by this model, and household variables in particular rarely

make a significant contribution. This may be the result of imprecision in the
timing of recorded transitions, or of the often—discussed weakness of the
behavioral distinction between the two states.

3) The importance of unobserved personal characteristics which affect
the efficiency or Intensity of job search activities is apparent from the

unemployment—employment transition results. The question naturally arises of
why the unexpected household effects which appear here do not appear in
the N+E

estimates

as well.

25

TABLE 4

Employment

Unemployment

Transition Rate for Female Heads

(ML estimates of effects on the logarithm of the transition rate)*

Total
Sample
—

Constant

(—

1 =

Nale head employed

2.73
6.50)

Male Head
Employed
—

2.68

C— 9.21)

Male Head
Unemployed
—
(—

2.84
4.59)

0.14
C 0.89)

Actual or predicted
hourly wage — male head

0.02
C 0.78)

0.02
( 0.66)

0.13
( 1.92)

Actual
hourly wage — female head

0.02
( 0.21)

0.18
( 1.65)

—

Hourly tax — SIME/DIME Cs)

0.07
( 0.56)

— 0.12

Hourly tax — other
tax and transfer programs ($)

— 1.45
C— 3.93)

(—

2.48)

— 1.67
(—

(—

0.12
0.48)

— 0.42
C— 1.68)

0.96

—

5.14)

C— 0.65)

Other current income ($1100)

0.03
( 1.88)

0.03
( 1.18)

0.06
( 2.93)

Age in years/b

—

—

—

(—

Number of children under 6 years

1 =

Black

Seattle

Number

of

- 0.17
C— 2.78)
0.10
C 0.99)

1 = Mexican—American

1 =

0.35
5.98)

spells

Number of transitions

— 0.26
C— 1.52)

(—

—
(—

0.39
5.38)
0.13
1.97)

0.22
( 1.92)
— 0.17
(—

0.91)

0.21

C— 1.68)

—
(—

—
(—

0.31
1.70)
0.43
1.73)

—

2.06
(— 1.99)

0.15
( 1.36)

0.02
C 0.16)

( 1.24)

98.40

67.60

29.14

0.35

3116

3095

923

473

353

69

*(asyptotic t—statistics are in parentheses)

26

TABLE 5

Employment + Out

of

Labour Force Transition Rate for Female Heads

(ML estimates of effects on

the logarithm of the transition rate)*
Total
Sample

Constant

—1.73
(—10.56)

1 = Male head employed

Male Head
Employed
— 1.47

Male Head
Unemployed

— 1.24

9.23)

C— 2.32)

0.05
( 5.40)

0.03
( 0.24)

(—

0.38
(4.07)

Actual or predicted
hourly wage — male head
Actual hourly wage —
female head
Hourly tax — SIME/DIME Cs)

Hourly tax — other
tax and transfer programs (5)
Other current income ($1100)

Age in years/la

Number of children under 6 years

1 =

Black

0.04
( 3.51)

— 0.01
(—

0.15)

Seattle

(—

2.76)

— 0.16

(— 11.33)

(— 12.14)

— 1.43

— 1.89

— 0.06

(— 7.18)

C— 14.82)

(— 0.04)

0.03
( 3.11)

0.02
C 1.57)

— 0.31
(— 9.08)

— 0.34
(— 8.29)

0.10
( 3.23)

0.13
( 3.92)

— 0.43

— 0.45

(— 7.60)

(— 6.50)

0.09
C 1.21)

— 0.24
C—

2

— 0.57

— 0.17

1 = Mexican—American
I =

0.20
( 3.91)

3.97)

— 0.44
(— 6.14)

0.08
C 0.43)

0.04
C

1.76)

— 0.43
(— 3.60)

0.03
C

0.26)

0.08
(

0.34)

0.30
C

0.97)

C

0.08
0.33)

454.54

477.16

43.02

Number of spells

3116

3095

923

Number of transitions

1584

1223

105

*(asymptotjc t—statistics are in parentheses)
27

The observance of a direct transition from non—participation to employ—
nient may be regarded as evidence of a spell of unemployment which was too

brief to be recorded. The fact that household income and time substitution

effects are observed to affect N'E transition but not U+E transitions y
then indicate some duration dependence in the response of an individual's
search strategy to changes in household conditions.

4) The effect of other variables are interesting in their own right and
many results, such as the consistency of own—wage effects even in the context

of U+N and NU transitions, have been noted above. More important for the
purposes of this study, however, is the confirmation of the theory's
predictions regarding interactions between spouse's employment status and the
value of home time provided by the pattern of coefficients on age and number
of children under six years.

VI. EMPIRICAL RESULTS: EMPLOYMENT STATE DISTRIBUTIONS
The transition rate estimates in the previous section give a detailed
picture of how the employment status of husbands and other variables affect

the labour market experience of married women. We would like, however, to
have a summary measure of the impact of spouse's unemployment on the
distribution of wives over labour market states ——

i.e.

on their unemployment

and participation rates. To this end, note that the transition rates define a
continous time stochastic process for which we should be able to find a
steady—state probability distribution.

Following Howard, we define P(t) as the probability that a continous

time Markov process occupies state j at time t and let (t) be the row
vector of state probabilities for all states. Let A be the square matrix
such that the j_kth off—diagonal element is the transition rate

28

and the

jth diagonal element is —A..
Then,

(t)
where eAt =

I

+At +A2t2 +A3t3 +
2!

3!

Differentiating this expression produces,

='(t)A
as that the limiting state probability vector '
n
= 0 and .
1.

satisifles

j=l j

In this section, we concentrate on the equilibrium state distribution of

financial controls in the Denver sample only. The mean values of independent
variables are calculated for black and white subgroups of this population17,
and the coefficient estimates presented in columns 2 and 3 of each table in
the last section are used to produce average transition rates by race and by
employment status of the male head.

The simplest procedure is to calculate the equilibrium state distribution
of female heads as individuals, conditional upon the employment status of male

heads —

i.e.,

ignore the transitions of male heads. There is, however, a

major problem with this technique. Since the female heads reach an
equilibrium state distribution conditional upon the state of their spouses, it

is implicitly assumed that unemployed men remain unemployed forever. Since
the mean duration of an unemployment spell in this sample is just over two
months, transitions by both household heads must be permitted.
For this purpose, it is necessary to estimate transition functions for

the entire, nine—by—nine household transition matrix. Many of the estimates
for transitions of the male heads are presented in Lundberg, but for cells

where the number of observed transitions was very small, a population average
rate has been substituted.

29

In Table 6, the steady—state unemployment rates and participation rates
of female heads by the employment status of spouse can be compared with

previous estimates and actual 1972 averages. Reassuringly, the estimated
household matrix generates a reasonable steady—state distribution.
Controlling for factors such as expected wage, other income, age, and number
of children, the equilibriun unemployment and participation rates of women

with unemployed husbands are higher than these rates for women ith employed
husbands. This relationship holds for both black and white subsamples and is
generated by higher rates of labour force entry

and lower rates of labour

force exit for "added workers".

A better way to assess the magnitude of the added worker effect nay be to
observe the effect of an increase in the unemployment of married men on the

labour supply of their wives. This can be simulated by introducing a distur—

bance to a sample of households which are in labour market equilibrium. The
adjustment of the system back to its steady—state distribution can be traced
over time using interval transition probabilities.
Leaving the transition rate matrix unchanged, the initial state
distribution was altered so that the unemployment rate for male heads was

twice its equilibriin level. The monthly changes in the state distribution of
the households are presented in Table 7.

The initial effects of a doubling in the unemployment rate of male heads

can be summarized as follows. If 100 white husbands became unemployed
simultaneously, 36 additional wives will have entered the labour force by the

end of the first month. Of this 36, about 29 wives will have become
employed. If 100 black husbands become unemployed, 25 wives will join the
labour force and, of these, 20 will be employed by the end of the month.

Unemployment rates return very rapidly to their equilibrium levels, so the

30

Table 6

Unemployment and Participation Rates for
Female Heads by Race and Employment

Status of Male Head

(Denver

Financial Controls only)

Average
1972

Household
Steady—State

White

Unemployment rate

male head employed
— male head unemployed

6.2
12.8

7.9
14.0

Participation rate
— male head employed
— male head unemployed

43.7
59.7

37.0
75.1

Unemployment rate
— male head employed
— male head unemployed

6.3
14.6

1.3.2

Participation rate
— male head employed
— male head unemployed

50.9
65.8

54.2
81.7

—

Black

11.0

system is stable. The participation rates of wives, however, are still 1.5 to
2% above their steady—state levels at the end of one year, indicating some
persistence in the employment effect.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In recent years, the high unemployment rates and volatile participation
behavior of groups in the labour force which are often considered to be
"secondary workers", such as women and teenagers, have received considerable

attention. The apparent importance of family structure in explaining changes
in the labour force status of these workers emphasizes the need to consider
job search behavior in a household labour supply context, and to expand the

31

Table 7
Unemployment and Participation Rates by Month
Following A Doubling of the Male Head
Unemployment Rate in Month 0.

WHITE

BLACK

End
of

Unemployment

Month

AH

1

9.6

9.0

42.4

15.9

11.5

58.8

2

8.4

8.9

42.3

14.2

11.4

58.6

3

7.6

8.9

42.2

12.9

11.4

58.4

4

7.0

8.8

42.0

12.0

11.4

58.3

5

6.7

8.8

41.9

11.3

11.3

58.1

6

6.4

8.7

41.8

10.8

11.3

58.0

7

6.2

8.6

41.6

10.4

11.3

57.8

8

6.1

8.6

41.5

10.1

11.2

57.7

9

6.0

8.6

41.4

9.9

11.2

57.6

10

5.9

8.5

41.4

9.7

11.2

57.5

11

5.9

8.5

41.3

9.6

11.2

57.4

12

5.9

8.5

41.2

9.5

11.2

57.4

Steady—
State

5.7

8.4

40.5

9.1

11.2

56.6

Participation Unemployment

Participation

FH

FH

Rates

Rate

Rates

FH

MH

FH

Rate

traditional two—state labour market of job search theory to allow movements
into and out of the labour force.
This paper brings together the joint utility maximization of static
household models and the stochastic events which affect labour supply
opportunities in search theory, and applies a more comprehensive model to a

32

study of the added worker effect. The theory suggests a continuous—time
exponential model of state—occupancy durations, with th& transition rates
depending upon both household strategies and the arrival rates of random
events (job offers, job separations, and changes in the value of non—market
time).

These transition rates are then expressed as functions of individual and
household characteristics, and the parameters of the model are estimated using
maximum likelihood methods on the employment histories of a sample of
households enrolled in the Seattle and Denver Income Maintenance

Experiments. The dependence of individual and household transition rates on
the employment status and wages of both household heads is then tested.
Cross—wage effects are found to be negligible, but the influence of
spouse's employment status on the observed transition rates of female

household heads is generally consistent with the theory. This effect is
particularly strong on transitions into and out of the labour force.
In the final section, the steady state unemployment and participation
rates of women with unemployed husbands are shown to be markedly higher than
the rates of women whose husbands are employed for both blacks and whites in

the DIME sample. A simulation of the effects of increasing the unemployment
rate of married men produces an additional response in the form of increased
participation and employment among their wives in the short—run.

33

FOOTNOTE S
1.

See the references in MIncer [1966] and Wachter.

2. As noted by Burdett and Mortensen, strict concavity can also be
interpreted as risk aversion under conditions of uncertainty.
3.

"Leisure" In this model can also be viewed as time devoted to non—market
or household production. This interpretation renders the assumption of
substitutability between £ and £2 more palatable. Some of the results
below are dependent upon thts assumption —— in particular those which do
not hold the employment status of member 2 constant become ambiguous in
sign if strong compleinentarities between £, and £2 are permitted. The
empirical evidence on this point is contradtctory, but Ashenfelter and
Heckman conclude that the cross—substitution effect is zero.

4. The state E should be indexed by the wage, but
moment to simplify the notation.
5.

this

is ignored for the

is thus a function of the arrival rates of job offers and job
separations decribed above.

6. Throughout, it is assumed that member 2 is devoting time to market work at
the wage w2.

7. Proposition I does not depend upon the assumption that £i and £2 are
substitutes, but this additional result does. All proofs are contained in
Chapter 2 of Lundberg.

8. We can expect that the values b will change in some predictable manner
over the life—cycle of household members and the current approach, which
focuses on the short—run dynamics of the labour market, abstracts from
such considerations. To the extent that future events which change the
value of non—market time, such as births or educational opportunities, are
anticipated and planned for, this stochastic model will not provide an
adequate description of household behavior. The same argument, of course,
can be applied to predictable change in available wage rates over the life
cycle, which affect household res2onse to current wages. In what follows,
the distributions f (w ) and g(b ) are assumed to be exogenous, though
their dependence on acors under 6e long—run control of the household is
here acknowledged.
9. Ideally, we should like to identify the household's decision rules
(wi,wj) themselves, so that the effect of one member's wage on the
other's reservation wage and value of non—participation can be estimated
directly. Unfortunately, the four elements of the household's strategy
are unobservable and observing transitions alone will not permit
identification of the reservation wage function, so a reduced form
estimation of the transition probabilities is necessary.
10. In particular, see Tuma, Hannon, and Goreneveld [1979] for a general
discussion and Flinn and Heckman for empirical comparisons of discrete and
continuous—time methods.

34

11. Considerable evidence is accumulating that duration dependence is an
important attribute of the rate of leaving unemployment. See, most
recently, Flinn and Heckman, or, for a treatment explicitly based on non—
stationary search strategies, Kiefer and Neumann [1979].
12. This has been shown by Ueckman and Borjas.

13. In general, the unemployment rates for SIME/DIME female heads were much
higher than for married women in the U.S. population, and participation
rates were somewhat lower, particularly in the arly years of the
experiment.
14. The antilog of the coefficient on a dummy variable in this model gives the
multiplier effect of the dichotomous variables on the transition rate.
15. To perform a test of the explanatory power of the model, we compare it
with another model where all coefficients except the constant term are
constrained to equal zero. The constant term in this model is the average
transition rate, or the total number of transitions divided by the total
length of time the sample is observed in the initial state. If all
households were identical and durations were controlled by a single—
parameter exponential process, this statistic would be the appropriate
estimator of the exponential parameter.
Implementing the comparison for the model in column 1, the value of
the log of the likelihood function is 38.31 for the constrained version,
as opposed to 368.37 for the unconstrained model. A standard likelihood
raio test gives a test statistic of 660.12, which is distributed
The critical value of the test statistics at a 99 percent
xh(l1).
siginificance level is 24.7, so we can reject the null hypothesis that all
coefficients other than the constant term are equal to zero. All models
reported here are able to pass a similar test at a 95 percent level,
enabling us to conclude that they explain the specified transitions better
than a single—parameter exponential process.
16. The puzzling aspect of the E+N transition rate estimates appears when we
turn our attention to the own—wage and tax effects. A negative sign on
the own wage effect was expected, and this expectation is confirmed for
the male head unemployed subsample (Column 3). When the male is employed,
however, the own—wage effect is positive and accompanied by large,
negative tax effects. The possibility that these results are due to non—
linearities in the wage effect, since the tax variables are so highly
correlated with the wage when employed, points up the need for future
experimentation with various functional forms in the specification of
these transition rates. At present, it must simply be noted that
misspecification may be a serious problem.
17. Other income and hourly taxes are allowed to vary by employment state, due
to the state dependence of transfer payments and the non—linearity of
income taxes.

35

REFERENCE S

0. and J.J. Heckman, "The Estimation of Income and Substitution
Effects in a Model of Family Labor Supply," Econometrica, 42 (January
1974), PP. 73—85.

Ashenfelter,

Bowen, W.G. and T.A. Finegan, The Economics of Labor Force Particpation,
Prinecton, N.J., Princeton University Press (1969).
Burdett, K. and D.T. Mortensen, "Labor Supply under Uncertainty," in Research
in Labor Economics, Vol. 2 (1978), edited by R. Ehrenberg, aslo N.U. Math
Center Discussion Paper, No. 297.

Cain, G.G., Married Women in the Labor Force: An Economic Analysis, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, (1966).
Flinn, C.J. and J.J. Heckrnan, 'Models for the Analysis of Labor Force
Dynamics," Economics Research Center NORC (June 1980).

Heckman, J.J. and G. Borjas, "A Continous Time Model of Heterogeneity and
State Dependence with Simple Tests and Applications to Labor Mobility and
Unemployment," presented to Summer Meetings of Econometric Society,
Montreal (1979).
Heckman, J.J. and T.E. MaCurdy," A Life Cycle Model of Female Labor Supply,"
Review of Economic Studies, January, 1980.
Howard, R.A., Dynamic Probabilistics Systems: Volume II: Senii—Markov and
Decision Processes, New York, John Wiley & Sons, (1971).

Kalbfleisch, J.D. and R.L. Prentice, The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time
Data," New York, John Wiley & Sons, (1980)
Keeley, M.C. et al., "The Estimation of Labor Supply Models Using Experimental
Data," American Economic Review, 68 (December, 1978), pp. 873—87.
Kiefer, N.M. and C. Neumann, "An Empirical Job—Search Model," Journal of
Political Economy, 87 (February, 1979), pp. 89—107.
Kurz, N. and R.G. Spiegelman, "The Design of the Seattle and Denver Income
Maintenance Experiments," Stanford Research Institute, Research Memorandum
No. 18 (June, 1972).
Kurz, N., R.G. Spiegelman, and J.A. Erewster, "The Payment System for the
Seattle and Denver Income Maintenance Experiments," Stanford Research
Institute, Research Memorandum No. 19 (June, 1973).
Kurz, M. et al., "A Cross—Sectional Estimation of Labor Supply for Families in
Denver 1970," Stanford Research Institute, Research Memorandum No. 24
(November, 1974).

Lippman, S. and J.J. McCall, "The Economics of Job Search: A Survey,"
Economic Inquiry, 14 (1976), pp. 155—89 (a), pp. 347—68 (b).

36

Lundberg, S.J., "Unemployment and Household Labour Supply," unpublished
dissertation, Northwestern University (1981).
Marston, S.T., "Employment Instability and High Unemployment Rates,"
Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (1976), pp. 169—203.

Brookings

J.,

"Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in Aspects of Labor
Mincer,
Economics, edited by H.G. Lewis, Princeton, N.J., Princeton University
Press (1962), pp. 63—105.

Mincer, J., "Labor Force Participation and Unemployment," in Prosperity and
Unemployment, edited by R.A. Gordon and M.S. Gordon, New York, John Wiley
& Sons, (1966), pp. 73—112.
Toikka, R.S., "A Markovian Model of Labor Market Decisions by Workers,"
American Economic Review, 66 (December, 1976), pp. 821—34.
Tuma, N., M. Hannon, and L. Goreneveld, "Dynamic Analysis of Event Histories,"
American Journal of Sociology, 84 (January, 1979), pp. 820—54.

Tuma, N. and P.K. Robins, "A Dynamic Model of Employment Behavior: An
Application to the Seattle and Denver Income Maintenance Experiments,"
Econotnetrica, 48 (May, 1980).

Wachter, M.L., "A New Approach to the Equilibrium Labour Force," Economica,
(February, 1974), pp. 35—51.

Watts, H.W. and A. Rees, eds., The New Jersey Income — Maintenance Experiment,
Vol. II, New York, Academic Press (1977).

37

APPENDIX A

Table

A—I

Spell Sample Means of Variables By Employment
State of Female Head*

Denver
Out

Employed

Unemployed

of

Labour Force

1 = Male head employed

0.78

0.76

0.70

1 = Black

0.32

0.43

0.23

I = Mexican—American

0.27

0.26

0.39

Age in years — female head

29.5

28.9

29.0

Years of schooling — female head

11.4

11.2

10.8

Hourly wage — female head ($)

2.02

Predicted wage — female head ($)

1.83

1.70

3.26

3.30

3.29

83.44

111.76

116.99

Actual or predicted hourly wage —

male head ($)
Other income ($/tuo.)

Net assets Cs)

3,084

3,730

3,101

Hourly tax on earnings of
female head
— DIME
— other taxes and transfers

0.10
0.44

0.14
0.75

0.14
0.69

Number of children < 6
< 16

0.92
2.01

0.99
1.94

1.11
2.16

Number of Observations

*

(All

2553

765

dollar quantities in July 1972 dollars)

38

3548

Table A—2

Spell Sample Means of Variables By Employment
State of Female Head*

Seattle
Out

Employed

Unemployed

of

Labour Force

I = Male head employed

0.70

0.65

0.62

I = Black

0.44

0.49

0.34

Age in years — female head

32.0

31.2

31.4

Years of schooling — female head

11.4

10.9

11.2

Hourly wage — female head Cs)
Predicted wage — female head ($)

2.46

———

2.11

1.89

3.86

3.70

3.97

71.83

114.42

97.55

Actual or predicted hourly wage —

male head (5)
Other income ($/mo.)
Net assets ($)

Hourly tax on earnings of
female head
— SINE
—

other

taxes and transfers

Number of children < 6
< 16
Number of Observations

*

(All

5,120

4,395

4,376

0.16

0.09

0.11

0.40

0.79

0.65

0.72
1.89

0.74

0.96
2.06

1742

1.87

752

dollar quantities in July 1972 dollars)

39

2432

Table A—3

Characteristics of the Household Sample

Denver

Seattle

Financial control, no SIME/DIME
payment (%)

43.4

48.1

Remained in sample for entire 4 years (%)

68.5

80.1

Black (%)

28.4

38.8

Mexican—American (%)

34,5

White (%)

37.1

61.2

12 or less — male head

84.3

79.2

12 or less — female head

90.0

82.7

10 or less — male head

33.8

34.5

10 or less — female head

38.3

25.8

— male head

33.4

36.9

—

30.6

33.0

Years of schooling completed (7.)

Mean Age

in

years — January 1, 1972

female head

Mean predicted wages — 1972
— male head

3.34

3.86

— female head

1.86

2.02

1389

Number of households

40

993

