                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TEST SCORES AND SELF—SELECTION OF HIGHER
              EDUCATION: COLLEGE ATTENDANCE VERSUS
                       COLLEGE COMPLETION


                         Steven   Venti

                         David A. Wise


                     Working Paper No. 109




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                           July 1981




We are indebted to David Eliwood, Win Fuller, Jerry Hausman,
Charles Manski, and Michael Stoto for their comments. This work
was supported by the Exxon Educational Foundation, contract number
300—18—051-t5 from the Office of Education; Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare; and the National Science Foundation. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper #709
                                                                         July 1981




              Test Scores and Self-Selection of Higher Education:
                 College Attendance Versus College Completion

                                    ABSTRACT


     As a companion paper to our work on students' application and colleges'

admission decisions, we have estimated a joint discrete-continuous utility

maximization model of college attendance and college completion. The paper

is motivated by the possibility that test scores are poor predictors of who

will succeed in college and thus may not promote optimal investment decisions

and may indeed unjustly limit the educational opportunities of some youth.

We find that: (1) College attendance decisions are strongly commensurate with

college completion. Persons who are unlikely to attend college would be very

likely to drop out of even their "first-choice" colleges, were they to attend.

College human capital investment decisions are strongly mirrored by the likeli-

hood that they will pay off.   (2) Contrary to much of the recent criticism of

the predictive validity of test scores, we find that their informational

content is substantial. After controlling for high school class rank, for

example, the probability of dropping out of the first-choice college varies

greatly with SAT scores. (3) Individual self-selection, related to both

measured and unmeasured atrributes, is the dominant determinant of college

attendance.


                                          Steven Venti
                                          J.F.K. School of Government
                                          Harvard University
                                          Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                          (617) 495-1456

                                          Professor David A. Wise
                                          J.F.K. School of Government
                                          Harvard University
                                          Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                          (617) 495-1178
         TEST SCORES AND SELF-SELECTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION:

            COLLEGE ATTENDANCE VERSUS COLLEGE COMPLETION

                                 by

                   Steven Venti and David A. Wise*


     Most economic studies of college attendance emphasize the returns to

higher education as the motivation for an individual's choice to go to

college, but ignore institutional constraints on possible choices. Critics

of the use of test scores in the determination of college attendance on the

other hand tend to emphasize the constraints on educational opportunities

imposed by test scores and to ignore individual choice. Indeed scholastic

aptitude tests have become an integral part of college application and

admission procedures. Implicit in much of the recent criticism of them

are two assumptions or claims: One is that the impact of test scores is

primarily by way of their use by college admission officials to screen people

out, and thus--by way of the constraints that they place on access to higher

education--to limit occupational opportunities. The other is that the test

scores are poor predictors of who will succeed in college and thus may not

promote optimal investment decisions and may indeed unjustly limit the edu-

cational opportunities of some youth.1 We shall in this paper address the



     *  Research Fellow, J.F.K. School of Government, Harvard
                                                              University;
Stambaugh Professor of Political Economy, J.F.K. School of Government,
Harvard University and Research Associate, NBER
                                                respectively.
     1. See Nader Report by Nairn and Associates [1980], Slack and Porter
[1980] and the congressional hearings on "Truth in Testing" legislation,
U.S. Congress [1979].
                                  -2—


second claim by comparing the determinants of college attendance on the

one hand versus the determinants of college completion on the other, with

special emphasis on the role of test scores.

     With respect to the first assumption, we have found in previous

research (Venti and Wise [1980]), that test scores (or more precisely, the

attributes measured by them) bear a much stronger relationship to

individual college application decisions than to college admission decisions.

Indeed, most persons who don't apply to any college or university would have

a high probability of admission at schools of average academic quality, if

they were to apply. We have found that test scores in general do not

narrowly proscribe by way of college admissions decisions the post-secondary

educational opportunities of youth. Our previous research also suggests that

student application decisions do not simply reflect expectations about college

admission decisions. But it may be that to the extent that test scores

determine individual human capital investment decisions, they do not provide

an adequate or appropriate signal to students, and thus in large part may not

be contributing to rational individual choice. It could be, for example,

that persons who don't go to college--presumably in part because of test

scores--would have been well advised to obtain higher education.

     We shall address this latter issue as the first of two interrelated

questions posed pursuant to the goals of this paper.   We ask first whether

individual college attendance decisions are consistent with the likelihood

that a degree will be obtained. To motivate this questions, recall that

 simple models of investment in higher education suggest that individuals

 choose to attend college if the expected net return from college attendance

 is greater than the return from time spent by the individual in other ways.
                                   —3-

The return from college can be thought of as the product of two components:

the probability that a degree will be obtained, times the expected gain in

future earnings (and non-monetary benefits) given a degree. Much has been

written about the second component but little about the first.1 The first,

however, is of crucial importance because at least the occupational rewards

to college education and probably the earnings gains as well come in large

part with the degree. Whatever the determinants of college attendance,

for attendance to be "rational", it should be the case that persons who are

most likely to attend are also the most likely to obtain a degree and that

those who are unlikely to attend would be unlikely to obtain a degree were

they to go to college.    Thus we investigate the relationship of test scores

and other individual attributes to college attendance on the one hand, versus

the relationship between these attributes and college completion on the

other. We judge the extent to which individuals make "correct" college

decisions by focusing on the relationship between college attendance decisions

of youth and the ability of youth to benefit from college--as measured by

the likelihood of graduation.2 Within this context, we shall emphasize the

relationship of test scores to these outcomes, and implicitly their informational

value to students. Not only are universities likely to want to admit persons

who will succeed, but students may be just as likely to use test scores to

judge their own chances of success.

     In addressing these issues we shall also emphasize student self—



     1.   Griliches [1974] elaborates on the distinction.

     2.  Of course, it is possible that the returns to college education
are greater for the more academically able as well.
                                   -4-
selection.   Our model allows us not only to consider the extent of self-

selection as explained by measured variables, but also to evaluate the extent

of   self-selection attributable to unmeasured individual   attributes (the

idea commonly denoted by self-selection in a statistical sense).

      Then we ask a second, but related question. To the extent that

persistence in college is a criterion for admission, what is the information

value of test scores to admissions officials, and is their use of the scores

consistent with this criterion? We pose the question in this way to provide

a framework that allows us to compare our results with the claims of critics

of the predictive validity of test scores. The question is essentially whether

test scores add measurably to the information available to colleges, given

a measure of high school performance, also an important determinant of college

admissions decisions.

       To address these questions, we shall specify and estimate a mixed

"discrete-continuous" utility maximization model that is in general

analogous to the profit maximization discrete-continuous production models

put forth by Duncan [1980] and McFadden [1979].    The model supposes that

if an individual were to attend a college or university it would be one of

academic quality and cost depending on the individual's personal attributes

and family background. The individual is presumed to compare the net value

 of opportunities with an education from a college of this quality and cost

 with the value of opportunities without a college education.      If the supposed

 value to him of opportunities with a college education exceeds the value to

 him of the opportunities without college, he is presumed to attend. If after

 attendance he concludes that the net value of opportunities without a degree

 exceeds the value of opportunities with a degree he is presumed to drop out.
                                   —5-

It is intended that this idea incorporate attendance and dropping out

associated with searching, evaluating one's abilities and likes, monetary

constraints on attendance, etc.   In short, the procedure estimates jointly

four outcomes--the dichotomous college attendance and college dropout

(or persistence) outcomes and the two continuous college quality and college

cost decisions. The college quality and cost estimates represent the

preferred type of school among those available to the individual if, given

his individual attributes and family background, he were to choose among

college possibilities. Estimation of the college dropout relationship yields

for an individual the probability of dropping out, if given his attributes

he were to attend the most preferred of the college alternatives. And of

course the college attendance equation yields estimates of attendance for

an individual with given attributes. For the purposes of our analysis, the

model is estimated in reduced form. The most important results are presented

in the form of simulations based on the parameter estimates pertaining to

the four outcomes.

     Our estimation procedure has at least two related substantive advantages.

One is that it allows explicitly for individual self-selection of higher

education. Given measured attributes, persons who elect to attend college

are likely to have unmeasured attributes that differ systematically from the

unmeasured attributes of those who elect not to attend. For example, among

persons with the same measured attributes, those who attend college are

likely on average to get more from school than those who don't attend, and thus

will be willing for example to pay more for a college education. This is

similar to the idea captured by Willis and Rosen [1979] in distinguishing the

relationship between unmeasured determinants of college education and
                                  -6—

unmeasured determinants of success in college versus noncollege

occupations.

     The related and concomitant advantage of the procedure is that it

allows estimation of outcomes for any person in the population, not just

those who have elected to attend a particular college. That is, it

corrects for self-selection bias and in so doing yields estimates of

population parameters. Invariably, studies of the relationship between

measures of pre-college academic ability and college success are based on

relationships between test scores and first year college grades, say, for

persons attending a single college or university. Studies of the validity"

of the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) are based on this sort of relationship,

with the validity criterion usually taken to be a correlation or multiple

correlation coefficient) Not only does this process ignore the important

self-selection of college versus no college, but it also ignores both the

individual selection of a particular college from among many possibilities

and the admissions decisions of colleges. All of these decisions tend,

given SAT scores, to allocate persons between college and non-college and

among colleges according to individual comparative or competitive advantage.

Individuals tend to go where they will "do well" and agiven college tends

to select persons who will do well at that college. Thus the relationship

between grades and SAT scores at a particular school underestimates the

relationship in the population between SAT scores and expected academic

performance. Our analysis allows estimation of the probability that an

individual selected at random from the population will drop out of the type

of college he would be expected to choose, should he attend.



     1.   See for example Lord and Novick [1968] or Cronbach and Gleser [1965].
                                     —7-

      In addition, validity analyses of the relationship between SAT

 scores   and grades exclude persons who drop out of school during the first
 year. Our emphasis on persistence    in college avoids this problem while

 concentrating on what may be the single most important indicator of

acquisition of college credentials that will yield subsequent occupational

and monetary rewards.

     Our results indicate that persons with a low probability of attending

college, if they were to attend would have a high probability of dropping

out. Thus attendance is strongly consistent with the likelihood of

benefitting from college by obtaining a degree. Attendance reflects

self—selection explained by measured as well as unmeasured individual

attributes. For example, after controlling for family economic and

social background characteristics, a range of values of test scores and

high school class rank yields estimated attendance probabilities ranging

from a low of about 0 to a high of about .85, while corresponding dropout

probabilities range from about .90 to about .10. And among persons with the

same measured characteristics, persons who are ex post observed not to go to

college, if they were to attend would prefer schools of lower quality and

cost and would have a higher probability of dropping out than persons who

are observed to attend.

     If attendance and persistence are predicted on the basis of test scores

and high school class rank only--without controlling for socioeconomic

background and other determinants of persistence, as is the case in most

validity studies--the variation in dropout probabilities with test scores

is more pronounced. By these measures, test scores provide substantial

distinction among individuals in their estimated persistence probabilities
                                  -8-

were they to go to college. To the extent that individual educational

investment decisions are determined by SAT scores, these decisions appear

in the aggregate to be strongly related to the estimated likelihood that

the investment (college attendance) would be justified ex post.

     These results are in sharp contrast with much of the recent inter-

pretation of the findings of validity studies of SAT tests.   As mentioned

above, these studies emphasize binary or multiple correlations between

test scores and/or class rank on the one hand and college grades on the

other. They also by implication emphasize the effect of test scores on

college admissions decisions while largely ignoring their relationship

to student choices, and they ignore student persistence decisions which may

be the single most important indicator of success in college.     Furthermore,

they are invariably limited to relationships within a single college or

university. Both self-selection by students and decisions of admissions

officers tend to minimize the relationship between test scores and perfor-

mance among students in a single college or university.

     We hasten to add that our results should not be interpreted to mean

that test scores explain a large part of the variation in academic perfor-

mance among individuals. We show that the effect of test scores on

persistence (a "slope parameter') is large, not that the unexplained vari-

ation in college performance is small. And we emphasize that our analysis

 pertains to a national random sample of high school graduates and thus

of colleges and universities. Our findings may not reflect relationships

 that exist with a single university or college.   In particular they may

 be less accurate at the tails of the distributions of individual and

 college characteristics than around their central tendencies, necessarily
                                  -9-

more representative of the weight of the data.

     Section I is a description of the
                                          model we have used. The data
are described in Section II. Estimated
                                          parameters and simulations based
on these estimates are discussed in Section
                                              III. Section IV contains
concluding comments and discussion. Some details of the estimation

procedure are presented in an appendix.
                                  -10-




1. The Statistical Model

      We begin by supposing that each individual is characterized by a vector

of attributes X, with elements describing the individual 's socioeconomic

background, academic ability and past performance, and the local labor

market conditions that he faces. Upon high school graduation but without

a college education, given X, the individual is assumed to face a set

of opportunities to which he attaches a value U0, that depends on X,


(1)                           U0 Xa0+e0

where a0 is a vector of parameters and e0 is an error term representing

the collective contribution to U0 of unmeasured characteristics including

tastes.

      If an individual with attributes X were to attend college, we assume

that he would prefer--among those that he could attend--a school of

quality


(2)                            Q=XaQ+eQ.
And, if the individual were to attend, we assume that he would prefer a

school with cost of attendance given by,



(3)                            C Xa+e
where a is a vector of parameters and eC an error term. Indeed, college

quality and cost are likely to be determined jointly and our estimation

 procedure will allow for that.
                                                    —11—




        At the time of high school graduation, the individual is also

  assumed to attach a value U1 to the opportunities he supposes he would

  have if he were to attend college. The expected net benefit that an

  individual associates with college attendance is assumed to depend not

  only on his attributes but also on the quality and cost of the most preferred

  college among those he could attend.) Thus, U1 is assumed to be given

  by



                          U1 = Xa. +          +            + e1
  (4)
                                X(a1 +
                                         c1aQ
                                                + iaC)         +
                                                                     (e1
                                                                           +
                                                                               c1eQ
                                                                                      +


 if (2) and (3) are substituted for Q and                          C.


        Finally, the individual is assumed to attend college if—-at the

 time of high school graduation—-the net value that he attaches to the

 opportunities that would be available to him if he had college educa-

 tion is greater than the value he attaches to opportunities available

 to him without college. The probability that he will attend college is

 thus



        Pr[U1 - U0 >        0]

           =
 (5)
               Pr[X(a1
                           +
                               1aQ
                                     +
                                         1a     -
                                                    a0)
                                                           +
                                                               (e1      +1eQ + aleC       -
                                                                                              e0)
                                                                                                    >   0]
           =          =
               Pr[A       X1
                                +     > 0]

where A,        ,   and        are defined by the last equality.



     1. Evidence on the relationship between college quality and
earnings is provided by Wise [1975a, l975b], Solmon [1975], and Morgan
and Duncan [1979].
                                —12-



     This attendance specification incorporates both student applica-

tion and college admission decisions. In an earlier paper (Venti and

Wise [1980]), we estimated a model that distinguished the two decisions

and indeed was focused on the college admission decision versus the

student application decision. We found that the student application

decision is the primary determinant of college attendance.' Because

our primary concern in this paper is on dropping out of college, we

concluded that our analysis would not be appreciably affected by distin-

guishing with separate equations the application and admission decisions.

     To determine the relationship between personal attributes and

college "completion," we observe persons in October of the fifth year

after high school graduation. Those who went to a four-year college

and are either still attending or who have obtained a bachelor's degree

we assume to have "persisted," and those who are not in college and have

not obtained a degree we assume have dropped out. (For some, of course,

dropping out may be temporary.) An individual's perception of the

costs and benefits of a college education, as well as his perception of

opportunities without a college degree, over time may change from his

perceptions when he graduated from high school. Schooling is likely

to be part of the searching and learning process that with respect to

youth is most often mentioned as integral to youth job hunting and an

important reason for the high job turnover rate among youth. Just as

youth takejobs to "try them out," some go to college for the same

reason. Some youth may enter a college or university without a clear

intent of obtaining a degree.



     1. Approximately 89 percent of applicants were admitted to the
college or university that was their "first choice."
                                           —13-



        To simplify the analysis--and we feel without appreciably affect-

 ing our results or their interpretation--we assume that persons after

 entering college associate with college and non-college opportunities,

 values that may differ from U0 and U1. Suppose that during the first

 five years after high school (October of the fifth year) the highest

 value associated with opportunities without a college degree is given

 by    V0 and the value associated with opportunities with a degree is
 given by V1. Both may depend         on the quality and cost of the college

 a    person enrolled in, but because       we assume that they are            affected

 directly    by personal attributes X as well as by these same attributes

 indirectly through college quality and cost, we specify V0 and V1 in

 terms of X, without distinguishing the direct effect of college quality

 and cost, as



                                      V0     Xb0+u0
 (6)
                                      V1 = Xb1 + u1


 where b0 and b1 are parameters and u0 and u1 are error terms. Then,

 the probability of persisting in college is given by




                      Pr[V1 -   V0 > 0]


(7)
                        =
                            Pr[X(b1
                                      -
                                           b0)
                                                 +
                                                      (u1
                                                            -
                                                                u0)
                                                                      >   0]

                        =   Pr[P =    X4+        E4   >0],
where P,        and    are defined by the last equality.
                                           -14-




          To recapitulate a bit, we have four equations:


                                                    +
                                  A =      X1           S1.


                                       = X.2        +


(8)                                                 +
                                  C. =


                                  P.   =            +
                                           X.4          54i

                =                               =         and i indexes individuals.
where                  2 = eQ 3 = aC       53
                    aQ
The college quality and cost variables Q and C are continuous and the

variables A and P are latent indicator variables with the properties
that individual i attends college if A> 0 and persists in college if
      >   0.
P1

          The   college quality and college cost variables             and C are

assumed to reflect optimal college attributes for individual i, given
                                             and C are observed only
X, if he were to attend college. Of course Q

for persons who attend a college or university, and only persons who
                                                                   alone, it is neces-
attend can persist (or drop out). For this reason

sary to consider attendance along with the other decisions, since the

unmeasured determinants of all of the outcomes are likely to be corre-

 lated. The empirical estimates, however, yield more than this mechanical

 correction for statistical bias. They yield estimates that in particular

 allow estimation for any high school graduate of the probability that he

 would drop out of college, should he decide to attend, with allowance
                                                        of the college he would select
 made for the expected quality and cost

 if he were to attend. (Our ultimate goal is to compare the probability
                                         -15—



      of dropping out among persons with
                                              different attributes, and to relate
      this evidence to student application
                                                and college admission decisions
  from our earlier work. We will return to this in our discussion of
                                                                     the
  results.)

          The model as specified is analogous to the discrete-continuous

  production (profit maximization) model presented by Duncan [1980] and

  also by McFadden [1979]. Our model
                                              pertains to utility maximization,
  however, and we will estimate it
                                        using an unconstrained maximum likeli-
  hood procedure, which incorporates fewer conditions than the analogous

  Duncan or McFadden versions of the
                                          production model; but the underlying
 model also has less structural
                                      content than these production model

 counterparts. Our model is in reduced form. It would be informative,

 for example, to know the
                             relationship of college cost and college

 quality to persistence, that is, to include them as right-hand

 variables in the persistence equation.
                                                 But both are surely determined
 by the same variables that determine
                                              persistence itself. Thus, without
 making what we believe are unrealistic
                                                exclusion or covariance restric-
 tions, we are unable to obtain adequate
                                                 identification of coefficients
on these variables in the persistence
                                               equation.

         A covariance matrix E describes the relationships
                                                           among the
 random terms in (8), with




                                          2
                                012     G2
(9)                                               2
                                013     a23      G3

                                014     a24      (534
                                                        lJ
                                                     -16-


                                                          and   are set to 1.1
Note that the variances of both
       Three outcomes are possible: (i) Individual i does not attend

college so that A1<0. (ii) Individual I attends a college of quality

     and cost C. and persists so that A..>O, Q. and C. are observed, and

                        Individual I attends a college but drops out so that
p.>0. (iii)
A.>0, Q. and C.1 are observed, and P.<0.
                                    1
 1           1

        If       the ki are assumed to be multivariate normal, f is taken to

be    the bivariate density of                      and C, and g is the conditional bivariate

density of A             and    P, given Q1         and
                                                          C. (more
                                                                         precisely, of l and
given c2 and                     then the probabilities of the three outcomes are
                         E31)

given by:




                         Pr(A1 <         0) = Pr(11 < -X)            =    I-
 (10-i)                    =
                                Ph




                                     >   0, Q1, C, P. > 0)
                           =    Pr(c1 <              and        < X14IQ C1)f(Q             C1)


     (10—il)
                                 x.  1   1
                                              x.
                                               14
                            =f               / g(c1 E4162,           3)dE4d1f(Q1, C1)


                            =P.
                              2i




         1.        It
            is not possible to identify their ratio if                               1
                                                                                         and
                                                                                               4
                                                                                                   are
 allowed to differ.
                                                 —17—




                Pr(A1 >     0,           C., P. <         0)
                  =
                                  < X.1         and            >
                                                                   X4!Q3    C).f(Q. C)
(10-ui)               X.
                          f
                   - xi4 g(e1,
                  =11                           C4I2, 3)dE4dE1.f(Q, C)

                  =P.
                    3i



       The log-likelihood function for N observations is given by


                                 N1                   N2              N3
                      L =                       +     E lnP2. +
(11)
                             i=l
                                       lnP1.1       i=l     1
                                                                      i=1   lnP.1

The function L is maximized with respect to l' 2'                                   and the

eight variance-covariance terms. We will report the two variance
            2         2
estimates a and a , and               the six relevant correlations (instead of the
            2         3


covariances).     Some details of the estimation procedure are presented

in an appendix.
                                    -18-

II. The   Data
                                                 from the     National
    We have based our estimates on data obtained


Longitudinal     Study of the High School Class of 1972. During the Spring

of 1972, approximately 23,000 high school seniors were surveyed. The

data collected included information on each student's family back-

ground, high school performance, and a host of other student character-

 istics. The students also took a battery of six aptitude tests

developed by the Educational Testing Service (ETS). Three fol1ow-u

 surveys were used to obtain information on post-secondary school and

work decisions as well as other related data. We have based our esti-

mates on a random sample of ,726 of the total sample.

     We have confined our attention to four-year colleges and univer-

sities. For example, the probability of attendance refers to the

probability of attendance at a four-year college; some of those who

didn't go to four-year schools went to two-year or vocational schools.

     Our analysis is based on several groups of variables. The first

group includes variables that describe the individual's academic

aptitude and high school performance, as well as non-academic achieve-

ment in high school.

      The Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) score of an individual is

 presumed to have a substantial effect on his post-secondary school

 preferences and on available alternatives. Although SAT scores are

 recorded for many students in our sample, not all of them took the SAT

 test. Many took no college admissions tests at all, while others took

 the American College Testing Program (ACT) test. Our method of analysis

 requires that we have an academic ability measure for all persons in the

 sample, not only for those who took the SAT test--undoubtedly for most
                                 -19—




because they planned to apply to some school. For this reason, we have

used an "SAT" score predicted on the basis of the ETS test scores that

are available for each person in our sample.

     High school class rank is also presumed not only to influence

students' preferences for college but to measure individual attributes

related to college persistence as well. An individual's class rank

is determined not only by his ability, but also by the ability of others

in his high school. We do not have a definitive measure of high school

quality, but have tried to control for it in part by including in our

analysis the percent of students from an individual's high school who

go to college. Finally, we have used two measures of non-academic

achievement in high school: leadership in student government and

athletic achievement.

     The second group of variables is intended to measure an individ-

ual 's socioeconomic background; it includes family income and parents'

education. Race is also included, with the effect of race allowed to

interact with geographic region--South versus non-South.

     The third group includes two measures of local labor market con-

ditions: a local wage rate and a local unemployment rate. These

variables enter the attendance equation only. The analysis also

includes an indicator of sex, and an indicator of rural versus city

or urban high school location.
                                —20-



    The variables are defined as follows:


     SAT Score: predicted SAT scores based on 5 of the 6 ETS tests

administered to the National Longitudinal Study sample.

     College SAT: the average of the SAT scores of freshman students

at the college. We often refer to this as college quality.1

     College Cost: tuition and living expenses, minus grant aid to

the student.

     High School Class Rank: the percentile rank of a person in the

person's high school, based on course grades.

                                       Leader: one if the person was a

"leader" in high school student government nd zero otherwise.

     High School Athlete: one if the student was a "leader" in high

school athletics and zero otherwise.

     Percent of High School Class Going to Colig: the percent of

students from an individual 's high school who go to colleges.

     Parents' Income: family income as reported by the youth respondent.

     Education of Mother (Father) less than High School: one if the indi-

vidual's mother (father) had less than a high school education and zero

otherwise.

     Education of Mother (Father) College Degree or More: one if the

individual's mother (father) had a college degree or more education, and

zero otherwise. The excluded category is a high school degree but less

than a college degree.




     1. Solmon [1975] discusses several alternative measures of college
quality and expresses a preference for SAT scores over survey measures
such as the Gourman ratings. See also Astin and Henson [1977].
                                   —21—



       Siblings: the number of non-adult dependents of the individual's

  parents.

       Black in the South: one if the person is black and went to high

  school in the South.

      Black in the Non-South: defined analogously to black in the South.

      White in the South: defined analogously to black in the South.

 The excluded category is white in the non—South.

      Local Wage Rate: average 1972 wage of manufacturing workers in the

 SMSA of the individual 's high school, or if not available, the state average.

      Local Unemployment Rate: SMSA 1972 unemployment rate (or state rate

 where not available).

      Male: one if the individual is male and zero if female.

      Rural: one if the individual went to high school in a rural area

 and zero otherwise.

      Parents' Income Missing: one if parents' income was not reported and

 zero otherwise.

      Means and standard deviation of the variables are shown in Appendix

 Table 1.




      1. South is assumed to include the following states: Alabama,
 Arkansas, Delaware, Washington, D.C., Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Virginia, Idest Virginia.
                                   —22—




 III. Results

      We shall present first the parameter estimates and discuss the im-

 plied partial effects of specified changes in each of the right-hand

 variables. Then we shall present more detailed simulations based on the

 parameter estimates--the first to describe the effect of changes in SAT

 scores and high school class rank and the second to describe the effect

 of changes in parents' income and education. The quantitative implica-

 tions of self-selection are presented next. Finally, predictions based

 on SAT scores and class rank only are discussed, with emphasis on their

 relationship to current criticism of SAT scores.


      A. The Parameter Estimates and Normalized Partial Effects of
          Individual Variables

      The parameter estimates and their asymptotic standard errors are

 shown in Table 1. We shall not present standard error estimates

for the simulations, but we emphasize that the major coefficients in

the model are measured with considerable precision, as shown by the

standard errors in Table 1. For example, many of the implied t -

statistics   on the SAT and class rank variables are 10 or more. To

evaluate the partial effects of each of the variables, in Table 2

 are shown the predicted shifts in each of the four outcomes due to

specified changes in each of the right-hand variables.

     The correlations among the unmeasured determinants of each of

the outcomes are shown at the bottom of Table 1.    It is clear from these

correlation estimates that unmeasured attributes that increase an

individual's propensity to attend college are strongly related to the

unmeasured attributes that determine the cost and the quality of the
                                   -23-




 college he would choose, were he to attend; the relevant correlations

 are .94 and .45 respectively. Given measured attributes, the more

value an individual attaches to college attendance, the more he is

willing to pay for a college education and the more likely he is to

go to a higher quality school. Of course, both the average SAT score

of entering students and the cost of attendance may be measures of

college quality. (It can also be seen that the unmeasured determinants

of college quality and college cost are positively related as casual

observation would suggest.)

      The results in Table 2 show the effects of the specified changes

in each of the variables, assuming that all other variables are held

constant at their respective population means. If the variable is

continuous, the outcome with this variable one standard deviation above

its mean is compared with the outcome with the variable one standard

deviation below its mean. For example, holding other variables at their

sample means, a person with an SAT score one standard deviation above

the mean for all persons is estimated to have a probability of college

attendance .234 higher than a person with an SAT score one standard

deviation below the mean. Evaluated at the mean of all the right-hand

variables, the expected attendance probability is .21, college quality

is 908, college cost is -$314, and the persistence probability is .47.

     By these measures SAT scores and high school class rank are of

approximately equal importance in determining college attendance, college

quality, and college cost. But the relationship of class rank to per-

sistence is over three times as great as the relationship to persistence

of SAT scores. That is, once persons enter the schools optimal for
                                   -24—




them, given their measured characteristics, high school ciass rank is

a stronger indicator of persistence than are SAT scores, although both

are statistically significant. This result is not surprising if it is

assumed that given academic ability or achievement as reflected in

SAT scores, class rank reflects in part differences in individual

effort or desire to perform well. Recall that the model also controls

for high school "quality," to the extent that it is measured by the

proportion of students from an individual's high school who go to

college. It can also be seen in Table 2 that holding constant other

variables, including SAT score and high school class rank, persons

from "better" high schools are considerably more likely to persist

in college.

     It might be expected that given an indication of how well a student

performed academically as well as an indication of the abilities of

those with whom he was competing, the additional information that the SAT

score provides would be limited. The former two measures provide obser-

vations on the sort of performance that SAT scores are intended to predict,

but in high school instead of college. Because together they provide an

observation that is similar to what the SAT score is intended to predict,

it should not be surprising that they are better predictors of subsequent

but similar student performance than SAT scores are. We will see below

that if predictions are based solely on SAT scores and class rank, the

importance of knowing SAT scores is considerably greater.

     The difference in the probability of college attendance, as well

as college quality and cost, associated with college educated parents
                                                —25—                                     R


                    Table 1.   Parameter Estimates (and Asymptotic Standard
                               Errors), by Equation.


                               I




      Variable                     Probability          College    College   Probability of
                                   of Attendance        Quality    Cost      Persistence

 SAT Score       1000                  2.233            0.225       1.700       0.786
                                      (0.160)           (0.021)    (0.193)     (0.305)
 High School Class Rank               1.454             0.142       1.093       1.613
              ÷ 100                   (0.106)           (0.016)    (0.132)

 Proportion of High                   0.809             0.060       0.691       1.025
 School Class Going to               (0.120)           (0.015)     (0.135)     (0.226)
 College

 High School Student                  0.246             0.023       0.154      -0.042
 Leader                              (0.072)           (0.008)     (0.082)     (0.106)
 High School Athlete                  0.370             0.027      0.286        0.140
                                     (0.061)           (0.007)    (0.067)      (0.105)
 Parents' Income                      0.220             0.019      0.401        0. 357
                                     (0.049)           (0.006)    (0.055)      (0.085)
Education of Mother                  -0.129        - -0.010       -0.158        0.029
Less than High School                (0.056)           (0.008)    (0.068)      (0.114)
Education of Mother                   0.138             0.014      0.172        0.108
College Degree or More               (0.063)           (0.007)    (0.066)      (0.094)
Education    of Father               -0.244            -0.008     -0.221       -0.072
Less than High School                (0.055)           (0.007)    (0.068)      (0.106)
Education of Father                   0.254             0.025      0.242       0.140
College Degree or More               (0.057)           (0.007)    (0.062)

Siblings                            -0.026          -0.002        -0.028      -0.012
                                     (0.012)        (0.002)       (0.014)     (0.023)
Black in the South                   0.749          —0.127         0.594       0.510
                                    (0.105)         (0.011)       (0.147)     (0.181)
Black in the Non-South               0.925           0.033         0.655       0.006
                                    (0.100)         (0.012)       (0.116)     (0.196)
White in the South                   0.038          -0.033        -0.111      -0.162
                                    (0.055)         (0.007)       (0.061)     (0.086)
Rural High School                   -0.016          -0.013        0.055       -0.027
                                    (0.045)         (0.006)       (0.052)     (0.080)
                                                                                          R
                                                -26-




              Table 1.   Parameter Estimates (and Asymptotic Standard Errors),
                         by Equation (continued).


                                                       College      College      Probability of
                                Probability
       Variable                 of Attendance          Quality      Cost         Persistence


Local Wage                         -0.136
                                   (0.031)

Local Unemployment Rate             0.000
                                   (0.008)

                                    0.193               0.021         0.132           0.032
Male
                                   (0.044)             (0.005)       (0.051)         (0.079)

                                    0.231               0.025         0.521           0.415
Parents' Income Missing
                                   (0.080)             (0.010)       (0.095)         (0.144)

                                   -3.680               0.601        -3.081          -2.509
Constant
                                   (0.199)             (0.032)       (0.234)         (0.458)



                                        Correlation Matrix

              Attendance               1.000



              College Quality       0.451              1.000
                                   (0.056)

                                       0.935            0.389          1.000
              College Cost
                                      (0.011)          (0.046)

                                       0.155            0.047          0.135           1.000
               Persistence
                                      (0.099)          (0.048)         (0.074)


                                                                 Total Sample           5726
Standard Error of             0.098
College Quality              (0.005)
                                                                 Number Attending       1622

Standard Error of             1.122
                                                                 Number Persisting      1155
College Cost (a3)            (0.055)

 Log—Like lihood Value       -532.1



      a. College quality for purposes of estimation is in 1000's, college cost is
 in 1000's, student SAT is in 1000's, and parents' income is in 10,000's.
                                      -27-                                    R




            Table 2. Effects of Two Standard Deviation and Category
                      Changes in Variables, by Equation



     Variable              Probability       College   College   Probability of
                           of Attendance     Quality   Cost      Persistence

SAT Score 1 S.D. Above         .234           81.0      611.8          .112
the Mean Versus 1 S.D.
Below the Mean

High School Class Rank,        .231           77.8      597.3          .340
1 S.D. Above the Mean
Versus 1 S.D. Below
the Mean

High School Student            .078           23.1      154.4         -.017
Leader Versus Not

High School Athlete            .121           27.2     285.7           .056
Versus Not

Percent of High School         .090           22.7     260.2           .153
Class Going to College,
1 S.D. Above the Mean
Versus 1 S.D. Below the
Mean

Parents' Income, 1 S.D.        .070           20.5     430.8           .152
Above the Mean Versus 1
S.D. Below the Mean


Education of Mother and        .233           56.9     791.9           .116
Father College Degree or
More Versus Education of
Mother and Father Less
Than High School

Number of Siblings, 1        -.005           -.007     -93.8          -.017
S.D. Above the Mean,
Versus 1 S.D. Below the
Mean
                                                                                  R
                                          -28-




             Table 2. Effects of Two Standard Deviation and Category
                         Changes in Variables, by Equation (continued).



                              Pro bability       College   College   Probability of
    Variable                  of Attendance                Cost      Persistence
                                                 Quality


Black in the South                .265           -127.1     594.4          .198
Versus White in the
Non-South

White in the South                .011            -33.4    -110.8         -.064
Versus White in the
Non-South

Black in the Non-South            .336             32.7     654.5          .002
Versus White in the
Non-South

                                  .057             20.7     132.3          .013
Male Versus Female

Rural Versus Non-Rural           -.005            -13.4      55.2         -.011
High School

Local Wage, 1 S.D. Above         -.047
the Mean Versus 1 S.D.
Below the Mean

Local Unemployment Rate,           .000
1 S.D. Above the Mean
Versus 1 S.D. Below the
Mean
                                     -29-




 versus parents without high school degrees is quantitatively similar

 to the effect of a two-standard deviation change in class rank and SAT

 scores. A two-standard deviation change in parents' income on the

 other hand has a relatively small effect on college attendance and type

 of college, but has a greater effect on persistence than the change

 (just described) in parents' education. Parents' education is apparently

 much more important than income in determining preferences for education,

 but after entering college, income is relatively more important than

 parents' education in determining persistence.

      Black youth are more likely than white youth, given other attributes,

 to go to college.   In the South, the probability that black youth attend

 is .25 higher than the probability for white youth with the same attributes.

In the non-South, the probability is .34 higher for black youth. While

 black youth in the South go to colleges with average SAT scores about 94

 points lower than white youth in the South, the persistence rate of black

 youth is about .26 higher than the rate for white youth. The persistence

 rate of black youth in the South is about .20 higher than the rate of

 black youth in the non-South. While black youth in the South go to

 colleges with average SAT scores about 160 points lower than black youth

 in the North, their probability of persistence is about .20 higher than

 the persistence probability of black youth in the non-South. In the non-South,

 black youth go to colleges with student SAT scores that average a bit

higher than those of schools attended by white youth, given academic

and socioeconomic characteristics.

      That black youth are more likely than white youth to go to college,

 given comparable academic and family background attributes, may reflect
                                 -30-

the relatively greater returns to higher education for blacks, as found

for example by Freeman [1976, 1978]. The atmosphere created by emphasis

on affirmative action may also have encouraged more black youth to go

to college. The average SAT scores of students in most predominantly black

schools (largely in the South) are low relative to the least selective

schools in the non-South. Thus some students in the South may be be attracted

to a college alternative that doesn't exist in other regions of the country.

In addition, some black youth who go to four-year colleges in the South

might be more likely to go to two-year colleges if they lived in the non-

South.

     The greater returns to education for black youth are consistent also

with the finding that given other attributes black youth pay more

to go to college than white youth. The estimated effect of the race-region

variables on cost assumes of course that other attributes--in particular

SAT scores--are held constant. When these attributes are not held constant

we find the average college cost for blacks is lower than for whites in

 both the South and the non-South, while in both regions the average of

 black SAT scores is about 170 points lower than the white average. These

and other means of selected variables by race and region are shown in

Appendix Table 2.
                                  —31—




B. The Probability of Attendance versus the Probability of Dropping Out

      In the next section we shall present simulated partial effects of

selected variables on each of the four outcomes. These simulations,

however, don1t provide an overall indication of the relationship between

attendance and persistence. To provide such a summary we have presented

in Figure 1 a graph of the probability of attendance versus the probability

of dropping out. To relate the probability of dropping out more purely

to student decisions, we have also graphed this probability against the

probability of application, taken from Venti and Wise [1980]. That is,

for each individual in our sample, we have predicted attendance (and

application) and dropout probabilities. Then, for each attendance (or

application) interval, we have calculated the average dropout probability.

These predictions are thus based on all measured determinants of the

outcomes.

     The figure indicates that persons who are unlikely to attend college,

on average would be very likely to drop out were they to attend. The

same pertains to those who are unlikely to apply to any college. On the

other hand, persons who are likely to apply, and attend, are very unlikely

to drop out. In this sense, student application and attendance decisions

seem to be quite consistent with persistence outcomes and more generally with

rational educational investment decisions. To the extent that the expected

benefit from college is determined by whether a degree is obtained, persons

with high expected benefit are likely to go while those with low expected

benefit areunlikely to go.
                                       -32-




        Figure 1.     Probability of Attendance and Application Versus
                      Probability of Dropping Out.




       1.0
              S.



       0.9


       0.8


4-,
       0.7


•1
0      0.6
                                       \
C

       0.5
 0
>
4-,
F      0.4-         Attendance

.0
 0
 S.-   0.3                                                               icat ion


       0.2


       0.1
                                                                             \
              0     0.1   0.2    0.3       0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9 10
                                                       Probability of
                                                       Attendance, Application
                                   —33-



      C. Simulated Effects of Selected Variables

      1. SAT Scores and Class Rank.

      Estimated probabilities of attendance and dropping out, together

 with estimated college quality and cost, are presented in Table 3 for

selected SAT and class rank values. Differences among the entries in

the table represent estimated partial effects of SAT and class rank, with

 other variables in the model assigned their population means.

      Persons with SAT scores and class ranks that make them unlikely

 college entrants would have a high probability of dropping out were

they to go to college. For example, persons with SAT scores of 900 or

lower and in the bottom half of their high school classes have at most

a .24 probability of going to college. If persons in this group were

to attend, their dropout probabilities would be very high, at least

 .53 and ranging up to .88 for those with the lowest test scores and

 poorest academic records. On the other hand, persons with scores and

class rank that yield high estimated attendance probabilities are much

 less likely to drop out than those with low scores and class rank.

While attendance probabilities range from .01 to .82, corresponding

dropout probabilities range from .88 to .15.

     We see also from Table 3 that if persons were to choose among

college possibilities, the qualities of the schools they would choose

would vary with their own academic abilities, as casual observation would

suggest. Recall that estimated college quality and college cost repre-

sent the characteristics of the school a person with given attributes—-

randomly selected from the population--would choose, were he to choose
                                                                         R
                                        34




        Table 3. Simulated Effects of SAT and High School Class Rank
                  on Attendance, College Quality and Cost and on the
                  Probability of Dropping Out



                                   Class Rank (Percentile)
SAT
                  0           25              50             75        100


                                Probability of Attendance

500               .01          .03            .06             .11      .19

700               .03          .07            .13             .22       .34

900               .08          .15            .24             .37       .51

1100              .16          .27            .40             .55       .68

1300              .30          .43            .58             .71       .82


                                       College Quality
 500              755         791             826            862       898

 700              800         836             871             907      943

 900              845         881             916             952      988

                  890         926             961             997      1033
lipO
1300              935          971           1006            1042      1076

                                        College Cost
 500             —1372        —1099          -825            -552      -279

 700             -1032         -759          -486            -212        61

                  -692         -419          -146             128       401
 900
1100              -352          -79           194             468       741

1300.              -12          261           534             807      1081


                               Probability of Dropping Out

 500              .88          .79            .65             .49       .34

 700.             .85          .74            .59             .43       .28

 900              .81          .68            .53             .37       .23

1100              .76          .62            .47             .31       .19

1300              .71          .56            .40             .26       .15
                                    -35-




 among colleges. Thus it is also not surprising that persons who are

 unlikely to find school attractive would pay little to attend. Indeed

 these estimates indicate that for many persons the optimal college would

 be one that they were paid to attend; the estimated cost is negative.

 "Desired' college cost is not constrained to be positive.1

      As mentioned above, the partial effects--after controlling for a

 measure of the academic level of an individual's high school, as well as

 socioeconomic background and other variables--show that the effect on

 persistence of high school class rank is much greater than the effect of

SAT scores on persistence. If the percent of students from a person's

high school who are college bound is not controlled for, however, the

corresponding variation in dropout probabilities by SAT score is much

greater than is shown in Table 3.   (Such estimates are presented below.)

     The attendance and dropout probabilities in Table 3 may be integrated

with the application and admission probabilities from our earlier paper

(Venti and Wise [1980]), based on a model with the same variables used

in this paper. These results are shown in Table 4.

     Based on the application and admission probabilities shown in

Table 4, we concluded in our earlier paper that SAT scores were related

much more to individual application than to college admission decisions.

Most persons would have a high probability of admission were they to

apply to a college of average quality. It is clear also from Table 4



     1. Because unmeasured determinants of attendance are positively
related to quality, cost, and persistence, the conditional quality and
cost estimates are higher than the unconditional ones, and the dropout
probabilities are lower. This idea is pursued further in Section D below.
                                                                            R
                                      -36-




                Table 4 Simulated Application, Admission,
                          Attendance, and Dropout ProbabiUtieSa
                          for Selected SAT and Class Rank Values



                                    Class Rank (Percentile)
   SAT
                  0          25               50              75     100


                             Probability of Application
                 .03          .06             .11             .19    .30
   500
                 .07          .14             .23             .35    .49
   700
                 .17          .27             .40             .54    .68
   900
                              .45             .59             .72    .83
  1100           .31

                 .50          .64             .76             .86    .92
  1300
                               Probability of Admissionb
                 .52          .63             .74             .82    .89
   500
                 .64          .74             .82             .39    .93
   700
                 .74          .82             .89             .93    .96
   900
                 .83          .89             .94             .96    .98
  1100
                 .89          .94             .96             .98    .99
  1300
                               Probability of Attendance
                              .03             .06             .11    .19
   500           .01

                 .03          .07             .13             .22    .34
   700
                              .15             .24             .37    .51
   900           .08

                 .16          .27             .40             .55    .68
  1100
                 .30          .43             .58             .71    .82
  1300
                              Probability of Dropping Out
                 .88          .79              .65             .49   .34
   500
                 .85          .74              .59             .43   .28
   700
                              .68              .53             .37    .23
   900           .81

                 .76          .62              .47             .31    .19
  1100
                 .71          .56              .40             .26    .15
  1300



     a. The probability of application and the probability of admission
from Venti and Wise [1980].

     b. At a college of average quality (with an average SAT of 1012).
                                  -37-




that some persons with a high estimated probability of admission have

a low estimated probability of attendance. In particular, this is true

 of persons whose SAT scores, and/or class ranks are below the sample

 averages.1 This result also supports the finding that to the extent

 that SAT scores determine college attendance, their effect is more by

 way of individual than by way of college admission decisions.

      And whether we consider the individual application decision or the

 attendance decision outcome--that incorporates both student and college deci-

 sions—-the relationship between test scores and these decisions seems

 supported by the dropout probabilities. To the extent that test scores

 affect student and college decisions, in the aggregate, they tend to be

 consistent with the dropout probabilities. We will pursue this point

 in Section E.

      2. Income and Parents' Education.


     Simulated attendance and dropout probabilities together with college

quality and cost for selected levels of parents' education and family

income are shown in Table 5. Again, they are unconditional estimates--

representing the predicted choices of a person with the given attributes

selected from the pooulation: colleae charartrictirs and dropout

 probabilities conditional on attendance differ from these, as shown in

 Section D below.



      1.  In part, these estimates pertain to SAT and class rank combi-
nations that would be unlikely to be observed empirically. For example,
because SAT and class rank are positively correlated, very high SAT and
very low class rank is uncomon.
                                                                              R
                                       -38-


         Table   5.   Simulated Effects of Parents' Income and Education
                      on Attendance, College Quality and Cost, and on
                      the Probability of Dropping Out.



                                                  Parents' Income
  Parents'
  Education
                             $6,000     $9,000        $12,000       $15,000   $18,000

                                              Probability of Attendance

Less than High                 .11        .13           .14           .15         .17
School

College Degree or              .33        .35           .38           .40         .43
More

                                                  College Quality

Less Than High                 879        885           890           896         902
School

College Degree or              936        941           947           953         959

                                                   College Cost

Less Than High                -747       -627          -507          -387      -267
School

College Degree or               45        165           285           405         525
More

                                         Probability of Dropping Out

Less Than High                 .62        .57           .53           .49         .45
School

College Degree or              .50        .46           .42           .38         .34
More
                                       -39-


        Relative to parents' education, parents' income appears to affect

 dropout probabilities much more than attendance
                                                      or college quality or
 college cost. Apparently persons whose parents earn less are substantially

  more likely to drop out of college for monetary reasons than persons

  from wealthier families, if family income is interprested strictly as a

  determinant of individual budget constraints.
                                                     This observation is con-
 firmed by the estimated effects of two standard deviation shifts reported

 in Table 2. Indeed parents' income has
                                              considerably less effect than
 SAT scores except in the determination
                                          of dropping out. Parents' educa-
tion, on the other hand, is by these
                                       comparisons relatively less important
 in the determination of dropping out than in the determination of atten-

 dance and college characteristics.    Judging by the evidence in Table 2,
 however, the three measures of individual academic
                                                        ability--SAT scores,
 the percent of the individual's high school
                                                 class who go to college, and
 high school class rank—-taken together are much more important than family

 income in the determination of persistence.
                                                  Nonetheless, our results

suggest that if educational attainment were not to be related to family

income, for example, low family income would have to be offset by external

funds, even if income itself were not a major determinant of college

attendance.



     1. Recall that we have used net college cost, subtracting aid
from college tuition plus living cost. Holding other determinants
constant, persons from poorer families obtain more aid than persons
from wealthier families, although in 1972 academic performance was an
important determinant of aid. In subsequent years after the introduc-
tion of the federal Basic Equal Opportunity Grant program, relatively
more aid was allocated in inverse relation to family income. (See
Fuller, Manski, and Wise E1980a, 1980b].)
                                  -40-




    D. The Importance of Self-Select1fl

    The foregoing results highlight the very substantial relationship

between measured individual attributes on the one hand and college

selection and persistence on the other. The effect of measured attributes

on outcomes, however, represents only one of the components of self-selec-

tion. The other is the effect of unmeasured individual attributes which may

be expected to have comparable effects on self-selection. In particular
                                         attributes, individuals who elect
we proposed above that given measured
                                                       those whose relative
to go to school are likely to be disproportionately

opportunities will be most enhanced by college or who most enjoy school,

etc., and who are the most likely to succeed in college. The estimated
                                            reported in Table 1 support
correlations among the disturbance terms

this proposition. The correlations may be interpreted as an indication

of self-selection bias.1

      To provide a better measure of the importance of this form of self-

 selection, we have estimated the difference in college quality, college

 cost, and the probability of dropping out, conditional on attendance

 versus conditional on non-attendance. The results evaluated at the

 population means of all variables are as follows:2


                     Conditional on        Conditional on
                     Attendance            Non-Attendance       Difference

                            (1)                  (2)             (l)—(2)

                           966                   893                73
  College Quality
                           1188                 -720              1908
  College Cost
                           0.45                 0.55             -0.11
  Probability of
  Dropping Out


       1. See Hausmarl and Wise [1979], for example.

       2. The probabilities have been rounded to the nearest hundredth.
                                    -4l-



 Given personal attributes, persons who elect not to go to college, if

 they were to attend, would choose schools of lower quality than the

 schools selected by persons with the same attributes who go to college.

 Also, among persons with the same attributes, those who don't go would

 have a higher probability of dropping out than persons who are observed

 to go. Possibly most noticeable is the very large difference between the

 average cost of schools selected by those who attend versus the cost

 "desired" by students who don't attend. On average, students who attend

 are prepared to pay much more for college than those who don't attend.1



      E. The Information Content of SAT Scores and Class Rank
          arid Implications for Test 'Validity."

     The simulations above are based on a model that we believe incor-

porates measures of the major determinants of college-going decisions,

namely, it incorporates both academic and family socioeconomic variables.

Measures of academic ability and past performance are assumed to be

reflected in SAT scores, high school class rank, and the proportion of a

person's high school classmates who go to college. Thus all of the

above estimates are of partial effects after controlling for other

variables. In particular, unreported estimates suggest that when the

percent of an individual's high school classmates who go to college is




       1. Mechanically, these effects are due to the size of the Mills
 ratio for the different values of X. For example, the expected value of
cost given attendance is

                          +
                              p13a3(q(X1)/[x1])   ,

where X3 is shown in Table 3, p13 = .935 and a3 = 1122;     is the unit

normal density function and    is the corresponding distribution function.
                                 -42-




added to the model, the relationship between high school class rank

and dropping out of college becomes larger and the partial relationship

between SAT score and dropping out smaller. The percent of high school

classmates who go to college appears to be an alternative measure of

the academic ability of the individual; or class rank relative to SAT

score means more if we have an indication of the abilities of the students

against whom he was competing.

     But much of the recent discussion on the subject is motivated by

claims that the predictive "validity of the tests is low, in particular

relative to high school class rank. To address these claims, we have

estimated our model using only SAT scores and high school class rank,

together with the three race-region variables. Simulations analogous

to those in Table 4, but based on this limited predictive model, are

shown in Table 6. (Parameter estimates analogous to those in Table 1

but based on the simplified model, together with simulations analogous

to those in Table 3, are shown in Appendix Tables 3 and 4 respectively.)

     It is clear from the bottom section of the table that given high

school class rank, substantial predictive information is contained in

SAT scores. The change in the dropout probability associated with a

200 point change in the SAT score is about the same as the change in

the dropout probability associated with a 25 point change in class rank.

 For example, begin with a person at the 50th percentile in his high

school class and with an SAT of 900. If the person instead were at the

75th percentile in class rank the estimated dropout probability would be

 .11 lower; similarly if instead the person had an SAT score of 1100,
                                       43                                   R



                Table 6    Simulated Application, Admission, Attendance,
                           and Dropout Probabilities, for Selected SAT
                           and Class Rank Values, Based on Simplified Model a



                                     Class Rank (Percentile)
     SAT
                    0          25              50           75        100

                               Probability of Application
     500          .02          .04             .07          .11       .17
     700          .09          .14             .21          .29       .39
     900          .25          .34             .44          .54       .64
    1100          .49          .60            .69           .78       .85
    1300          .74          .82            .88           .92       .95
                                Probability of Admissionb
    500           .45          .59            .71           .81       .89
    700           .56          .69            .79           .88       .93
    900           .66          .78            .86           .92       .96
   1100           .76          .85            .91           .96       .98
   1300           .83          .90            .95           .98       .99
                                Probability of Attendance
    500           .01          .02            .03           .06       .10
    700           .04          .07            .12           .18       .25
    900           .14          .21            .29           .38       .49
   1100           .33          .43            .53           .63       .73
   1300           .58          .68            .76           .83       .89
                              Probability of Dropping Out
    500           .86          .79            .70          .60        .49
    700           .78         .69             .59          .48        .37
    900           .68         .58             .47          .36        .26
   1100           .57         .46             .35          .25        .17
   1300           .44         .34             .24          .16        .10



     a. Based on a model that includes only SAT and class rank together
with the race-region variables.

     b. At a college of average quality (average SAT of 1012).
                                  -44-




The dropout probability would be .12 lower.1


     Comparisons based on high school class rank and SAT score are

important because these are the measures that are most often considered

in evaluation or criticism of the predictive validity of test scores,

or the information content of the scores. The criticism, however, is

often justified on the basis of the limited increase in the multiple

correlation between college grades on the one hand, and high school

class rank and SAT scores on the other, over the simrle correlation
                                                     2
between college grades and high school class rank.       Even though the

relatively high correlation between SAT scores and high school class

rank (.50 in our sample) means that expected dropout probabilities can

be predicted well with only high school class rank, given class rank the

difference in expected dropout probabilities varies greatly with SAT

scores. This means that although on average colleges could predict

reasonably well on the basis of class rank alone, these predictions

would be far from expected dropout probabilities in some instances.

In particular, individuals with SAT scores very different from the

expected SAT score given class rank would be either substantially disad-




     1. A 200 point change in SAT scores and a 25 point change
in class rank are both roughly equivalent to one standard deviation.
Calculations based on an exact one standard deviation change yield
a .11 change in the dropout probability for each of them.

     2. The validity coefficient is the binary or multiple correla-
tion between the criterion variable and one or more predictor vari-
ables. A recent survey of over 800 studies of college grades versus
                                                      coefficients of
SAT scores and high school performance found validity
about 0.52 for high school performance, 0.41 for SAT score, and 0.58
for both predictors together. See Ford and Campos [1977].
                                    -45-




vantaged or substantially advantaged if admissions were based on class

rank alone.

     It is also informative to compare the estimated weights associated

with the two measures in individual decisions versus college admission

decisions. According to our formulation of the problem the estimated

coefficients in the student attendance equation represent the

ship between the associated variables and the individual's evaluation

of opportunities with education at the school he could attend versus

opportunities without college. A similar interpretation can be given to

estimated coefficients in the application and dropout equations. In the

admission equation, the coefficients may be interpreted as the weights

that colleges and universities assign to these measures in determining

an individual's academic potential.1


     For each estimated relationship we have calculated the ratio of

 the SAT to the class rank coefficient; that is, the number of class rank

 percentile points that is equivalent to 10 SAT score points. The results

 are as follows:2


                    Probability of Application      3.14

                    College Quality (Application)   3.94

                    College Quality (Attendance)    3.10



      1. See Venti and Wise [1980].

      2. The ratios in the probability of application, college quality
 (application), and the probability of admission equations are taken from
equations analogous to those in Venti and Wise [1980], but based only on
SAT scores and class rank together with the race-region variables.
                                  -46-



                 College Cost (Attendance)         3.78

                 Probability of Attendance         3.05

                 Probability of Admission          1.02

                 Probability of Persistence        1.38



In the light of recent criticism of the use of SAT scores in admissions,

it is striking that the class rank percentile point equivalent of 10

 SAT points is a bit less in admissions than it is in rredicting

 persistence. Thus should persistence be the criterion for admission,

 colleges and universities on average may if anything assign a somewhat

 lower weight to SAT scores versus high school performance than persistence

 predictions suggest.

     Note also that relative to class rank, SAT scores bear a much

greater relationship to the values that individuals assign to oppor-

tunities with and without college than they do to the "average" univer-

sity's evaluation for admission purposes. The importance of the individual

attributes reflected in SAT scores shows up not only in individual applica-

tion decisions but in college quality and cost decisions as well. On average

these (by and large) individual decisions are also much more strongly

related to test scores than college admission decisions are. The same may

be said for ultimate attendance decisions, largely individual choices but

affected in part by college admission decisions.

     Apparently, the relationship between test scores and what individuals

 think they can get out of school is much more pronounced than colleges

 and universities--in effect society's--evaluation of the opportunity

 that should be available to them should they want to enter college,
                                  -47-




indeed much greater than the realtionship between test scores and

academic success, measured by observed persistence. Individuals are

likely to evaluate schooling opportunities not only in terms of persis-

tence but in terms of human capital development while in school (and

subsequent earning gains) and simply enjoyment of schooling as well.1

Both would suggest that student schooling decisions are determined more

by academic ability than university admission decisions are. Individuals

not only weight academic ability highly in deciding whether to go to

college at all, but are also willing to pay more for a college education

if they have greater academic ability. And persons with greater academic

ability are also likely to choose a more competitive and higher quality

college. Both are consistent with rational individual human capital

decisions. Simply put, the results are consistent with the hypothesis that

the net returns to education are low for persons with low academic ability

or interest. Colleges on the other hand don't insist that every entrant

do well; neither do they insist that every entrant like school. Individuals

whose lives are personally affected by such things, apparently are much

more inclined to take them into account in making their decisions.

Apparently, the provision of individual college opportunities in general

is considerably more in the hands of individuals than at the behest of

institutions, and apparently the individual decisions are strongly related



     1. One explanation may be complementarily between ability (as
measured by test scores) and schooling in the determination of earnings.
The value of a college degree may be more for students higher in the
attributes measured by test scores. These attributes may also be more
closely related to the consumption aspects of schooling.
                                  -48-




to the attributes reflected in SAT scores.

   We note also that the relative weight of SAT scores is much lower

in persistence than in the other individual decisions (supposing that

persistence is largely an individual and not an institutional choice).

SAT scores of course provide a comparison of individual attributes with

those of a much broader population than is provided by class rank which

compares an individual only with his high school classmates.   Since in

making post-secondary schooling decisions an individual is likely to

think of his attributes relative to those of a group much broader than

his high school classmates, it is not surprising that the attributes

reflected in SAT scores should weight relatively more heavily than high

school class rank. On the other hand, once individuals have allocated

themselves to college versus no college and among colleges, in large

part according to the attributes reflected in SAT scores, it is also

not surprising that given this allocation, class rank should weigh

relatively more heavily in determining persistence than in determining

college attendance and college type.

     We emphasize that the calculations in this section derive from

predictions based on SAT scores and high school class rank only. As we

have already mentioned, relative to class rank the partial effect of

SAT scores on dropping out is considerably less in the more behavioral

model (Table 3 for example) than in the simplified specification. In

large part the difference results from the inclusion in the behavioral

specification of the percent of an individual's high school class who to

to college: Apparently though, SAT scores in the simple model also pick
                                   -49-




 up to some extent individual attributes
                                           contributing to success in
college but that should be ascribed to
                                         family socioeconomic background
rather than academic ability. In
                                   particular, family income affects
persistence and its effect is apparently picked
                                                  up in part by SAT scores
when income is not included in the model.
                                             In any case, it is clear that
the additional predictive information contained
                                                  in SAT scores, given high
school class rank, would be less if family background variables were

also used to predict dropout probabilities. Such predictions used in

admission decisions, however, would surely be ethically inappropriate

and indeed legally proscribed.
                                   -50-


IV. Concluding   Comments and Discussion

     Our earlier work demonstrated that a very large proportion of

college applicants gain admission to their 'first-choice" school. The

self-selection by students of colleges and universities is striking.    In


particular, SAT scores are more closely related to the student than to

university choice. These findings together with the results reported in

this paper suggest that test scores (or the attributes reflected in them)

are at least as important in student decisions as in admission decisions.

It is not only the university that would like to compare one student to

another, but the student who would like to judge his academic abilities

relative to other students. Our findings suggest that SAT scores are likely

to contribute in substantial measure to rational college attendance

decisions and indeed may aid student choice more than university choice.

In a statistical sense, this self-selection can be thought of in two

components. One is the part that is explained by observed individual

characteristics. The other is associated with unobserved characteristics

and is reflected in positive correlations between the random determinants

of college attendance and the random determinants of persistence in

college (as well as the random determinants of college quality and college

cost). For example, an individual with average attributes who attends

college will drop out with estimated probability .45, while an individual

who is observed not to attend would have a .55 probability of dropping out.

This is analogous to the self-selection component hypothesized by Willis

and Rosen [1979] with respect to college attendance and earnings with and

without a college degree.
                                    -51-




      College attendance and non-attendance decisions are consistent

 with the strong relationship between the likelihood of attendance and

 the likelihood of benefitting from college by obtaining a degree. Persons

 who are unlikely to attend are very likely to drop out without a degree

 should they attend and persons who are likely to attend are unlikely to

 drop out. In addition, the relationship between SAT scores and high

 school class rank and the probability of college attendance is strongly

 mirrored by an opposite relationship between these measures and the

 probability of dropping out of college, if a college should be attended.

 Our results also confirm that the quality of school
                                                       persons attend--largely
 by choice--is strongly related to their aptitude and past performance in

high school. This finding is in accord with casual observation, but it is

also consistent with evidence based on choice models of selection among

schools to which persons have been admitted.1   Possibly less obvious,

but consistent with economic reasoning, is the result that persons who

are unlikely to succeed in school, if choosing among colleges would

not only select low quality schools but low cost schools as well. Indeed

for many, the preferred school would ba one that individuals were paid to

attend. Persons who are unlikely to succeed in school on average would

not be as inclined to pay a lot for the privilege.

     To the extent that colleges base admissions decisions on test scores,

their selection procedures distinguish persons according to expected

probability of success. Indeed the relative weight assigned to SAT scores




     1. See Radner and Miller [1975], Kohn, Manski, and Mundel [1976],
and Fuller, Manski, and Wise [1980a].
                                  —52-




versus high school class rank by college admissions officers is

s'mewhat less than the relative weight of SAT scores in the prediction

of the probability of college persistence.   (This is not to say of course

that test scores necessarily explain a great deal of the variation in

academic performance.)

     Our findings are inconsistent with the implications of much of the

recent discussion and criticism of test scores. Predictions based on SAT

scores and high school class rank yield estimates that distinguish rather

dramatically the school preference and college success probabilities of

high school graduates. Our previous research indicated that the relation-

ship between these measures and college attendance outcomes was due much

more to their relationship to individual application decisions than to

their effect on college admission decisions. The relationship between

these measures and expected probabilities of success in college tend to

support the individual application decisions since occupation and monetary

advantages of going to college are limited if a degree is not obtained.

     Together these results provide two primary pieces of evidence that

are in contradistinction to much of the criticism of SAT scores. First,

the test scores are much more related to student application decisions

than to admission decisions of colleges. Second, the scores are rather

dramatically related to the probability that persons will drop out of

college, a consideration not given weight by critics of the predictive

validity of SAT scores, who have emphasized the relationship between

test scores and first year college grades. Furthermore, the studies

of the predictive validity of tests do not account for the self-
                                   -53-




selection of students among colleges in such a way as to match their

interests and capabilities with the characteristics of the colleges, as

human capital considerations would suggest. Accordinq to our findings,

students self—select themselves to colleges and universities in large

part on the basis of SAT scores. This alone would suggest that the

correlations between SAT scores and grades within individual colleges

or universities--the basis for many of the conclusions of critics

such as Slack and Porter and the Nader organization--are pushed toward

zero. Thus, even within the limited criteria of ôorrelation coefficients,

they tend to underestimate the relationship between success in college

and test scores.
                                              -54-.




                                     APPENDIX ON ESTIMATIO'


           Because the estimation procedure is not new, we will not go through

it    in   detail, but will point out only those features that may be par-

ticularly       relevant--although not unique--to our application.
           Suppose that given Q       and   C, the conditional distribution of A and
                                                                 matrix
P is multivariate normal with mean vector (p1, '2 and covariance



                                            lw'1


                                                          0)22


For convenience we will deviate from the text notation by supposing that

the covariance matrix            pertains to (A, P, Q, C), rather than (A, Q, C,

P).

           The probability of not going to college is given by


                                 Pr (A <      0) =    1
                                                          -




                                                       be written as
The probability of going to college and persisting may


                 Pr(A >   0,   P >   0,   Q, C)



                    p1w         p1w
                                                                  f(Q,
                 :f J                     h(X1, A2, p*)dj2dX1 •
                                                                         C)




                                                                   function with correla-
where h is a standardized bivariate normal density

                                             w    1
tion coefficient p*. and wj =
                                                      -55-



                Pr(A >     0,    P <   0,    Q, C)



                     Pl/wl

                 f f h(A1, X2,                       p*)dA2dX1        f(Q, C)




                     P1w        -p1w
                =J           f              h(A., A2, _p*)dA2dA1 .           f(Q,   C)




where the last is in a form that may be evaluated by standard bivariate

normal inteqral approximations.

       Of course, all of                    p2, the W'S, p, and f are functions of the

elements of the covariance matrix .                          We   must constrain E to be positive

definite. This may be done in the usual way by writing it as PP' =

and maximizing the likelihood function with respect to the elements of

P.    In our case, there is an additional constraint, namely that a11 =                       1

and         =   1.   We impose this constraint by using a polar coordinate
      a22
transformation.

       Let the matrix P be given by



                                        P1


                                        P2       P3


                                        P4       P5          P6


                                                 P8          P9     P10


If   we set P1 =      1,   P2 = cos 0, and P3 =              sin   0, then
                                           -56-




                   011 =


                         =        = cos 0
                   012       P2


                   013 = P4


                   014 = P7

                              2        2
                                                                   2
                   022 = p2       +        =   cos   +   sin   o       =1
                                      p3




                      etc.


The likelihood function is maximized with respect to ,                      2'   3' 4'
and P4 through P10 using an algorithm proposed by Berndt, Hall, Hall,

and Hausman [1974].
                                      -57-                                           R



           Appendix Table 1. Variable Means and Standard Deviations for
                              All Students and Students Attending College.



                                             All Students         Attending College
           Variable
                                         Mean      Std.   Dev.    Mean    Std. Dev.


SAT Score                                 823         180          959        175

High School Class Rank                   .551        .273         .717       .220

Proportion of High School Class          .503        .188         .558       • 196
Going to College

High School Student Leader               .067        .250         .126       .332

High School Athlete                      • 1 02      .302         .161       .368

Parents' Incomea                       11186.        5380.        12805       5584

Education of Mother Less than            .269        .444         .134       .340
High School

Education of Mother College              .114        .318         .218       .413
Degree or More

Education of Father Less than           .324         468          .163       .369
High School

Education of Father College             .180         .385         .342     .474
Degree or More

Siblings                               2.037       1.705         2.012    1.608

Black in the South                      .064       .2440          .056     .229

Black in the Non-South                  .041         .197         .043     .202

White in the South                      .214         .410         .212     .409

Rural High School                       .498         .500         .440     .496


Local Wage Rate                        3.922         .588          --        --
Local Unemployment Rate                3.833       1.852           --        -—
                                                                              R
                                      -58-



         Appendix Table 1.   Variable Means and Standard Devi&ions for
                             All Students and Students Attendiny College
                             (continued).



                                             All Students      Attending College
    Variable
                                        Mean       Std. Dev.   Mean    Std. Dev.


Male                                    .475         .499      .502        .500

Parents Income Missing                  .196         .397      .169        .375



Total Sample                  5726

Number Attending College      1622

Number Persisting             1155




       a. Calculation excludes observations with missing values.
                                                                                    R
                                     -




      Appendix Table 2. Means of Selected Variables by Region and Race.


                                               Non—South             South
           Variable
                                     Whites          Blacks   Whites         Blacks

                                 a
For Persons Attending College:

   SATb                                  992         749      953             741

   High School Class Rank                72.5        56.3     73.2           68.4
      (Percentile)



   College Quality                       1042         986      998            821

   College Cost Cs's)                    1394        1214     1162           1031

   Proportion Dropping Out               0.26        0.49     0.34           0.30


For Total Samplec

  SATb                                   855         678      819            663

  Proportion Attending College           .29         .30      .28            .25



    a. Sample size = 1622.

    b. Predicted on basis of ETS survey tests.

    c. Sample size = 5726.
                                                                                          R
                                           -60-



     Appendix Table 3.         Simplified Dropout Model:       Pa ranie te r
                               Estimates (and Asympotic Standard
                               Errors), by Equation



                              Probability            College   College    Probability of
     Variable                                                  Cost       Persistence
                              of Attendance          Quality

SAT Score                         3.162               0.313      2.848           1.547
                                 (0.142)             (0.023)    (0.204)         (0.314)

High School Class Rank            1.037               0.101      0.754           1.119
                                 (0.091)             (0.014)    (0.120)         (0.189)


Black in the South               0.567              -0.143      0.266           0.285
                                 (0.096)            (0.010)    (0.142)          (0.167)

Black in the Non-South            0.841              0.030      0.539          -0.118
                                 (0.097)             (0.012)   (0.116)         (0.176)

White in the South                0.084             -0.033     -0.130          -0.185
                                 (0.049)             (0.007)   (0.062)          (0.083)


Constant                        -4.004                0.616    -2.975          -1.845
                                (0.118)              (0.030)   (0.223)         (0.398)



                                  Correlation Matrix

            Attendance          1.000


            College Quality     0.470              1.000
                               (0.055)

            College Cost        0.938              0.421        1.000
                               (0.011)            (0.041)

            Persistence         0.194              0.109        0.187          1.000
                               (0.094)            (0.047)      (0.071)
                                                                            R
                                      —61-




     Aooendix Table 3. Simplified Dropout Model: Parameter
                       Estimates (and Asymptotic Standard Errors),
                       by Equationa (continued).



Standard Error of College    0.102             Total Sample          5726
Quality °2                  (0.055)
                                               Number Attending      1622
Standard Error of College    1.185
Cost (c3)                   (0.060)            Number Persisting     1155

Log-Likelihood Val ue       -842.8



     a. College quality for purposes of estimation is in 1000's, college cost
is in 1000's, student SAT is in 1000's, and parents' income is in 10,000's.
                                                                              R
                                     -62-



Appendix Table 4. Simplified Dropout Model: Simulated Effects of
                   SAT and Class Rank on Attendance, College Quality
                  and Cost, and on the Probability of Dropping Out.



                                   Class Rank (Percentile)
   SAT
                  0           25              50             75        100


                               Probability of Attendance
   500           .01          .02             .03             .06       .10

   700           .04          .07             .12             .18       .25

   900           .14          .21             .29             .38       .49

  1100           .33          .43             .53             .63       .73

  1300           .58          .68             .76             .83       .89

                                       College Quality
   500           758          783             808            833       858

   700           820          845             870             896       921

   900           883          908             933             958       983

  1100           945          970             995            1021      1046

  1300          1008         1033            1058            1083      1108

                                        College Cost
   500         -1540        —1351           -1163            -974      -786

   700          -970         -781            -593            -404      -216

   900          -400         -212             —23             165       354

  1100           169          358             546             735       923

  1300           739          928            1116            1305      1493

                              Probability of Dropping Out
   500           .86          .79             .70             .60       .49

   700           .78          .69             .59             .48       .37

   900           .68          .58             .47             .36       .26

  1100           .57          .46             .35             .25       .17

  1300           .44          .34             .24             .16       .10
                                     -63-



                                    RE FE RE NC ES



  Astin, Alexander W.,   Predicting Academic Performance in College, Free
       Press, New York, 1971.

 Berndt, Ernest, Bronwyn Hall, Robert Hall, and Jerry Hausman, "Estima-

       tion and Inference in Nonlinear Structural Models," Annals of

       Economic and Social Measurement, pp. 653—665, 1974.

 Cronbach, Lee J. and Goldine C. Gleser, Psychological Tests and

      Personnel Decisions, Urbana Illinois, University of Illinois Press,

      2nd edition, 1965.

 Duncan, Gregory M., "Formulation and Statistical Analysis of the Mixed,

      Continuous/Discrete Dependent Variable Model in Classical Produc-

      tion Theory," Econometrica, Vol. 48, No. 4, pp. 835-852, May 1980.

 Eckland, Bruce K., Louise Henderson, Ann Tickamyer, and William Trent,

      National Longitudinal Study: Constructed Education Variables,

      NCES, Washington, D.C., March 1979.

Ford, Susan and Sandy Campos, "Summary of Validity Data from the Admissions

     Testing Program Validity Study Service," ETS, Princeton, N.J., 1977.

Freeman, Richard B., Black Elite, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1976.

____________________ "Black Economic Progress After 1964: Who Has Gained

     and Why," NBER Working Paper Number 282, 1978.

Fuller, Winship, Charles Manski, and David Wise, "New Evidence on the

     Economic Determinants of Post-Secondary Schooling Choices," J.F.K.

     School of Government Discussion Paper Number 90D, June l980a.

___________________________________________________ "The Impact of the

     Basic Educational Opportunity Grant Program on College Enrollments,"

     J.F.K. School of Government Discussion Paper Number 94D, July 1980b.
                                    -64-




Grilliches, Zvi, "Economic Problems of Youth:' in James Coleman (ed.)

     Youth: Transition to Adulthood, Chicago, University of Chicago

     Press, 1974.

Hausman,   Jerry and David Wise, "Attrition Bias in Experimental and Panel
     Data: The Gary Income Maintenance Experiment," Econometrica, Vol.

     47, No. 2, pp. 455-473, 1979.
 Kohn, Meir G. ,   Charles Manski , and David Mundel, "An Empirical Investi-
     gation of Factors Which Influence       College-Going Behavior," Annals

     of Economic and Social Measurement, pp. 391-420, 1976.

 Levinsohn, Jay R. et al,, National Loi udinal Study Be Year, First,

     Second, and Third Followup Data File Users Manual, NCES, Washington,

     D.C., 1978.

 Lord,   Frederic M.   and Melvin R. Novick, Statistical Theories of Mental

     TestScores, Reading, MA, Addison-Wesley, 1968.

             Daniel, "Econometric Met      Supply Systems for Firms With Con-
 McFadden,

     tinuous and Discrete Commodities," presented at the joint Harvard-

     MIT Econometrics Seminar, Spring 1979.

 Morgan, James N. and Greg J. Duncan, "College Quality and Earnings,"

      in Ismail Sirageldin (ed.), Research in       Human Capital and Devlop-

      ment, Vol. 1, pp. 103—121, 1979.
 Maim, Allan and Associates, "The Reign of ETS:          The Corporation That

      Makes Up Minds," 1980. (The Ralph Nader Report on the Educational

      Testing   Service).
  Radner, Roy and Leonard Miller, Demand and Supply       in   U.S. Higher Educa—

      tion, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1975.
                                 -65-




Slack, Warner V. and Douglas Porter, "The Scholastic Aptitude Test: A

     Critical Appraisal, " Harvard Educational Review, Vol. 50, pp. 154-

     175, May 1980.

Solmon, Lewis C., "The Definition of College Quality and Its Impact on

   Earnings," Explorations in Economic Research, Vol. 2, No. 4,

   pp. 537-587, 1975.

U. S. Congress, Subcommittee on Elementary, Secondary, and Vocational

   Education, Hearings on the Truth in Testing Act of 1979 and the

   Educational Testing Act of 1979, October 1979.

Venti, Steven and David A. Wise, "Test Scores, Educational Opportunities,

   and Individual Choice," J.F.K. School of Government Discussion Paper

   Number 92D, June 1980, Revised February 1981.

Willis, Robert and Sherwin Rosen, "Education and Self-Selection," Journal

   of Political Economy, Vol. 87, pp. S7-S36, October 1979.

Wise, David A., "Academic Achievement and Job Performance," American

   Economic Review, pp. 360-366, 1975a.

_______________ "Personal Attributes, Job Performance, and Probability

   of Promotion," Econometrica, Vol. 42, No. 5-6, pp. 913-931, 1975b.
