                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             TEST SCORES, EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES,
                      AND INDIVIDUAL CHOICE


                          Steven   Venti

                          David A. Wise


                      Working per No. 110




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            July 1981


This paper is part of a larger project on post—secondary school and
work choices of high school graduates headed by Charles Manski and
David Wise, and reflects many discussions with Charles Manski. We
have benefited from comments from Robert Feldinesser, Win Fuller,
Rodney Hartnett, Robert Klitgaard, Robert Meyer, David Mundel,
Richard Zeckhauser, and members of the University of Chicago Labor
Seminar.   None of them, however, is necessarily in agreement with
the results nor should any of them be associated with the paperst
shortcomings. This research was supported by a grant from the
Exxon Educational Foundation and contract number 300—18—0545 from the
Office of Education; Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                           NBER Working Paper #710
                                                                         July 1981




         Test Scores, Educational Opportunities, and Individual Choice


                                   ABSTRACT


     A model combining student preferences for college with university

admissions decisions is estimated to provide information on the role of test

scores in the determination of post-secondary educational opportunities. In

contrast to implications of much of the recent criticism of tests and their

use, we find that scholastic aptitude test scores are more strongly related

to student application and choice of college "quality" than to college admis-

sions decisions.   In addition, although there is a substantial correlation

between test scores and high school performance, we find that both post-

secondary school preferences and ultimate opportunities are related as much

to performance in high school as to test scores themselves. Although SAT

scores certainly exclude some persons from schools, our findings indicate

that they do not represent a dominating constraint on the college opportu-

nities of high school graduates.



                                          Steven Venti
                                          J.F.K. School of Government
                                          Harvard University
                                          Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                          (617) 495-1456


                                          Professor David A. Wise
                                          J.F.K. School of Government
                                          Harvard University
                                          Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                          (617) 495-1178
                  TEST SCORES, EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES,

                           AND INDIVIDUAL CHOICE


                                     by

                      Steven Venti and David A. Wise*


    The role of test scores in the determination of post-secondary

school opportunities has been the focus of considerable public dis-

cussion and of recent court decisions. These expressions of public

interest and conventional wisdom more generally, however, are often

based on limited evidence and may not be informed by the most relevant

or appropriate information. Our goal is to provide in this paper quan-

titative information on the current effect of Scholastic Aptitude Test

(SAT) scores and other individual attributes on the college preferences

of high school graduates and the admissions decisions of post-secondary

schools. We hope that the evidence will enlarge the background for and

will help to inform future discussion and decisions on the subject.

    A great deal of criticism has centered around the validity of

college entrance examinations as predictors of college success, while

other   criticism has questioned the cultural fairness of the tests.
Both lines of criticism are reflected in calls for truth in testing



   * Research Fellow, J.F.K. School of Government, Harvard University;
Stambaugh Professor of Political Economy, J.F.K. School of Government,
Harvard University and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic
Research respectively.
                                   -2-




legislation in several states and in movements to deemphasize the role

of tests in college admissions.1 An apparent concern is that test

scores may have an extreme influence on post-secondary educational

opportunities and thus presumably on subsequent occupational oppor-

tunities. This concern may be heightened by the limited evidence on

the relationship between test scores and performance in college and

the even more limited evidence on the relationship between test scores

and academic training on the one hand and occupational productivity or

performance on the other. The extent to which answers to the latter

questions are important depends in part simply on the magnitude of the

effect of SAT scores on student and college decisions. The recent em-

phasis on test scores may have tended to exaggerate their influence on

schooling opportunities relative to the influence of other determinants,

in particular school performance itself, and may have misdirected atten-

tion to school decisions and away from student choices.

     While the importance of test scores has been a major focus of

public concern, the influence on college choice of increased earnings

attributable to college education has been the focus of much of economic

research on the subject.2 Exceptions are formal discrete choice models

of college selection.3 Whatever the focus of the economic research, it



     1. Substantial discussion has been sparked by the recent Nader re-
port on the Educational Testing Service (Nairn and Associates [1980]),
Slack and Porter [1980], and the response to the former (ETS [1980]).

     2. Recent examples are Willis and Rosen [1979] and Dresch and
Waldenberg [1978].

     3. Radner and Miller [1975], Kohn, Manski, and Mundel [1976],
Manski and Wise [1978], and Fuller, Mariski, and Wise [1980].
                                     -3-




has emphasized college attendance versus non-attendance without consider-

ing the several separate decisions that determine attendance. There are

at least three: the student's decision of whether to apply and if so,

to which schools, and the colleges' admission decisions. Our goal is

to present empirical evidence on the relative influence of test scores

and   other individual characteristics on each of these post—secondary
school preferences and opportunities.
      Human capital literature for the most part emphasizes individual

optimal education decisions, investment in education until the marginal

benefits--in large part in terms of increased future earnings--are just

offset by the marginal cost of another unit of education. In this con-

text, test scores may be thought of as providing individuals and schools

with information that will help them to make choices that are closer to

the optimum than would be possible without this information. Individuals

are presumably aided in determining how much they can get out of addi-

tional education--what the gains from additional education will be--and

which schools will provide for them the most advantageous education.

Test scores presumably help colleges to select the students who will

benefit most from the education they provide.1

      The approach of this paper, however, is to ask to what extent test

scores constrain individual choice and thereby limit educational oppor-

tunities. Do test scores limit human capital investment decisions and

if so, how substantial is the constraint? How important are test scores



     1.  In a different context, Rothschild [1979] discusses ways in
which employment tests may increase national output by permitting more
efficient allocation of resources.
                                    -4-




in screening students among colleges of various qualities and does the

screening operate by way of college application decisions made by indi-

viduals or through college admission decisions?

     The findings of this paper provide only part of the evidence that

would be useful in judging the role of test scores in the determination

of individual choice and opportunity. A closely related question is the

extent to which test scores help to determine the likelihood that a given

 student will succeed in a particular college, the likelihood of graduation

 for example. Another relevant question is ihe extent to which college

 quality, given initial student attributes, affects later opportunities as

 measured, for example, by earnings.   If tests constrain college oppor-

 tunities, then the importance to the individual of the constraint may

 depend in part on its effect on his opportunities after graduation.     Both

 of these topics are subjects of related papers and will be discussed

 briefly in the concluding section of this paper. The subject of this

 paper seems to be a logical precursor to either of these.
     We began our research with a focus on the determinants of college

 admissions, but we realized quickly that to obtain a comprehensive pic-

 ture of the importance of students' prior school performance and test

 scores, it was necessary to consider the student application and quality

 of school choices in conjunction with college admissions decisions.

 Thus we have developed a model that yields joint estimates of the deter-

 minants of all three decisions. In a technical sense, the model incor-

 porates two discrete choices with a continuous outcome.     The continuous

 outcome is the aver SAT score of students at the school to which a
                                     -5-




 student applies; it is our measure of school "quality."1 In addition to

 individual SAT scores, we have emphasized the influence of high school

 class rank, non—academic achievement in high school, family background,

 and local labor market conditions on student decisions to apply for

 college admission. A primary goal of our analysis has been to compare

 therelative importance of these characteristics in determining indi-

 vidual and college decisions.

     We have based our estimates on data obtained from the National

 Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972. During the spring

of 1972, approximately 23,000 high school seniors were surveyed. The

 data collected included information on each student's family back-

ground, high school performance, and a host of other student character-

 istics. The students also took a battery of six aptitude tests as-

sembleci by the Educational Testing Service (ETS). Three Follow-Up

surveys were used to obtain information on post-secondary school and

work decisions as well as other related data. We have based our esti-

mates on a random sample of approximately 5,000 of the total sample and

have used data from the initial survey and the first follow-up survey.

    We find that the importance of both measured academic aptitude and

past school performance is reflected much more in student than in college

decisions. Test scores in themselves do not in general, through college

admissions policies, narrowly pigeonhole persons to a very limited set of

post-secondary school opportunities. Test scores and high school class



     1.  We. are well aware that a comprehensive measure of college quality
is almost impossible to define because there are so many determinants of
it and because it is a subjective attribute that depends on individual judg-
ment and preferences. Nonetheless, we will sometimes use it as shorthand
for the measure that we have.
                                      -6-




rank are roughly of equal importance in the determination of both student

application and college admission decisions. Our results pertain to

schools on average; individual colleges and universities of course may

have different admissions policies.

      The higher the local wage rate, the less likely are high school

graduates to go to college, although the effect is small. The local

unemployment rate is not significantly related to college application.

Thus apparently our findings weakly support the presumption that there

is some interaction between local labor market opportunities and the

continuation of schooling; poorer labor market prospects induce more

persons to attend school.

      Black youth are much more likely than white youth to apply to a

college, given high school class rank, test scores, and family background.

If affirmative action measures have influenced college attendance, our

results indicate that their effects may have been on student application

decisions more than on college admission decisions.

      The model we have used is described in Section I.   The data are

explained in Section II. The results are presented in Section III. Con-

cluding remarks are contained in Section IV.


 I.   The Model

      We want to describe how individual attributes are related to the

 likelihood of college admissions. Presumably college admission de-

 cisions depend on the college's academic standards and on the indi-

 vidual attributes of the applicant being considered. Of course any

 given colTege considers only students who apply to it. Our approach

 is intended to integrate the student application decision with the
                                     -7—



 college admission decision, with the particular goal of obtaining con-

 sistent estimates of admission probability parameters. We will motivate

 our statistical model by first considering a simple and standard random

 choice interpretation of it. The statistical model will then be set

 forth in a succinct form.

      Standard economic reasoning prescribes that whether a given indi-

 vidual finds it worthwhile to go to college depends on the opportunities

 available to him if he were not to have a college education, as well as

 the costs of a college education and the opportunities that would be

 available with a college degree. The opportunities may be defined by

monetary reward as well as other occupational and social characteristics.

The costs of a college education may include the effort or discomfort

associated (by some) with college attendance, as well as foregone earn-

ings. The opportunities available to an individual without college,

the relationship between college and subsequent opportunities, and the

cost of college incurred by the tndiyidual are all likely to depend on

individual attributes. For example, persons with high academic aptitude

may gain more from college than persons with lower aptitude. The cost

of college to an individual-—relative to the gains-—is likely also to

depend on the wealth of his parents.' The socioeconomic background of

an individual may in general influence his schooling decisions. Oppor-

tunities without a college degree will be determined in part by the

local labor market conditions faced by the individual.



     1. At least if capital markets are imperfect, and if socioeconomic
background influences tastes, even if they are not.
                                          -8-




      Finally, there is a wide variety of schools, and the particular

school that an individual prefers is presumed to depend on his character-

istics. It is also reasonable to suppose that whether an individual

chooses to go to college should depend on the quality of school he would

attend, were he to go to college.

      One formal way to capture this line of reasoning is the following.

Suppose that X represents a vector of personal, family, and local labor

market variables. Suppose that associated with an individual 'S       oppor-
tunities without a college degree is a value U0 that depends on X as

well as on unmeasured random factors e0, such that


                                   U0 = Xb0   +
(1)                                               e0


where b0 is a vector of parameters. Suppose also that if a person were

to go to college the quality of the most preferred college would be


(2)                                Q =
                                         X    +


where           is a vector of parameters and £2 a random term.' Finally,

suppose that opportunities with a college education (call them U1)

depend        on the characteristics X directly, as well as on the quality
Q   of   the college attended, so that

(3)                            U1 = Xb + Qc1 + e1


         The effect of X on Q may reflect in part the individual's
         1.
perception of the probability of admission to a school of quality Q.
We will return to this point later.

     2. Higher quality schools, for example, may increase future earn-
ings (Solmon [1975], Solmon and Wachtel [1975], Morgan and Duncan [1979]);
it may also affect the enjoyment of a person while a student, or the time
and effort required to obtain a degree.
                                               -9-




For expository purposes, we have shown U1 as linear in Q, although our

statistical specification does not impose this constraint, and indeed

other work has shown the relationship to be non-linear.1                        If we substi-

tute for Q, we have


                                        +          +            +
(4)                     U1 =   X(b          c12)        (c1E2       e1)

Suppose further that an individual would apply to college only if the

value associated with an education at the most preferred school is

greater than the value associated with opportunities without a college

degree. Then the probability of applying to college is given by the

probability that U1 is greater than U0, or


                 Pr[U1-U0 =
                                                       +
                                                           (c1c2+e1-e0)
                                                                          >   0)]
(5)                            X(b1+c12-b0)

               = Pr[A   =
                            X1+E1
                                    >   0]

where A, l' and Cl are defined by the equality, with A representing

the value to the individual of opportunities with college, minus the

value  of opportunities without college.2 Notice that l is a vector
of "reduced form" parameters, each indicating, according to this inter-
 pretation, the effect of the associated variable on the difference be-
 tween the value of opportunities with and without college.


        1.   See Fuller, Manski, and Wise [1980].
     2. This specification does not explicitly account for the cost of
application, which we believe is not a major determinant of application
for most students, but may be important for some who are at the marain.
Many schools will waive the application fee on request. In any case,
the effect of the cost of application is captured in the constant term
in    our empirical specification.
                                     -10-




       Equations (2) and (5) together represent demand for college educa-

tion. This aspect of the model is analogous to the profit maximization

discrete-continuous production models proposed by Duncan [1980] and a

similar net supply system model discussed by McFadden [1979],

       Thus far we have discussed only the choice of individuals and have

presumed that a person would apply to a college only if attendance at

that school would be more advantageous to the individual than oppor-

tunities without college. A much more detailed model of individual

choice among schools to which a person has been admitted is presented

by Fuller, tlanski, and Wise [1980].    Another and also more elaborate

approach is followed by Abowd L19//J. w wou               riis paper, flow—

ever, to consider jointly the individual's application decision and

college quality decision together with admission decisions made by

colleges.

      From application material submitted by students, we presume that

admissions officers are able to predict academic potential. Suppose

that in general the available information includes test scores—-which

may afford a straightforward means of comparing all applicants--as well

as other indicators of academic preparation such as high school grades or

high school class rank. Other information, such as recommendations,

may also provide evidence of academic potential, although it may entail

consider&ble subjective assessment on the part of admissions officers.

Suppose for ease of exposition that given the high school class rank

of   person i and a test score      the academic potential of person   i
is evaluated by college j as
                                             —l
                                              -I
                                                 —




(6)                      P. =            +           +
                                ci.1T.


where        is a disturbance term that captures the stochastic nature of
        e.
subjective assessment.     It may reflect attributes known to admissions

officers but for which we do not have measures, and it may vary with

the school to which the individual applies. The parameters c1 and

are weights placed by admissions officers on test scores and past school

performance. For convenience we shall assume for the time being that

they are constant across colleqes.

      The equation above is very similar to the relationship underlying

the extensive literature on the predictive validity of tests. In this

literature,       would be replaced by a measure of academic performance

in college--such as grades—-and test scores and high school class rank

would be taken as predictors of college performance.1

      It may be tempting to specify the admissions decision as a function

of test scores and class rank and to compare the estimated coefficients

on the variables in such an admissions model with the estimated validity

coefficients on these measures. But, the academic potential of appli-

cants is not the sole criterion for admission to most colleges. Other

student characteristics including non-academic talents may also be

valued by schools. Consequently, a more realistic description of the



     1. For the case of a single predictor the validity coefficient is
the regression (correlation) coefficient in a normalized model. The
validity coefficient with a set of predictor variables is the multiple
correlation between     and the predictors. A recent survey of over
800 such studies found validity coefficients of 0.52 for high school
grades, 0.41 for the SAT, and 0.58 for both predictors combined. See
Ford and Campos [1977].
                                      —12—




relationship between admissions decisions and student att'ibutes should

 ;clude a broader range of student characteristics than the indicators

of academic ability contained in validity models. The relationship (6)

is presumed to indicate only the evaluation by college j of the academic

potential of student i.

        In addition, while colleges may broadly agree on the academic poten-

tial   of an applicant with given characteristics, we know that colleges
have different admissions criteria. In order to translate the above rela-
tionship into a selection rule we recognize that an individual's likeli-

hood of admission to a particular college will depend in part on the

qualifications    of others who apply to that college.
       Thus we suppose that for admission purposes, college   j attaches a

"generalized"    potential to student i--call it   V__that depends on
academic potential P1, as well as other individual attributes Z, so

that

                    =     + Z6 = aiT + ct2R +        +
(7)                                                      e.
where   Z.
             is a vector of attributes and 6 a vector of parameters. We
also    recognize that higher quality schools ceteris paribus require

higher academic quality for admission than lower quality schools.1



     i.  of course 'quality' itself is indirectly determined by the
number of applicants as well as their qualifications. In a strict sense
the application decision for each student is not independent of the
decisions rendered on other applicants. However since selection ratios
and measured characteristics of enrollees tend to change slowly over
time, we have defined college quality without reference to the current
applicant pool.  In the empirical work that follows we use the average
SAT scores of students attending the college in 1972 as a measure of
quality. We discuss this in more detail in the next section.
                                                         -13-




  Suppose that the required level of                            in college j is a function of

  Q and is given by L aQ +
                                                u,   where u. is a random term) Further,

 suppose that colleges are willing to trade off academic potential P

 against other attributes Z, so that the probability of admission of

  individual i at college j is given by the probability that                                   exceeds
        that is




  (8)                  PrV — L        >   0]
                  =               +
                      Pr[(c1T.        2R    +
                                                 Z5)
                                                         —
                                                             aQ
                                                                  +   (e..   -
                                                                                 u)   >   0]

                  =          =
                      Pr[S       X3
                                      -
                                          aQ +           > 0]

 where S, X,             and E3    are    defined by the last equality and the index

 j has been suppressed.


        All of these relationships can be presented succinctly in a model

 with the following three components:


                      Application:              A = X1.B1         +


 (9)                                                 =            +
                      College Quality:                   X22
                      Admission:                S. =
                                                         X3       -   Q.a + £3.


 The likelihood that individual i applies to some college is assumed to

 be represented by an unobserved indicator variable A, that depends on



     1. This multiplicative specification is a simplification. All
that is needed to generate the following results is that Lj be a
monotonic increasing function of Q.. Our empirical specification per-
mits a nonlinear effect.
                                    -14-




the personal characteristic X11 and the random term £.     The quality

of the school that a person applies to is given by the continuous

variable      also assumed to depend on personal characteristics X2. and

a random term cj. It should be interpreted as the quality of college

a person with measured attributes X would select as a first choice, were

he to apply to college. The likelihood that a person with characteristics

X3. will be admitted to a school of quality Q1 is indicated by the

unobserved indicator variable S1, that depends on the random term

as well as on X31 and       The characteristics     that enter each

equation are distinguished by the number in the subscripts because not

all of the elements of X enter each of the equations. It is helpful

for interpretation to keep in mind that the random terms capture un-

measured determinants of the relationships. A is assumed to be posi-

tively related to college application and to have the property that a

person applies to some college if A is large enough--in particular,

following the usual normalizing assumption, if A > 0.    S is assumed to

have the property that a person is admitted if S > 0.

       We will use this same general idea, but we must describe the

probabilities of three possible outcomes. To do this, we need to con-

sider the covariances between the disturbance terms, given by te co-

variance matrix



                               1
                                    p12a    p13

                                     2
                                            p23o
(10)
                                            1
                                    -15-




The variance of the qualities of schools applied to by persons with

given characteristics X, is 2. The correlation between unobserved

determinants of college application and the quality of school applied

to is given by p12; the correlation between unobserved determinants

of application and unobserved determinants of admissions is given by

p13; and the correlation between the unobserved determinants of college

quality and of admissions is given by p23. For identification, the

disturbances in both of the dichotomous relationships are taken to

have variance 1.
     we expect a priori that the unobserved determinants ot the

applications and college quality decisions, both made by applicants, are

likely to be highly correlated; but that the correlations between these

two and the admission decisions may be much less. This approach is used

of course to correct for "selection bias." If the unmeasured attributes

that determine admissions decisions are correlated with the unmeasured

attributes that determine the quality of the school that an individual

applies to, we cannot obtain consistent estimates of the effects on

admissions decisions of measured variables without "correcting for"

the correlation between these unmeasured variables. And of course only

persons who apply to some school select a school of a given quality. To

obtain consistent estimates of the effects of personal characteristics on

the quality of school persons apply to, we must also account for the

possible correlation between unmeasured determinants of the quality of

school and unmeasured determinants of application.

     For any individual i, there are three possible outcomes: individual

i does not apply to college so that A1<O and no college quality is
                                                   -16-




observed; individual i applies to a college of quality Q. and is admitted

so that   A1>O, quality Q.          is observed, and S>O; individual i applies to a

                                                                                  is
college of quality Q1 but is not admitted so that A>O quality

observed, and S<O.

       The probabilities of these three outcomes for an individual i are

given respectively by:


                                          =               =
                 1)   Pr(A<O)


                ii)   Pr(A.>O,                observed, S.>O)


                      =
                          Pr(A>O              S1>OjQ).f(Q1)

                      =
                          Pr(61<X11 e3<X3 +

                      =          X11           X33+Q
(11)
                          -               -               g(1 ,3Q)dE d61 .f(Q1)

                      =



               iii)   Pr(A>O Q observed, S<O)

                      =
                          Pr(A>O, S<OlQ).f(Q)

                      = Pr(ci<X1,                E3>X3.3 +    Q.cQ)'f(Q)
                                   lii.
                      =
                           f
                          -,
                               x

                                      f g(ci
                                     X33+Qct
                                                          E3Q)dCdCl.f(Qi)


                      =
                           p3i
                                                  -17-



  where     is a standard normal distribution function and g is a condition-

  al bivariate normal density function.

         The log-likelihood function for the total sample of observations

  is given by




 (12)                 L =    l
                            11

                                 nP1
                                       +
                                           N2
                                                1 nP2. +
                                                           N3
                                                                1




 where   the three summations distinguish the groups corresponding to the

 three possible outcomes. The likelihood function is maximized with

 respect to the parameters to be estimated:
                                                            l' 2'   p12, p13
 and p23.


 II. The Data From the National Longitudinal Study of the High School
      Class of 1972

        We have confined our attention to four-year colleges and univer-

sities. For example, the probability of application refers to the

probability of application to a four year college; some of those who

didn't apply to four year schools applied to two year or vocational

schools. In addition, the National Longitudinal Study of the High School

Class of 1972 asked the respondents to list in order of preference the

first three schools to which they had applied. We have based our esti-

mates on the first of those and have checked the results using the second

school listed by those who applied to more than one school.1



     1. Approximately 63 percent applied to only one school; 21 percent
applied to two schools; and only 16 percent to three or more schools.
The "most preferred" school is the best apparent indicator of student
preferences and admissions decisions based on these applications have
been checked with admissions decisions based on applications to the
second most preferred school. The results are not noticeably different.
                                   -18-




     Our analysis is based on several groups of variables. The first

group includes variables that describe the individual's academic apti-

tude and high school performance, as well as non-academic achievements

in high school.

     The Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) score of an individual is

thought to have a substantial effect on his post—secondary school

preferences and on available alternatives. Although SAT scores are

recorded for many students in our sample, not all of them took the

SAT test. Many took no college admission test at all, while others

took the American College Testing Program (ACT) test. Our method of

analysis requires that we have an academic ability measure for all

persons in the sample, not only for those who took the SAT test--

undoubtedly for most because they planned to apply to some school.

For this reason, in some components of the analysis we have used the

SAT "equivalent" of the ACT score or an SAT score predicted on the basis

of the ETS test scores that are available for each person in our sample.

     High school class rank is also presumed to influence both student

application and college admission decisions. Any individual's class

rank is determined not only by his ability, but by the ability of

others in his high school as well. We do not have a definitive measure

of high school quality, but have tried to control for it in part by

including in our analysis the percent of students from an individual's

high school who "go" to two-year and four-year colleges. Finally, we have

used two measures of non-academic achievement in high school: leadership

in student government and athletic achievement.
                                      -19-




        The first group of individual characteristics is presumed to

affect both the student's application decision and the admission

decision of colleges. We believe that measures close to these would

be available to most college admissions officers; we believe the only

exception is the proportion of students from an applicant's high

school who go to college, although in many instances admissions officers

may have other implicit or explicit indicators of the quality of high

school that an applicant attended. For example, admissions officers

may have information on the past performance of students from a par-

ticular high school. Admission decisions are also presumed to depend

on "quality" of the college in question. Our measure of quality is the

average of the SAT scores of students entering the school.'

        The second group of variables is intended to measure an individual 'S

socioeconomic background and enters the application and college quality

equations. It includes family income and parents' education.

        Race is also included, with the effect of race allowed to interact

with geographic region--South versus Non-South.

     The third group includes two measures of local labor market con-

ditions: a local wage rate and a local unemployment rate. These

variables   enter the application equation.
        Finally, the analysis includes an indicator of sex, and an indi-
cator   of urban versus rural high school attendance.

     The variables are defined as follows:




     1.  Solmon [1975] discusses several alternative measures of college
quality and expresses a preference for SAT scores over survey measures
such as the Gourman ratings. See also Astin and Henson [1977].
                                       -20-




     SAT: the sum of the verbal and mathematics scores on the Scholastic

Aptitude Test if this test was taken, the SAT 'equivalent" of the score

on the ACT test if it was taken, or, if neither of these was available, a

predicted SAT score based on 5 of the 6 ETS tests administered to the

National Longitudinal Study sample.

     College SAT: the average of the SAT scores of the students in the

college to which an individual has applied.

     High School Class Rank: the percentile rank of a person in the

person's high school, based on course grades.

     High School Student Government Leader: one if the person was a

leader in high school student government and zero otherwise.

     High School Athlete: one if the student was a "leader" in high

school athletics and zero otherwise.

     Percent of High School Class Going to Colleqe: the percent of

students from an individual's high school who go to two or four year

colleges.

     Parents' Income: family income as reported by the youth respondent.

     Education of Mother (Father) less than High School: one if the

individual's mother (father) had less than a high school education and

zero otherwise.

     Education of Mother (Father) College Degree or More: One if the

individual's mother (father) had a college degree or more education, and

zero otherwise. The excluded category is a high school degree but less

than a college degree.

     Black in the South: one if the person was black and: (1) went to

high school in the South (college application and college quality equation)
                                   -21-




or (2) applied to a college in the South (admissions equation).'

     Black in the Non-South: defined analoaously to Black in the South.

     White in the South: defined analogously to Black in the South.

The excluded category is White in the Non-South.

     Local Wage Rate: average 1972 wage of manufacturing workers in the

SMSA of the individual's high school, or if not available, the state

average.

     Local Unemployment Rate: SMSA 1972 unemployment rate (or state rate

where not available).

     Male: one if the individual is male and zero if female.

     Urban: one if the individual went to hicih school in an urban area

and zero otherwise.

     Parents' Income Missing: one if the youth did not report parents'

income and zero otherwise.

     The means and standard deviations of the variables are shown in

Appendix Table 1.


III. The Results

     The estimated parameters for each of the three equations, together

with (asymptotic) standard errors, are shown in Table 1. The results

can be most easily understood by considering the effects of specified

changes in the riqht hand variables. Such effects are presented in

Table 2. We will discuss first some of the implications of the results

in Table 1 and then turn to Table 2. Finally, we will present simula-



      1. South is assumed to include the following states: Alabama,
Arkansas, Delaware, Washington, D.C., Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
Virginia, West Virginia.
                                       -22-


tions    based on our estimates.


A. Parameter Estimates

        The variable "SAT score" is used in the application and college quality

equations, as well as in the admissions equation. Although we do not have

an unambiguous interpretation of the estimated effect of this measure on

application and college quality, we are inclined to interpret the relevant

coefficients as measuring the effects of scholastic aptitude or academic

preparation. The ambiguity arises because some students apparently decide

not to go to college (and thus do not take the SAT) without knowing precise-

ly what their scholastic aptitude is, according to either the ETS battery

of tests or according to an SAT score. In addition, some students make

decisions on which schools to apply to before they know their SAT scores.

On the other hand, it is clear that actual SAT scores influence the ulti-

mate application decision of many students. In short, we do not know

precisely what information is available to students when they apply to a

given college. Nonetheless, we feel that our loose interpretation is not

likely to be far off, because most students receive many other indications

of scholastic aptitude or preparation prior to the time that the SAT is

taken, indications that are likely to be highly correlated with SAT scores.1

        The "college SAT" is entered in the admissions eauation in a Diece-

wise linear fashion. The breakpoints are at the mean of college SAT and

at the mean plus one standard deviation. It can be seen in Table 1 that,

given other individual attributes, the probability of admission declines



     1. For example, PSAT scores that are usually obtained during the
junior year in high school.
                                           -23-




with college SAT and at an increasing rate.' The relevant coefficients

are -2.0, -3.5, -6.6.

     The correlations among the unmeasured determinants (error terms)

of the three outcomes are shown at the bottom of Table 1. As expected,

the correlation between the unmeasured determinants of the application

and the college quality decisions is positive and large, .87. Thus,

given our set of measured characteristics, persons who are the most

likely to apply to some college are also likely to apply to a college

of higher quality than the average. Neither the correlation between the

error terms in the applications and admissions equations nor between the

unmeasured determinants of college quality and admission are significantly

different from zero by standard criteria. The first correlation is .08

and the second -   .02.   Because these are correlations between unmeasured

determinants of individual versus college decisions it is not surprising

that they are small. The two individual decisions are on the other hand

highly correlated.



     1.   If we let college SAT be represented by SAT and its mean by ji,
and its standard deviation by a, the specification is precisely described
by the three variables:

                   —
                   SAT =
                              SAT ifT<p
                                     —

                              1-!    ifp<T
                              0         ifTj
                          = SAT - p if     p    < SAT < p + a
                              a         ifp+a<
                   SAT
                          =
                              0                 ifT<p+a
                                    - (p + a)   if p + a <
                                    -24-




     Most of the parameters are measured with considerable precision, as

judged by the standard errors. In the simulations below, however, we

have in one or two instances given results based on the estimated parameter

even though the parameter estimate was of marginal significance (say with

a t-statistic considerably less than 2).

     Finally, the numbers at the end of the table indicate that 40 percent

of the sample applied to a four-year college and that of those who

applied, 89 percent were admitted to the college listed as the first

choice. In short, there appears to be a substantial amount of self-

selection; most persons apply to schools where they are likely to be

admitted. And indeed, a surprisingly small number of schools are even

moderately selective.1 In any case, even these summary numbers suggest

that much of the effect of personal characteristics on college atten-

dance outcomes is through individual application and college quality choices

rather than through their effect on college admissions decisions.



B.   The Effect of Two Standard Deviation Shifts and Category Changes
     in Variables

     To compare the estimated effects on the three outcomes of changes

 in each of the right-hand variables, it is helpful to consider the

effects    of "comparable" changes in each of them. Such results are
 presented in Table 2. An example will help to explain the entries in
 this table. Consider the effect on the probability of application of


      1.   See Hartnett and Feidmesser [1980] where this finding is dis-
 cussed in some detail, as well as findings on the proportion of appli-
 cants admitted. The numbers that they cite are consistent with our
 findings.
                                    -25-




a change of 2 standard deviations in a person's SAT score, assuming that

none of the other variables is changed. We have assumed that each of the

other variables is equal to its sample mean. Then we have evaluated the

probability of application for a person with an SAT score one standard

deviation above the mean of students in our sample, and the probability

with an SAT score one standard deviation below the mean. The table entry

of .35 is the first probability minus the second. The entry of 120 in the

second column means that a person with an SAT score two standard deviations

(about 350 points) higher than the score of a second person with the same

(mean) values for other variables will on average apply to a school with

average SAT scores 120 points higher than the second person. The same

difference in SAT score would change the individual 's probability of admis-

sion by .12, other things equal. For non-continuous variables, the compar-

ison pertains to the change associated with the specified change in cate-

gory. For example, evaluating other variables at their means, the proba-

bility that children of parents who are both college graduates will apply

to some college is .29 higher than the probability for children of parents

with less than high school education. To evaluate the results in Table 2,

it is useful to keep in mind that the portion of the sample who applied

to a college was .40 and the overall admission rate was .89; the standard

deviation of college quality (SAT) is 124.

     The estimates for admission are based only on the admission parameter

estimates. To obtain, for example, the probability that an individual X

will in fact be admitted to a school, we must consider the probability of

application and the expected quality of college applied to, as well as the

probability of admission. The results in Table 2 pertain to the effect on
                                       -26-




 the probability of admission of a change in a qiven variable, should a

 person with the mean X value for other variables be considered for appli-

 cation.

      The most important determinant of colleqe choice and admission is

 scholastic preparation as reflected in the SAT score and high school

class rank measures; but other personal characteristics are also important.

Scholastic preparation and other variables are most important in deter-

mining whether or not to go to college at all and the quality of college

to apply to, rather than in the determination of admissions. We will

present below more evidence on this.

     The influences of SAT score and class rank are of comparable orders

of magnitude in each of the equations, although the SAT score has a some-

what greater effect than class rank in both the application and college

quality equations.   (The relevant magnitudes are shown in more detail

in the simulations below.)

     The sinqie most important determinant of college admission, by these

measures, is the college quality itself. Colleges with better students

necessarily have more selective admissions policies on average. In the

terminology of the admissions model described on page 11, they require

higher academic potential. This is not apparently a student body size

effect, because student body size is not statistically significant when

added to the admissions equation)



     1. Applicants to the better schools are more likely than applicants
to lower quality schools to make several applications to schools of com-
parable quality. Thus for this reason also, the probability of admis-
sion to any particular school should be expected to decline on average
with increasing school quality.
                                    -27-




     Student government leadership in high school and athletic achieve-

ment are also positively related to the probability of college appli-

cation and to the quality of school to which persons apply. These measures

have estimated effects on the probability of application about one-half as

large as the estimated effect of a two-standard deviation (50 percentile

point) change in class rank. Their effect on college quality is also about

one-half as large as a two-standard deviation shift in class rank. Both of

these non—academic measures of achievement appear to be less important,

relative to other variables, in college admissions decisions than in student

college application and college quality decisions.

     Parents' education, by these measures, has effects on college applica-

tion and college quality that in order of magnitude are more or less compa-

rable to the effects of class rank. The effect of a two-standard deviation

shift in parents' income is only about one-half as large as the effect of

the described change in parents' education. The effect of the change in

parents' income is about the same as the effect of the high school student

leader and athlete effects.

     Black high school graduates with given characteristics are considerably

more likely to apply to four-year colleges than white high school graduates

with the same characteristics.' Their probability of application to a four-

year school is about .45 (absolute value) higher in both the North and the

South than the probability for whites in the North. Blacks may in general

be more likely to apply to college than whites of comparable ability and

background because of relatively greater returns to college education. The



     1.  Comparable results on post-secondary school attendance are
presented in Meyer and Wise [1979].
                                    -28-




result may also be a reflection in part of increased awareness of and

encouragement associated with government affirmative action policies. It

may also be that black colleges in the South attract some black students

who would not attend college if they lived in other regions of the country

and would go to non-black schools if they were to go to college. In other

reciions, particularly in the West, blacks may be more likely also to go

to junior colleges.

     This latter observation is consistent with the observation that black

students in the South on average apply to considerably lower quality schools

than white students in the South, the difference in average college SAT is

81 points (the standard deviation of average college SAT is 124). On the

other hand, blacks in the non-South apply on average to schools with

average SAT scores about 58 points higher than the school applied to by

whites. Our estimates indicate that black students in both the North and

the South are apparently a bit more likely to be admitted than white

students, holding other variables constant, but in neither region is the

estimated effect significantly different from zero by standard criteria.

In general, if affirmative action has affected student college outcomes,

its effect has apparently been reflected more in student decisions than

in decisions of colleges.

     Finally, we see that local labor market conditions have only small

estimated effects on college attendance and only the wage effect is signi-

ficant and of the expected sign; where the wage rate is high, persons are

less likely to go to college. The importance of these variables is

swamped by the influence of measures of academic ability and preparation

and by the effects of family background. Of course academic ability should
                                            -29-




                    Table 1.    Parameter Estimates (and Asymptotic
                                Standard Errors), by Equation.



                                  Pro bability       College          Probability
         Variable
                                  of Application     Quality (SAT)a   of Admission

SAT Score (÷1000)                      2.423              0.303           1.471
                                       (0.150)            (0.018)        (0.636)

High School Class Rank                 1.431              0.147           1.155
(÷100)                                (0.100)             (0.013)        (0.269)

High School Student Leader             0.337              0.028           0.241
                                      (0.077)            (0.009)         (0.173)

High School Athlete                    0.333              0.038           0.182
                                      (0.066)            (0.008)         (0.130)

Proportion of High School              0.811              0.105          -0.385
Class Going to College                (0.120)            (0.015)         (0.315)

College SAT, 1 (÷1000)                                                   -1.968
                                                                         (2.006)

College SAT, 2 (÷1000)                                                   -3.525
                                                                         (1.957)

College SAT, 3 (÷1000)                                                   -6.632
                                                                         (1.871)


Parents' Income (-l0,000)              0.266              0.023
                                      (0.047)            (0.006)

Education of Mother Less              -0.041             -0.009
Than High School                      (0.054)            (0.007)

Education of Mother College            0.226              0.010
Degree or More                        (0.070)            (0.008)

Education of Father Less              -0.248             -0.027
Than High School                      (0.053)            (0.007)

Education   of Father College          0.238              0.031
Degree or More                        (0.061)            (0.007)
                                          -30-




                Table 1. Parameter Estimates (and Asymptotic Standard
                          Errors), by Equation (continued).




           Variable              Probability        College       a    Probability
                                 of Application     Quality (SAT)      of Admission

Black in the South                    1.243             -0.106            -0.055
                                     (0.088)            (0.009)           (0.336)

White in the South                    0.034             -0.025            -0.043
                                     (0.056)            (0.007)           (0.115)

Black in the Non-South                1.242              0.058             0.174
                                     (0.105)            (0.012)           (0.200)


Local Wage                           -0.078               --                --
                                     (0.032)
Local Unemployment                   -0.013               --                --
Rate                                 (0.010)

Male                                  0.168              0.021            -0.095
                                     (0.044)            (0.006)           (0.095)

Urban High School                     0.002              0.009             0.049
                                     (0.047)            (0.006)           (0.097)

Parents' Income Missing               0.254              0.026              --
                                     (0.075)            (0.010)


Constant                             —3.738              0.457             1.513
                                     (0.192)            (0.021)           (0.633)


Correlations:
                                                   LoO Likelihood Value -1095.9
   Application-College Quality                                              0.016
                                                   College Quality 2
                                                   Error Variance, o       (0.001)
   Application-Admission                           Total Sample             5001

                                                          of College        2005
   College Quality-Admission         -0.024
                                     (0.179)
                                                   umr
                                                    pp ican 5
                                                   Number Admitted          1799

       a. College SAT divided by 1000.
                                          -31-




               Table 2.   Effects of Standard Deviation and Category
                          Changes in Variables, by Equation.




                             Pro bability        College         Pro bability
         Variable
                             of Application      Quality (SAT)   of Admission

SAT Score 1 S.D. Above              .35               120               .12
the Mean Versus 1 S.D.
Below the Mean

High School Class Rank,            .29                81                .13
1 S.D. Above the Mean,
Versus 1 S.D. Below the
Mean

High School Student                .13                 28               .04
Leader Versus Not

High School Athlete                .13                41                .02
Versus Not

Percent of High School             .12                40               -.03
Class Going to College,
1 S.D. Above the Mean
Versus 1 S.D. Below
the Mean

College SAT, 1 SD.                                                     -.15
Above the Mean Versus
1 S.D. Below the Mean

Parentst Income, 1 S.D.            .14                32
Above the Mean Versus 1
S.D. Below the Mean

Education of Mother and            .29                78
Father College Degree
or More Versus Educa-
tion of Mother and
Father less than High
School
                                             -32-


            Table 2. Effects of Standard Deviation and Category Changes
                      in Variables, by Equation (continued).




                              Pro bability          College         Pro bability
         Variable
                             of Application         Quality (SAT)   of Admission

Black in the South                  .46                 -106             .01
Versus White in the
Non-South

Whitein the South                   .01                  -25            - .01
Versus White in the
Non-South

Black   in the Non-South            .45                   58             .03
Versus White in the
Non-South



Local Wage, 1 S.D. Above           -.03
the Mean Versus 1 S.D.
Below the Mean

Local Unemployment Rate,           - .02
1 S.D. Above the Mean
Versus 1 S.D. Below the
Mean



Male Versus Female                  .06                   21             .02
                                    -33-




reflect in part the gains to be had from college education and this surely

reflects in part the reward to college training in the labor market.


C. Additional Simulations

     To give a better idea of the relative effects of class rank and SAT

scores and their importance in application versus admissions decisions,

we have presented a few simulations. Suppose that other variables assume

sample mean values, while student SAT and class rank assume the various

values shown in Table 3. The table entries represent simulated estimates

of application and admission probabilities together with preferred college

qualities.

      Notice first that estimated admission probabilities are much higher

 than estimated application probabilities.   In particular, persons in the

 bottom half of their high school classes and with low SAT scores, say

700 or lower, are very unlikely to apply to a four-year college--.03

to .23. Yet if such persons applied to a college of average quality,

their likelihood of admission would be very high--between .52 and .82.

Even persons with high class rank and SAT scores are considerably less

likely to apply to colleges than to be admitted should they apply to

the average school. It seems apparent that the greatest impact of SAT

scores and class rank is on individual application decisions. The

relative impact on college admission is much less.

      The effect of SAT scores and class rank on preferred college

quality is shown in the bottom part of Table 3. Again, we see sub-

stantial differences in average preferred college quality, depending on

 individual academic performance and aptitude.
                                    - 34...




     In short;, students seem to categorize themselves by SAT scores much

more than colleges themselves do.

     Ihis is not to say that anyone has a relatively high probability of

being admitted to any school. To demonstrate this we have calculated

admission probabilities at different quality colleges for selected SAT

and class rank values. The results are presented in Table 4.

     At the lower quality colleges (800 is well below the average) the

probability of acceptance is high for all applicants. This is consistent

with the findings of Wing and Wallach [1971]. According to their findings

almost half of all schools essentially have open admission and don't

actively consider SAT scores, although they may require applicants to take

the SAT.

     On the other hand, it is clear that the probability of admission at

the best schools would be low for most students and would be well below

a sure thing even for students with the best academic credentials. [Recall

that these simulation results assumed that individual attributes, other

than SAT score and class rank, are equal to the average over all persons

in the sample]. Our results should give a good indication of the expected

experience of students at the majority of schools. For schools in the

tail of the selectivity distribution, however, our results may be less

accurate. For example, at schools with an average SAT of 1400, our prior

judgment was that almost no very poor student would be admitted but our

simulations suggest probabilities greater than zero, and the simulated

probabilities for the best students may be high. Of course the simulations

 in the tails are based on extrapolations well beyond the central tendency

of the data, especially when it is assumed that other determinants of
                                           -35-



       Table 3.        Simulated Application Probabilities, Admission
                       Probabilities and College Qualities, for
                       Selected SAT and Class Rank Values.



                                      CLASS RANK (Percentile)
 SAT
                   0             25                50           75       100


                                 Probability of Application
 500              .03            .06               .11          .19      .30
 700              .07            .14               .23          .35      .49
 900              .17            .27               .40          .54      .68
1100              .31            .45               .59          .72      .83
1300              .50            .64               .76          .86      .92

                  Probability of Admission at Average Quality College

 500          .52                .63               .7           .82      .89
 700          .64                .74               .82          .89      .93
 900          .74                .82               .89          .93      .96
1100          .83                .89               .94          .96      .98
1300          .89                .94               .96          .98      .99

                                         College Quality
 500          690                727               764          800      837
 700          751                788               824          861      898
'900          811                848               885          921      958
1100          872                909               945          982     1019
1300          932                969              1006      1042        1079
                                     -36-




       Table 4. Simulated Probabilities of Admiion at Colleges
                 of Selected Qualities for Seleced SAT and
                Class Rank Values.



                                CLASS RANK (Percentile)
                                            .

SAT
               0           25               50            75     100


                                    College SAT 800

 500           .69         .78              .86           .91    195

 700           .78         .86              .91           .95    .97

 900           .86         .91              .95           .97    .98


1100           .92         .95              .97           .99    .99


1300           .95         .98              .99           .99    .99

                                   College SAT 1100

 500           .41         .53              .64           .74    .83


 700           .53         .64              .74           .83    .89


 900            .65        .75              .83           .89    .94


1100            .75        .83              .89           .94    .97


1300            .83        .89              .94           .97    .98

                                   College SAT 1400

 500            .02        .04                  .07       .12    .18


 700            .04        .07                  .12       .19    .27


 900            .07        .12                  .19       .27    .38

1100            .12        .19                  .28       .38    .49


1300            .20        .28                  .38       .49    .61
                                     —37-




 admissions are held constant. In addition, we have not allowed interaction

 terms--say between SAT and class rank--that might be expected to improve

 the "fit" of our specification, especially at extreme values of the explan-

 atory variables, Nonetheless, a very small proportion (9 percent) of

schools admit fewer than half their applicants according to the findings

of other investigators.1

    For purposes of comparison we have presented in Appendix Table 2

simple binary probit estimates of the admission equation together with

the estimates based on the three-equation model. Simulated admissions

probabilities based on the probit estimates are very close to those shown

in Table 4, although we have not shown them.2

    To give an idea of the importance of socioeconomic background, as

compared to academic aptitude and performance, we have presented a few

simulations of application probabilities and school qualities based on

selected values of parents' income and education. They are shown in

Table 5. Again, the results are based on the assumption that other

variables are equal to their respective sample means.

    Although both parents' income and education are substantially related

to the probability of application and to college quality, their effect on

student choices is clearly less than the effect of SAT scores. Surprisingly

to us, even persons from high income ($18,000 in 1972 dollars) families



     1. See Hartnett and Feldmesser [1980].

     2. This result of course is consistent with the very small correla-
tions between the disturbance term in the admission equation and the
disturbance terms in the college application and college quality equations.
                                   -38-



          Table 5. Simulated Application Probabilities and
                    College Qualities for Selected Values of
                    Parents Income and Education.



                                       PARENTS'   EDUCATION
 PARENTS
 INCOME Cs)        Mother and Father                Mother and Father
                   Less Than High School            College Degree or More


                                   Probability of Application

 6,000                       .19                                .45

 9,000                       .21                                .48

12,000                       .24                                .52

15,000                       .26                                .55

18,000                       .29                                .58



                                           College SAT

 6,000                      765                               842

 9,000                      772                               849

12,000                      779                               856

15,000                      786                               863

18,000                      793                               870
                                    -39-




and with college-educated parents, with other characteristics equal to

the sample average, have only a .58 probability of applying to a four-

year college.


IV. Concluding Comments

     While SAT scores certainly exclude some persons from some schools,

to us they seem not to represent a dominating constraint on the college

opportunities of high school graduates.

     Although among the measures we have considered SAT scores are surely

an important determinant of college admissions decisions in the top 50

percent or so of colleges, and an important determinant of student college

application and college quality decisions, other personal attributes are

also important. In particular, high school class rank is of comparable

importance. In addition, the importance of SAT scores is much more

apparent in their influence on student application and college quality

decisions than in the admission decisions of colleges. Although persons

with low academic ability and past performance are very unlikely to apply

to any four-year college, such persons, if they were to apply to a college

of average quality say, would have a rather high probability of admission.

The probability of admission is much higher than the probability of
               1
application.

     This suggests strongly to us that low rates of application are not



     1. These results pertain to the marginal student (or a small number
of students) should he choose to apply. If all students who don't now
apply, were to decide to apply, the result undoubtedly would no longer
hold. In this case, at least in the short run, supply constraints would
lower admission probabilities.
                                    —40-



simply the reflection of expectations of low admission probabilities.'

As casual observation suggests, person with low scholastic aptitude

and past school performance may be likely to find school unenjoyable and

to expect that they will not get much out of college education. Indeed,

for them a college education may not be a good human capital investment.

This is not to say that even the best students can gain admission to any

school of their choice; they of course cannot. Nonetheless, the pro-

bability of admission at even the more selective schools is apparently

higher than some of us might have expected.

     To the extent that colleges use SAT scores, it is in the context

of all information available to admissions officers. The admissions

criteria that would pertain if SAT scores were not available is uncertain.

In particular, it is not clear that without the test scores persons who

would score low on them would have a greater chance of admission, even

at the more selective schools. Nor would it be demonstrably correct to

assume that without test scores more minority students, more students

from poorer socioeconomic backgrounds, or more individuals from any

other group would be admitted to colleges. It may well be, for example,

that tests "screen in" more students or encourage more students than they



     1. This is not to say that there is no such effect. Indeed Feld-
messer and Hartnett in a personal communication to us have suggested that
there is at least strong anecdotal evidence that most people believe that
colleges and universities are more selective than in fact they are. On
the other hand, of persons in the National Longitudinal Study who were
working full-time in October 1972, only 17 percent said they were not con-
tinuing education full-time because of poor grades or test scores, while
31 percent said they needed more money to continue schooling, 41 percent
that their future plans didn't require schooling, and 38 percent that they
wanted to take a break. Persons could have responded affirmatively to
more than one possibility.
                                   -41-




screen out. Although some students may not apply because they think their

scores are too low, others may apply because they discover themselves to

be "smarter than they thought."

     To the extent that SAT scores do determine student application and

college admissions decisions, there are at least two related questions

that are the subject of current and future research on our part.

     If students self-select themselves to colleges (or not) in part

on the basis of SAT scores, and if colleges admit students in part on

the basis of these scores, we would like to know if indeed these decisions

seem to be in accord with individual experiences in colleges, should they

attend. One indication of this would be the relationship between achieve-

ment in college and dropout rates on the one hand and individual academic

ability and college quality on the other. We are focusing on this question

in related research.1 Note that it is important to consider college drop-

out decisions, not simply class rank or qrades of those who are in college

or obtain degrees. It may well be that expected student performance in

college accords well with observed student decisions. If this were true,

it would provide support for the information value to students of scholas-

tic ability measures.

     To the extent that SAT scores prevent students from gaining entry to

the college of their choice, we would like to know what the effect of this

constraint is on opportunities following college graduation. One measure

of the effect of such a constraint on later opportunities is the relation-




     1. See Venti and Wise, "Test Scores and Self-Selection of Higher
Education: College Attendance Versus College Completion," Mimeograph,
July 1980.
                                    -42-




ship between college quality--given pre-college characteristics including

test scores-—and earnings after college graduation. Although this is by

no means a new question, the final follow-up to the National Longitudinal

Study of the High School Class of 1972 will provide a unique opportunity

to address it.1 Both of these questions are related to the work on school

selection and earnings by Willis and Rosen [1979], although they have

approached their work from a somewhat different direction.

     Finally, a continuing concern is the relationship between attributes

that determine success in college and those that determine job performance.

Although not the subject of this paper, it is interesting to note that

the kinds of attributes that are evidently important in the determination

of individual college application decisions, have also been found to be

related to the job success of college graduates, although their relative

importance in the two situations may differ (see Wise [1975a, 1975b]).




     1. Evidence on related questions was presented in Wise [1975a and
1975b], Solmon [1975], Solmon and Wachtel [1975], and Morgan and Duncan
[1979].
                                        -43-




                              REFERENCES
Abowd, John W. ,   "An Econometric Model of the U.S. Market for Higher

     Education," in R. Ehrenberg, (ed.), Research in Labor Economics,

     Vol. 4, 1980.

Astin, Alexander W., Predicting Academic Performance in College, Free

     Press, New York, 1971.

Astin, Alexander W. and James W. Henson, "New Measures of College Se-

     lectivity," Research in Higher Education, Vol. 6, 1977, PP. 1-9.

Berndt, Ernst, Bronwyn Hall, Robert Hall, and Jerry Hausman, "Estima-

     tion and Inference in Nonlinear Structural Models," Annals of

     Economic and Social Measurement, 1974, pp. 653—665.

Dresch, Stephen P. and Adair Waldenberg, "Labor Market Incentives,

     Intellectual Competence and College Attendance," Institute for

     Demographic and Economic Studies, New Haven, March 1978.

Duncan,   Gregory M. , "Formulation   and Statistical Analysis of the

     Mixed,   Continuous/Discrete Dependent Variable Model in Classical
     Production Theory," Econometricá, May 198U, pp. 839-852.
Educational Testing Service, Test Use and Validity, Princeton, N.J.,

     February 1980.

Ford, Susan and Sandy Campos, "Summary of Validity Data from the

     Admissions Testing Program Validity Study Service," ETS, Prince-

     ton, N.J., 1977.

Fuller, Winship, Charles Manski, and David Wise, "New Evidence on the

    Economic Determinants of Post-Secondary Schooling Choices,"

    J.F.K. School of Government Discussion Paper Number 90D, June 1980.
                                         -44-




Hartnett, Rodney T. and Robert Feidmesser, "College Admissions Testing

        and the Myth of Selectivity: Unresolved Questions and Needed

        Research,' AAHE Bulletin, March, 1981.

Kohn,    Mier G. , Charles   Manski and David Mundel ,   "An Empirical Investi-
        gation of   Factors Which Influence College-Going Behavior," Annals

        of Economic and Social Measurement, 1976, pp. 391-420.

Levinsohn, Jay R. et al., National Longitudinal Study Base Year, First,

        Second, and Third Followup Data File Users Manual, NCES, Washington,

        D.C., 1978.

Manski, Charles and David Wise, "Post-Secondary Educational Choice in

        theNational Longitudinal Study: A Partial Analysis," in

        Experiences of Recent High School Graduates, D. C. Heath, Lexing-

        ton, MA, 1978, pp. 129-162.

McFadden, Daniel, "Econometric Net Supply Systems for Firms with Con-

        tinuous and Discrete Comodities," presented at the joint Harvard-

        MIT Econometrics Seminar, Spring 1979.

Meyer, Robert H. and David A. Wise, "High School Preparation and Early

        Labor Force Experience," NBER Working Paper 342, revised December

        1979, forthcoming in Freeman, Richard B. and David A. Wise (eds.),

        The Youth Employment Problem: Its Nature, Causes. and

        quences, University of Chicago Press, 1981.

Morgan, James N. and Grey J. Duncan, "College Quality and Earnings,"

        in Ismail Sirageldin (ed.), Research in Human Capital and

        ment, Vol. 1, 1979, pp. 103-121.

Nairn, Allan and Associates, "The Reign of ETS: The Corporation That

        Flakes Up Minds," 1980.     (The Ralph Nader Report on the Educational

        Testing Service).
                                    -45,-




Radner, Roy and Leonard Miller, Demand and Supply in U.S. Higher

     cation, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1975.

Rothschild, Michael, "Social Effects of Ability Testing," June l979

     unpublished.

Schrader, W.B., "The Predictive Validity of College Board Admissions

     Tests," in William Angoff (ed.), The College Board Admissions

     Testing Program, CEEB, New York, 1971.

Slack, Warner V. and Douglas Porter, "The Scholastic Aptitude Test:

     A Critical Appraisal," Harvard Education Review, Vol. 50, May 1980,

     pp. 154-175.

Solmon, Lewis C., "The Definition of College Quality and its Impact on

     Earnings," Explorations in Economic Research, Vol. 2, No. 4,

     1975, pp. 537-587.

Solmon, Lewis C., and Paul Wachtel, "The Effects on Income of Type of

     College Attended," Sociology of Education, Vol. 48, 1975,

     pp. 75—90.

Venti, Steven and David Wise, "Test Scores and Self-Selection of Higher

     Education: College Attendance Versus College Completion," Mimeograph,

     July 1980.

Willingham, Warren W. and Hunter Breland, "The Status of Selective

     Admissions," in Selective Admissions in Higher Education, Jossey-

     Bass, San Francisco, 1977.

Willis, Robert and Sherwin Rosen, "Education and Self-Selection," Journal

     of Political Economy, Vol. 87, October 1979, pp. S7-S36.
                                   -46-




Wing, Cliff W. and Michael Wallach, College Admissions and the Psy-

     chology of Talent, Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York, 1971.

Wise, David A. , "Academic Achievement and Job Performance," American

     Economic Review, 1975a, pp. 360-366.

Wise, David A., "Personal Attributes, Job Performance, and Probability

     of Promotion," Econometrica, Vol. 43, No. 5-6, l975b, pp. 913-931.
                                            -47-



                   Appendix Table 1. Variable Means and Standard
                                      Deviations for Total Sample
                                     and for College Applicants.



                                     Total Sample                Applicants Only
       Variable
                            Mean Standard Deviation      Mean Standard Deviation




SAT Score                     835            198          953              202

High School Class            .550           .276          .691            .237
Rank

High School Student          .072           .258          .122            .328
Leader

High School Athlete          .103           .303          .149            .356

Percent of High School       .506           .190          .549            .194
Class Going to College

College SAT                   --             --          1024              124


Parents' Incomea             11185          5382         12772            5537

Education of Mother
less than High School        .264           .441          .165            .371

Education of Mother          .114           .318          .196            .397
College Degree or More

Education of Father          .321           .467          .191            .393
less than High School

Education of Father          .189           .392          .318            .466
College Degree or More


Black in the South           .062           .240          .063            .244
(High School)

White in the South           .213           .410          .200            .400
(High School)

Black in the Non-South       .037           .189          .043            .204
(High School)
                                             -48-



                   Appendix Table 1.     Variable Means and Standard
                                         Deviations for Total Sample
                                         and for College Applicants
                                         (continued).



                                      Total Sample                  Applicants Only
        Variable
                             Mean     Standard Deviation     Mean     Standard Deviation


Black in the South            —-              --             .058            .234
(College)

White in the South            --              --             .209            .407
(College)

Black in the Non-             --              --             .048            .215
South (College)


                                                              -—              -—
Local Wage                   3.930            .592

Local Unemployment           3.897           1.862            -—              --

Male                           .490           .499           .508            .500


Urban High School              .251           .433           .262            .440



Total Sample                          5001

Number of College Applicants          2005

Number Admitted                       1799



       a. Calculations exclude observations with missing values.
                                         -49-




               Appendix Table 2. Admissions Model Parameter
                                  Estimates (and Asymptotic
                                  Standard Errors) by Method
                                 of Estimation.



                                          Method of Estimation

       Variable                                      Joint Estimation
                                Probit               of 3 Equations


SAT Score (- 1000)               1.518                     1.471
                                (0.301)                   (0.636)

High School Class Rank           1.121                     1.155
(+ 100)                         (0.212)                   (0.269)

High School Student              0.214                     0.241
Leader                          (0.151)                   (0.173)

High School Athlete              0.194                     0.182
                                (0.121)                   (0.130)

Proportion of High School       -0.355                    -0.385
Class Going to College          (0.244)                   (0.315)

College SAT, 1 (÷ 1000)         -2.931                    -1.968
                                (0.769)                   (2.006)

College SAT, 2 (-- 1000)        -4.186                    -3.525
                                (1.221)                   (1.957)

College SAT, 3 (÷ 1000)         -6.703                    -6.632
                                (1.136)                   (1.871)




Black in the South              -0.228                    -0.055
                                (0.212)                   (0.336)

White in the South              -0.070                    -0.043
                                (0.111                    (0.115)

Black in the Non-South           0.111                     0.174
                                (0.187)                    (0.200)
                                           —50-



                  Appendix Table 2. Admissions Model Parameter
                                     Estimates (and Asymptotic
                                     Standard Errors) by Method
                                     of Estimation (continued)



                                             Method of Estimation
       Variable                                         Joint Estimation
                                  Probit
                                                        of 3 Equations


Male                              -0.103                     -0.095
                                  (0.093)                    (0.095)

Urban High School                  0.056                      0.049
                                  (0.096)                    (0.097)

Constant                           2.541                      1.513
                                  (0.773)                    (0.633)
