                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            FOUR OBSERVATIONS ON MODERN INTERNATIONAL
         COMMERCIAL POLICY UNDER FLOATING EXCHANGE RATES



                       J.   David Richardson


                      Working Paper No. T15




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                             Ju1r 1981


 This paper was prepared for the April 2425, 1981
Carnegie—Rochester Conference on Public Policy and is forthcoming
 in Volume 16 of the Conference Series. It is part of the research
program in International Studies of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. Any opinions expressed are those of the author, however,
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. I would
like to thank Robert E. Baldwin, Russell S. Boyer, Barry J.
Eichengreen, Gene Grossman, Jacob A. Frenkel, Stephen P. Magee,
Rachel McCulloch, and other participants in seminars at Wisconsin,
Rochester, and the National Bureau of Economic Research for helpful
comments on an earlier draft. I would also like to thank the
National Science Foundation for research support. Any credit is
partially theirs; any blame is all mine.
                                              NBER Working Paper #715
                                                           July 1981

           Four Observations on Modern International Commercial
                   Policy Under Floating Exchange Rates


                                 ABS TRACT




     This paper describes the essential similarity between "modern" commer-

cial policy, with its rent—like revenues, and capital transfers. Import

barriers are shown to have consequently ambiguous effects on nominal

and real exchange rates. The paper also examines some important supply—

side welfare Costs and consequences of import barriers through their

influence on current asset prices and future capital formation.

     The model on which the observations are based is an aggregated fixed—

endowment, full—employment, general—equilibrium model similar to those used

in the pure theory of international trade, with financial capital and for-

eign exchange markets that are integrated in a manner consistent with the

asset/portfolio—balance approach to exchange rates.

     The model is empirically calibrated to reflect the U.S. and the rest

of the world in the early 1980's. In this empirical stylization, U.S. import

barriers are shown (1) to reduce national consumption possibilities more

significantly than is usually thought to be the case; (ii) to discourage U.S.

physical capital formation; and (iii) to have significant yet variable effects

on exchange rates, where the variability depends on the distribution between

the U.S. and the rest of the world of the rent—like revenues implicit in the

import barriers. It is notable that the more favorable this distribution to

the U.S. the larger is the dollar depreciation caused by import barriers.


                                             J. David Richardson
                                             Department of Economics
                                             University of Wisconsin—Madison
                                             Madison, Wisconsin   53706
                                             (608) 263—3867/3876
                               INTRODUCTION



     This paper makes four observations on "modern" international com-

mercial policy under floating exchange rates. It describes the essen

tial similarity between such commercial policy and capital transfers,

and reveals its consequently ambiguous effects on nominal exchange

rates, the terms of trade, and national economic welfare. It also

examines some important supply—side costs and consequences of commer-

cial policy through its influence on current asset prices and future

capital formation.

     The model on which the observations are based is an aggregated

fixed—endowment, full—employment, general—equilibrium model similar

to those used in the pure theory of international trade, with financial

capital and foreign exchange markets that are integrated in a manner

consistent with the asset/portfolio—balance approach to exchange rates.

Its most closely related antecedents are models by Boyer (1977),

Eichengreen (1980), and Djajic (1981).

     In order to understand the likely magnitudes of the influences

being described, the model is empirically calibrated to reflect the U.S.

and the rest of the world in the early 1980's. In this empirical styli-

zation, U.S. import barriers are shown (1) to reduce national consumption

possibilities more significantly than is usually thought to be the case;

(ii) to discourage U.S. physical capital formation; and (iii) to have signi—

ficant yet variable effects on exchange rates, where the variability depends
                                                                         2




 on the distribution between the U.S. and the rest of the world of the

 rent—like revenues implicit in all import barriers.

         "Modern" commercial policy is commercial policy with a prominent

  quantitative element, and is examined to reflect several recent trends;

 One is the increasing popularity of quota—based barriers (voluntary ex-

 port restraints, orderly marketing agreements) and mechanistic admini-

 strative guidelines (trigger prices for steel> among those clamoring

 for protection. Another is the decreasing reliance that most govern-

 ments place on international trade taxes for revenue purposes, leading

 them increasingly to be willing to restrict trade in ways that create

 windfall revenues for someone deemed deserving other than themselves

 (including occasionally foreign governments). A third and less import-

 ant trend for purposes of this paper is toward rules—based commercial

 policies (variable levies for agricultural products, prescribed growth

 rates for textile and auto imports) and toward temporary safeguard re-

 lief from imports that all share in being variable yet anticipatable by

the private sector.

        The following are the four observations that are the focus of the

work.

        (1) Income transfers implicit in modern commercial policy are more

intricate and less innocuous than those implicit in tariffs, export sub-

sidies, and other tax—subsidy schemes.' Quantitative commercial policy

drives a wedge between world and domestic prices, generating rent—like
                                                                        3




 revenues that can affect both private incentives and national economic

 welfare. Foreign producers may collect most of the implied revenues for

 example, from the "voluntary" export restraints that a protectionist

 country presses them to administer. The country discriminated against

may even gain if the terms of trade turn sufficiently against the country

restricting its imports. And internally capital owners may gain relative

to labor if commercial policy's implicit revenues fall directly to them

and if labor has little market power. (Modern commercial policy may thus

have a direct effect on industrial profitability that tariffs do not have,

given that their revenues are distributed in a manner closer to distribu-

tional neutrality.)

     (2) Income transfers implicit in modern commercial policy create an

international transfer problem. This classic problem (described briefly

below) provides a revealing and realistic setting in which to examine

the effects of commercial policy (a focus of pure trade theory) under

floating exchange rates (a focus of international finance). International

transfers are generally "effected" by adjustment of commodity and asset

prices, including the exchange rate. These price/exchange—rate adjust-

ments in turn influence real trade, including trade in assets that are

claims to deferred real purchasing power. The adjustments also influence

real incomes, real wealth, and even real factor endowments.

     (3) Modern commercial policy can either strengthen or weaken a

currency.2 Neither its effect on exchange rates nor the subsequent

feedback of exchange—rate adjustment onto the variables targetted for
                                                                       4




influence by commercial policy are as straightforward as journalistic

disputation, common intuition, or familiar general—equilibrium logic

often suggest. The intuitive position is that protectionism strengthens

a country's currency and hence "undoes itself."


         [Export—related] jobs... would be lost by limiting

         imports.... If they [Japanese exporters] earn fewer

         dollars, the demand for yen goes down and the price

         of yen in terms of dollars also tends to go down...

         U.S. goods become more expensive to Japanese and

         they buy fewer of them, and jobs are lost in ex-

         port industries. (Friedman (1981)).


         A protective structure... is likely in the first

         instance to create an external surplus. This

         then requires an appreciation of the exchange

         rate to restore external balance. (Corden (1971,

         p. 105)).


The general—equilibrium position is that the exchange-rate system is a

red herring in calculating the effects of commercial policy, since in

the most familiar general—equilibrium models, exchange—rate changes

are neutral.3 In this view the exchange rate is the relative price of

two assets, both of which are "veils." Therefore whatever the effects

of commercial policy on exchange rates, if any, its effect on equilibrium
                                                                          5




 values of real variables is always the same. If the point is granted,

 it then makes   about   as much sense to write a paper on "Conunercial

 Policy Under Floating Exchange Rates" as on "Commercial Policy Under

 Variable Tides."

      (4) Modern commercial policy can either encourage or discourage

 aggregate capital formation. Import barriers clearly raise prices of

 domestic and imported output, and may either raise or reduce equity

prices by which the current capital stock is valued. The ratio of

physical capital's market value to its replacement cost (Tobin's "q,"

with commodity prices measuring replacement costs) is thus Sensitive

to commercial policy.       Cost—of—adjustment/installation theories

of physical investment (Tobin (1969), Lucas (1967), and Treadway (1969))

suggest that the long—run capital endowment and aggregate supply will

rise when q rises temporarily above 1 and fall when q falls temporarily

below 1, in both instances restoring its equilibrium value at 1. For

reasons discussed below, import barriers can be generally presumed to

be stagflationary, reducing q below 1 in some medium run, discouraging

capital formation, and undermining confidence in development/takeoff

strategies built around import substitution. Furthermore when this is

true, then an additional welfare cost of protection in the long run

is the reduced income per worker that accompanies reduced physical capital

per worker.

     Since the second, third, and fourth observations are less familiar
                                                                       6




than the first, it is worth summarizing briefly their explanations.

First and most simply, if modern protectionism allows foreign exporters

to capture a sufficiently large share of the policy's implicit revenues,

then it is possible that widespread barriers to imports will raise their

f.o.b. value (tariffs never do).4 This influence by itself would create

additional foreign—exchange—market demand for foreign currency and de-

preciation of domestic currency. A given set of import barriers then

becomes more effective at quelling trade under floating exchange rates

than under fixed exchange rates, not less.

     But this perspective is limited. It neglects the most important

influence underlying this paper. A significant change in commercial

policy causes a change in international asset preference as well.5

The ensuing short—run exchange—rate change under floating must be

consistent simultaneously with the implied changes in: (1) commodity

trade; (ii) capital movements; and (iii) domestic—currency prices of

globally traded assets. In the longer run it must also ultimately be

consistent with the change in debt service on the new equilibrium asset

positions. This is where the transfer perspective becomes important.

In the short run, if barriers to imports cause a larger incipient capital—

account deficit than current—account surplus, ceteris paribus, then

domestic currency may depreciate to restore equilibrium in the foreign

exchange market. And/or if barriers to imports cause excess domestic

demand to hold liquid tradeable assets, and excess foreign supply,
                                                                          7




  ceteris paribus, then domestic currency may depreciate to restore global

  portfolio equilibrium for asset stocks.

       Finally, the invariance of real equilibria to exchange rates will

 not be a property of the perspective taken below.
                                                      Exchange—rate changes
 will not be neutral. They will produce capital gains and losses, not

 only on net international indebtedness (Boyer (1977)), but even, through

 substitutability, on domestic equity claims to the capital stock. This

 is the key to understanding how commercial policy might affect the capital

 endowment through temporary divergences in the ratio of capital's market

 value to its replacement cost. And ultimately, a portion of national in—

 come, international interest earnings or debt service, will not vary

 proportionately with exchange rates or the price level.6


                          AN ILLUSTRATIVE MODEL

     The conclusions are illustrated by reference to a bilateral macro-

economic model7 with explicit foreign repercussion effects. Each

country's outputs are aggregated, but can be sold at a different price

abroad than at home due to the price discrimination that is implicit in

quantitative commercial policy. Imports are viewed as imperfect sub-

stitutes in consumption for domestic goods.

     Some familiar questions about the industry—specific motivation for

commercial policy and its sectoral consequences are obviously suppressed.

Yet responsiveness of excess supplies and demands to relative prices is

preserved by the assumption that two
                                       differentiated products are consuned.
                                                                      8




And in every other dimension, an effort has been made to align the model

as closely as possible with familiar general—equilibrium real trade models:

in the medium—term equilibrium that characterizes the model (see below),

endowments of two factors of production are fixed and fully" employed

(at natural rates of unemployment and capacity utilization), current

accounts are balanced, and expectations are stable. It can be easily

shown that all four observations around which the paper is built would

continue to apply to changes in commercial policy in a multisectoral

model with differentiated exportables, importables, and nontradeables,

and   with industry—specific commercial policy.
      The most important feature of the paper's perspective is its insis-
tence on   the exchange rate •being viewed as an asset price, and its focus

on some ways in which modern commercial policy might affect asset markets.9

      A converse perspective deserves brief emphasis. Exchange—market flux

may influence commercial policy. It can be argued that the strongest poli-

tical pressure for protectionism emanates from specific sectors of the

economy. Each industry views itself as having verylittle influence over

the exchange rate. Yet they are painfully aware of the exchange rate's in-

fluence on them. Depreciation and appreciation due to asset market flux

cause ebbs and flows in competitiveness, cash flow, and long—term economic

viability. To the extent that there are inter—temporal and capital—market

distortions that set limits to the maximum losses consistent with any firm's

survival, floating exchange rates may heighten corporate, sectoral, and

ultimately collective political pressure for protection, especially of a modern

(quantitative) kind.
                                                                         9




     This line of thought runs counter to familiar arguments that floating

exchange rates undermine balance—of—payments and aggregate—employment de-

fenses for government trade policy:

               Flexible exhange rates eliminate the balance—of—

         payments motive for tariffs and should therefore

         facilitate further rounds of negotiations to lower

         trade barriers (Dudley (1981, p. 264), ascribing the

         view to Richard Blackhurst)


         The great advantage of a floating exchange rate system

         was to have been that the adjustment would take place

         automatically through currency appreciations and de-

         preciations, removing the need for otherwise undesirable

         trade and capital controls, and allowing governments to

         concentrate their policies on domestic economic needs.

         Thus if the adjustment process is working well, trade

         measures for balance of payments purposes are unnecessary

         and undesirable. (Frank, Pearson, and Riedel (1979),

         p. 15).


        One   of   the major arguments for a flexible exchange rate

        system ...    is   that it makes the case for free trade clear

        and simple. If you have a flexible rate and you reduce

        tariffs, movements in the exchange rate will automatically
                                                                       10




          protect you against having any adverse balance of pay-

          ments effects, and therefore you are not exporting or

          importing unemployment (Friedman (1969), p. 118).


These arguments notwithstanding, floating exchange rates may aggravate

sectoral pressures for protection by responding flexibly to international

asset trade and thereby channeling intense competitive pres-

sure toward domestic sectors through unfavorable movements in the "real"

exchange rate (relative foreign to domestic commodity prices). The point

is exemplified in the late 1970's by hardpressed Swiss and German manu-

facturers suffering from massive portfolio shifts toward francs and marks.

     We proceed to discuss the model, beginning with the allocation of

nationally unique production to the two markets in which it is sold. In

the medium—term perspective of most trade models, production possibilities

(Q.) are exogenously fixed by assumptions of "full" employment and ideal

capacity utilization coupled with stationary endowments of all factors of

production.

          Q.
           1
             = D.  ii + D..;
                         ':i
                             where                                    (1.1)

          Q.      units of output produced uniquely in country i, net of

                  real replacement investment to hold the physical capital

                  stock stationary;

          D.. =   domestic consumption of domestic output;
          D.. =   foreign   consumption of domestic output; i's exports to

                  j; j's imports from i.
                                                                                     11




In the discussion below,
                                   D11 and D22 vary endogenously, and D12 and D21

are treated as the exogenous instruments of commercial policy. Non—

quantitative trade barriers can be easily translated into their "quota

equivalents." This is true even for tariffs and export subsidies, as

can be seen by defining each country's income in a conventional (e.g.,

Johnson (1976), Boadway and Treddineck (1978), Eichengreen (1980)10) but

more general may:

                =
                                                                                 (2.1)
                     ÷           + 01(ep12 —
                          [p11
                     +    (1     0212l — ep22)D21
                     + cF;

                     p22D22                                                      (2.2)

                    +            + 02(p21/e     —
                                                    p22)]D21
                    + (1 —                 —
                                 e1)(p12       p11/e)D12
                    —
                         cF/e; where
               =    country      l's   nominal income;

         Pjj        price of country i's (unique) product in j's market and

                    in j's currency;
               =
                    country      l's share of the "revenues" implied by commercial

                    policy concerning its own exports (i's imports), e.g.,

                    for tariffs, 0. =          0, for voluntary export restraints,
                    01 may approach 1;

        e           the exchange rate, the price of 2's currency in units of
                    11S   currency;
                                                                           12




            F   =   l's net    financial claim on 2; the stock of internationally—

                    traded assets held by 1 as claims on 2; 2's net indebtedness

                    to 1; number of such assets promising to pay c per period;

                    where

            c   =   periodic    coupon payment per unit of assets, payable in l's

                    currency.

For tariffs whose proceeds are redistributed as income transfers, all commer-

cial policy revenues are collected and disbursed by the domestic government,

so that the foreign country's share of such revenues,          or 62P is zero. It

is also zero for export subsidies financed by taxes. In these cases the first

                                                    iii
and second line of each Y. definition add to p .Q, and the third line re—
                                1

presents   tariff revenues or domestic taxes to finance export subsidies.

     For quantitative barriers to imports or exports, however, each country

has an opportunity to claim its portion of the implied revenues (or "quota

rents") that arise from the wedge that commercial policy drives between world

and domestic prices, These shares no doubt vary from policy to policy, from

good to good, and from time to time. It is likely that 0. is relatively

large for commercial policies administered by the exporting country (volun—

tary export restraints) and smaller for those administered by the importing

country (import quotas, government purchasing policy). 0. is also likely to

be large for goods in which the exporter industry has significant market

power compared to importers, for example where export sales are centralized

in a national marketing board, or where they are exempt from anti—monopoly

policy. Despite the clearly endogenous character of 0.'s, modelling their
                                                                      13




 determinants is beyond the scope of this paper, and they are treated para—
                     11
 metrically below.

      The variable F plays an important role in explaining certain unfamiliar

 conclusions below. F can be more elaborately described as the internation-

ally held portion of a broad pool of "inside" paper assets —— unsecured

 institutional bonds and notes, government securities, bank loans, etc. —

"inside"   in the sense that they are simultaneous claims and liabilities of

national residents, and enter national wealth only when held internationally.

Variation in the price of F in each country creates some of the capital

gains and losses that make the real consequences of commercial policy sen-

sitive to the exchange rate, not invariant to it as in simpler general—

equilibrium settings. Variation in the price of F in each country's currency

(Pf1 Pf2) must be furthermore consistent with exchange rate variation

(specifically, ePf2 must always equal Pf1 a condition equivalent to perfect

mobility of financial capital). In fact, one way of describing the exchange

rate is as the relative price of internationally—traded paper assets in the

two countries, a definition that accords well with the asset approach to ex-

change rates. Finally, variations in the actual and desired quantities of F

as a result of commercial policy's impact on income (Y.) and rates of return

are the counterbalance to the income transfers implicit in modern commercial

policy, determining whether such transfers are under— or over—effected, and

thereby determining asset prices and the direction of exchange—rate variation.

     cF represents periodic interest earnings on country l's net international

investment position, or alternatively, l's balance of payments on services
                                                                          14




account.12     Since the equilibrium described by the model is stationary with

respect to time, interest earnings are assumed to be entirely repatriated,

not reinvested.

     The behavior summarized by equations (3) and (4) further undermines

the neutrality of commercial policy's impacts to exchange—rate variation

and other financial flux.


          c/Pf1               r1;                                         (3.1)

          c/ePf2              r2;                                         (3.2)

          r.                  .Y./pk.K.; where;                           (4,1)

                              the price of tradeable financial assets in i's
          Pfj

                              currency;

          C/Pf1 c/ePf2 =      implied    interest rates in country 1 and country

                              2    respectively;
         r.               =   the    iip1ied rate of return on nontradeable

                              "equities"    in country i, where equities are
                              defined as (secured) ownership claims to the
                              nation's capital stock;
                          =   the    elasticity of output with respect to capital
                              in    an (implicitly Cobb—Douglas) aggregate pro-

                              duction function.


         cx1Y1
                          =   aggregate   rental payments to capital on the
                              assumption   that capital is paid the value of

                              its   marginal product;
                                                                           15




              K.            =   the capital stock in numbers of machines, or
                                equivalently, the number of equity claims to

                                the capital stock;

              ki
                            =   the "stoc1narket" price of a nontradeable equity
                                claim in i's currency.

       Equations   (3) require that rates of return on unsecured financial assets

and equity claims to the capital stock be identical, niaking them perfectly

substitutable ways of holding stores of future purchasing power. The assump—

tion   is   made primarily for analytical convenience. Some substitutibility can

certainly be defended by reference to domestic arbitrage across alternative
savings instrUments)3 The exchange rate has a clear relation to rates of
return   on equities through (3), and they in turn have a clear relation to
                                                                    14
commercial policy through the presence of income (Y) in (4).

       The important point is that modern commercial policy alters domestic

income distribution for all the normal reasons plus one ——     it    creates oppor-

tunities for income alternative to physical production)5 These rent—related

opportunities influence asset prices (equations (4)) and exchange rates

(equations (3)), and can in turn be moderated or exagerated by exchange—rate

variation. As discussed below, these rent—related opportunities may also

affect capital formation in the long run, creating a link between commercial

policy, exchange rates, and growth.

       The remainder of the model is more familiar, reflecting conventional

assumptions about economic behavior. Equations (5) and (6) represent conven-

tional demand equations for domestic and foreign goods:
                                                                                             16




                                        =                         where
              P1Dj                           j(Pjj/Pjj)Ej;                                   (5.1)

              (      )                 = i's          average propensity to import out of aggre-

                                             gate nominal expenditure (absorption);

              E.                       =     l's aggregate       nominal expenditure (absorption);

              (     ) > 0 (<0)               when import demand is own—price elastic (inelastic);

              p.,D.,.                  =     [1   —   .(p../p..)]E,.                        (6.1)


 Equations (7) capture an asset approach to the current account, that de-

 ficits must be financed by foreign borrowing of some sort, reflecting a

willingness to draw down national wealth toward some lower desired level

 (Wd. < W1), and that surpluses imply net foreign investment, reflecting

a desire to increase wealth toward some desired level)6

             E.
              1
                                    =
                                             i di i i.
                                            E.(W ./W.)Y.; where                             (7.1)
             Wdi, WI
                                    =       i's   desired and actual aggregate nominal wealth;

             E( )        <   0,   and E.,(l) =          1,   so that current accounts are balanced

                                            when desired and actual wealth are equal.

Equations    (8)   determine desired national                   wealth as a proportion of nominal
income: 16
                                    =
             WdI                            y.Yi.                                           (81)

Equations (9) define nominal wealth in the creditor (1) and debtor (2)

countries:

                                   =         +
             W1                         L1        kl K1 + Pf1F;                            (9.1)

                                   =         +
             W2                         L2        k2 K2 — pf2F; where                      (9.2)

             L1
                                   =
                                        country i's stock of nominal cash          balances, treated

                                        exogenously;
                                                                                      17




 Arid equations (10), in conjunction with (8) and (9),17 explain aggregate

 portfolio demands for money and non—money assets, as well as each nation's

 price level:

                                  =
          L                            Li(rj,   W./P.)Y.; where                       (lO.i)

                                  =
          W1/P.                        country   i's real wealth, nominal wealth deflated

                                       by an index of consumables prices;



                                                        '
                                 =     the price level or cost of living, defined as
          P1
                                                    +       —
                                                                1)(p/p)       where a o super—

                                       script denotes a base—period value;18

          L./3r. ( 0;            aL./(W,/P.) •       (W./P.)/L.   > 0 and <   1.19

Although the presence of both income and wealth as determinants of the de-

mand for money is unconventional in the closed—economy U.S. literature

Ne1tzer (1963), Brunner and Meltzer (1963), Goldfeld (1973, pp. 613—615).

Laidler (1977, pp. 139—142)), it has considerably more precedent in the asset!

portfolio—balance approach to modelling open—economies (Branson (1977, p. 72),

Kouri (1977, Equations (3) and (6.1)), and Henderson (1980, Equation (4)).

Two familiar equations that are implied by the behavior already spelled out

are:

                —        =
                    E1       Pf1tF;                                                  (11.1)

                —        =             where
                    E2       —Pf2AF;                                                 (11.2)

         L Is the time difference operator over the same interval as that

            for which the "flow" data are measured.
                                                                      18




                          ALTERNATIVE HORIZONS


     The model admits of three different horizons over which one could

answer the question "what are the effects of modern commercial policy

(an exogenous change in D12 or D21) under floating exchange rates?"

This paper focusses on the second of the three alternatives because it

is the horizon most frequently associated with trade—theoretic discussions

of commercial policy.

     (1) A short—run response would treat the capital stocks (K1) as

exogenous, and net international indebtedness as exogenous as well on the

grounds that for some sufficiently small interval of time, F (the "real"

current account/capital account balance) is infinitesimal relative to F

and pkjKi/pfj. During the short run, desired wealth would not be equal

to actual wealth, and current account/capital account imbalance would

be the means by which W "chases" Wd. Asset prices, e, fi' and ki would

be completely flexible in the short run. Expectations could be made

endogenous by forcing these asset prices to short—run equilibrium levels

such that their subsequent rates of change during the interim between

short— and medium—run equilibria (see below) would maintain equality of

yields across perfectly substitutable assets (where "yields" include

not only interest payments and rental payments, but also capital gains!
           20
losses).
     (2) A medium—run response could be distinguished from a short—run

response by recognizing that net international indebtedness (F) would
                                                                        19




 eventually attain a value consistent with equality of desired and actual

 wealth. At that point, current and capital accounts would be in balance.

 The capital stock might21 remain exogenous during the medium run and

 asset prices would adjust flexibly to an equilibrium consistent with

 the new level of international indebtedness. Such medium—run equilibria

 are the ones most frequently analyzed in comparative static pure trade

 theory, and it generally maintains an additional assumption of stable

expectations. This paper follows suit in order to stay as close as

possible to the most frequently referenced literature. But a more sen— —

sible,   if cumbersome, alternative would be to make expectations endogenous

after the fashion of the account above, forcing asset prices to medium—

run levels such that their subsequent rates of change between medium—

and long—run equilibria (see below) would leave no profit for arbitrage

across substitutable assets.

     (3) A long—run response might21 be distinguished from a medium—run

response by recognizing the mechanisms in this model by which commer-

cial policy could encourage or discourage net capital formation. In

particular, if the capital stock (K) represents accumulated foregone

consumption of domestic goods from the past, and if it can be measured

in units of domestic output, then commercial policy can create a short—

and medium—run divergence between the market value of existing capital

(pu) and its replacement/acquisition cost (1).22      The ratio of market

value to replacement cost            is precisely "Tobin's q." (Tobin
                                                                      20




(1969),   Lucas (1967), Treadway (1969)). Values greater than one create

incentives for capital formation (larger K1) and expansion of aggregate

supply. Values less than one create incentives for net real disinvest—

ment (small I) and contraction of aggregate supply. The long—run equili-

brium position of the economy as a result of commercial policy could be

calculated as the value of K. and other variables for which kj'jj

returned to 1.

     Another way of distinguishing shorter and longer runs is conceivable,

but is not followed here. One could define the shorter run as a period

in which domestic prices are rigid (p11 exogenous) and aggregate output

is flexible (Q1 endogenous), and the longer run conversely as is done

in the paper, with Q1 being set at a level corresponding to "natural"

unemployment and excess capacity. Then shorter—run changes in       would

correspond closely to output/employment flux, and longer—run changes in

would correspond closely to price flux. One interesting insight from such a

view is that when downward price rigidity is more marked than upward

price rigidity (as seems likely), then      trade policy could be largely

recessionary in the country where Y falls, and largely inflationary in

the country where Y rises, with global effects that net to world stagfla—

tion (the recession in the contracting country dominates the expansion

in the expanding country, and the rise in prices in the latter dominates

the price stability in the former.)


             SHORT— A1D MEDIUM-RUN CONCLUSIONS "IN PRINCIPLE"


     Commercial policy in the model described above operates in a   way
                                                                           21




that recalls the well—established literature on the transfer question.

Modern commercial policy is an income transfer mechanism among nations,

with no fiscal impacts unless the government auctions off import quota

rights or taxes the "windfall" revenues that accrue to importers or ex-

porters. Quantitative restrictions on exports and imports are an even

purer beggar—your—neighbor policy than taxes (which domestic residents

pay in part), causing price (and perhaps output) responses that redistri-

bute world income and alter the terms of trade in a direction that depends

on who collects the implicit revenues. As with all redistributions of

income internationally, there will be increased purchases of imports and

stock demands for certain assets where Y rises, and the opposite where Y

falls. The traditional transfer question is whether the asset trade

implied by the change in the current account (i) falls short of, (ii)

matches, or (iii) exceeds the explicit (financial) capital inflows to

one country and outflows from the other. In historical analyses, the

terms of trade of the country where Y fell were expected to adjust un-

favorably, not at all, or favorably depending on whether the income

transfer was "undereffected" (i), "just effected" (ii), or "overeffected"

(iii). Currency depreciation/appreciation in the foreign exchange market

was   seen   traditionally as the agent of terms—of—trade deterioration/

improvement. And      national   economic welfare improved or declined as the

terms   of   trade did.

        International redistribution of rent—like revenues from modern com-

mercial policy is what ties it inextricably to the transfer question.
                                                                        22




These rent—like revenues are at the heart of a striking, although fami-

liar conclusion.23 Import barriers may not bring about a rise in a

country's income. They may in fact reduce income if they award the foreign

country an opportunity to collect the wedge created between world and

domestic prices of its own exports. Voluntary export restraints and

orderly marketing agreements, of course, often do exactly that. In this

case also, import barriers make the trade balance more negative in the

short run,24 counter to common intuition and often counter to one of the

stated purposes of the policy. Parameters that play a key role in

generating this unusual conclusion, in addition to the shares of "quota

rents" that each country claims from the commercial policy of the other

(Qi, 62), are the price elasticity of demand for imports (reflected in

the elasticity of ft(   )), the   average propensities to import (), and
                                                                   25
the relative sizes of the two countries (as measured by Y1/eY2).

     The upshot is that in some circumstances, the most stimulative

trade policy for income and the trade balance may be the dismantling

of quantitative trade barriers and all manner of non—price discrimina-

tion against foreign producers. One cannot even rule this out as a para-

metric improbability.

     The conclusion has more than macroeconomic interest.   In a multi—

sectoral general—equilibrium model, import barriers that are aimed at

protecting output or employment in any particular sector can fail if

they give foreign competitors too large a share of the implicit revenues.

At the higher prices for the imported product and for its domestic
                                                                        23




 substitute, there may be less purchasing power facing domestic competi—

 tors, not more. And the sectoral trade balance may deteriorate further.

      Whatever commercial policy's short—run effects on the trade balance

 and income, it is these variables that drive most of the others in the

 model. But the direction of their impact is not unambiguous. The am-

 biguity arises from the transfer problem. And the most important vari-

 ables affected by the transfer problem are asset prices, including the

 exchange rate. Neither the short-run nor medium—run response of the

exchange rate to commercial policy is determinately signed, as we now proceed to

describe. The point and others in this section can be shown more pre-

cisely by algebraic manipulation of the equations in Appendix A.

     The immediate influence of commercial policy is to raise one country's

trade balance and hence income (say l's, without loss of generality)

and lower the other's. Higher income in 1 generates a demand for cash

(equation (10.1)) and for acquisition of non—money assets (equation (8.1))

that forces adjustment of equities prices (in particular        and of any

commodities prices that are flexible (altering the price index
                                                                 P1).
Equity—price adjustment may be up or down, even under stable expectations,

depending on the relative strengths of extra demands for cash (downward

pressure on      and for non—money assets (upward pressure on

Commodity—price adjustment may alter income further, although not so drama-

tically as to offset the rise due directly to commercial policy.

     Higher income in 1 generates a "desired" capital—account deficit!
                                                                       24




current—account surplus in order to import additional wealth (equation

7.1)) over the medium run (this effect remains despite any additional

wealth created by potential capital gains on equities). But the desired

current—account surplus may be greater or less than the actual current—

account surplus created by the commercial policy in the first instance.

This difference between desired and actual trade in assets from l's point

of view forces adjustment of the tradeable asset's price in l's currency,

Pf1 that can be in either direction, even under stable expectations.26

     In 2, lower income generates a stock demand for less cash (equation

10.2)) and smaller desired net wealth (equation (8.2)). These force

adjustment of flexible equities prices and commodities prices. There

remains, however, after these adjustments, an incentive in 2 for additional

indebtedness to 1 (larger F). This can of course be realized through

capital—account surpluses/current—account deficits (equation (7.2)).

But the desired current—account deficit may be greater or less than the

actual deficit that commercial policy has created for 2. This difference

between desired and actual trade in assets from 2's point of view forces

adjustment of the tradeable asset's price in 2's currency, f 2' that can

be in either direction.

     The upshot is that the exchange rate, the relative price of inter-

nationally traded assets (Pf1/Pf2) can be altered by commercial policy

in either direction in the short run. The direction in which the ex-

change rate moves depends on a comparison of the actual capital movements

that commercial policy causes through current account alterations to the
 desired capital movements for each country that commercial policy also cause:.

 These desired capital movements must be consistent with the income trans-

 fers (and price adjustments) that commercial policy brings about in the

 first place through the current account.

      It is interesting that, in contrast to Boyer (1977), Djajic (1981),

 and many others, none of these conclusions depends qualitatively on whether

 a country is a creditor (as is 1) or a debtor (as is 2), as long as the

 debtor nation's capital stock exceeds the value of its net international

 indebtedness (pK2 —              The peculiar dependence of results on net
                       Pf2F>O).
 international indebtedness in many papers with a similar flavor to this

one27 may rest on the neglect of freely—owned, "unattached" national net

worth.

     The short—run effects of commercial policy on interest rates and equity

yields (r.) can also be positive or negative, just as are the capital val-

uation effects Imposed by adjustment of      and Pf1. Since much modern

commercial policy can be anticipated (see the introduction), some of these

adjustments to asset prices, including exchange—rate adjustments, might

actually lead the commercial policy in time. They would also be stretched

out in smaller increments per period the earlier tFe anticipation can be

formed (see, for analogy, Fischer (1979), Wilson (1979)). Since the   exc
rate would then be adjusting slowly to an anticipated level that is eit

higher or lover than it would be without commercial policy, current—acco

and income deviations from trend may have the oppOsite sign in anticipati:

of commercial policy from the sign that they have subsequent to its impl-i:

tation, This of course further complicates the issue of what modern   c
                                                                      26




 policy does to income and the current account. Not only do rent—like rev-

 enues matter, but so do anticipations of commercial policy.

      The analogy to the transfer problem should now be even clearer. Coin—

mercial policy, like exogenous shocks to the capital account, creates a

 change in asset trade that must be accomodated in the short run. In both

 the transfer problem and commercial policy the implied income effects and

their disposition for goods and asset purchases may be large enough that

induced international trade in goods and assets just matches the exogenous

shock to it (with the opposite sign). Or it may not, in which case pressures

will be brought to bear on asset prices in each country and on the exchange

rate to induce compensatory goods and asset trade.

     The important conclusion for commercial policy from the transfer per-

spective is that exchange rate changes may not dampen any of its effects,

in contrast to what is apparently most economist's intuition. There is no

clear answer to whether or not coimnercial policy is less effective (for any

purpose) or less politically appealing under floating exchange rates than

under fixed.

     The medium—run effects of commercial policy on the exchange rate are

just as troublesome. The rate may be higher or lower than before the conuner—

cial policy.28 Since, however, over time both countries approach equality

of actual and desired asset holdings (equations (8)), l's period—by—period

offers to buy F (through capital—account deficits) will be gradually smaller

as will 2's period—by--period offers to sell F (through capital—account sur—

pluses), Pf1 will fall over time and Pf2 will rise, leading l's "currency"

to appreciate gradually relative to 2's from whatever its short—run value
                                                                      27




 would have been otherwise. While this seems closer to common intuition

 regarding the effect of commercial policy on the exchange rate, it is

 not really closer. Intuition suggests an immediate and indefinite appre-

 ciation of l's currency from its original value. The present model suggests

 instead immediate appreciation or depreciation, followed by gradual appre-

 ciation over time, and culminating in a value for l's currency that may

 be higher or lower than its original value.

      As another implication of restoring equilibrium to stock demands for

 and supplies of assets, current account surpluses and deficits will vanish

 in the medium run. This effect alone would tend to restore national incomes

 toward their levels prior to commercial policy. But commercial policy will

 have caused country 1 to accumulate additional F claims and country 2 to

incur additional F liabilities in the medium run. Country l's earnings on

these additional assets (c times the growth in F) will keep its income higher

than it was prior to the commercial policy, and perhaps even higher than

during the short run after the commercial policy (i.e., l's income level

could rise immediately and then gradually over time). Country 2's additional

debt service payments (c times the growth in F/e) will keep its income lower

than it was prior to the commercial policy, and perhaps even lower than its

immediate post—policy short—run value.

     It is clear from this account that commercial policy will cause a pos-

itive medium—run change in the international services account balance for

country 1, whose net international claims rise. This change persists in-

definitely. And correspondingly, commercial policy will cause a negative

and indefinite change in the same account for country 2, whose net international
                                                                            28




 indebtedness rises. The more interesting complement to this conclusion

 is that commercial policy causes the merchandise trade balance of country

 1 to be more negative during and indefinitely after the medium run, and

 the merchandise trade balance of country 2 to be ultimately and indef-

 initely more positive. Commercial policy that improves the medium—term

 income position of a country causes the trade balance to deteriorate, and

 conversely. To put it somewhat loosely, one cannot be a protectionist in

 the medium run on both nationalist and mercantilist grounds. Or looser

 still, commercial policy aimed at protecting domestic producers of goods

 will nevertheless lead services (capital services) to have a larger share

of medium term exports.


                      LONG—RUN CONCLUSIONS "IN PRINCIPLE"

        When the long run is defined as above, then commercial policy has the

potential also for affecting capital formation and aggregate supply. One

mechanism     by which it   might do so is a change in "Tobin's q," the ratio

of   the market price of a claim to the existing capital stock            to the
market price of a replacement piece of capital (p11, assuming that output
and capital are the same commodity before capital is "sealed" in place). As

we have seen, import barriers can either raise or lover stock—market prices
        in   the short and medium runs, depending on    parameter values. But
their   effect on   domestic   prices (p..)   is more predictable. Import barriers
tend   to raise domestic prices as frustrated import demand spills over into

domestic production of substitutes. (Theexceptional case where import

barriers can lower          is more likely the more price—inelastic is import
                                                                     29




 demand and/or the larger is the share of implied revenues that foreigners

 take (i.e., the larger is 01, 02).) Thus there is a presumption in this

 model that import barriers reduce the ratio of the market value of capital

 to its replacement cost. This finding is noteworthy because it suggests

 that import barriers can be stagflationary in their long—run effects, re-

 ducing the capital stock and aggregate supply.

      This does not seem to be the place to discuss the open—economy impacts

of the capital formation and destruction that commercial policy prompts

during the transition from medium— to long—run equilibrium by changing

asset valuation and capital—goods prices. But it is worth pointing out

that the exchange rate interacts with all other asset prices in this model,

in a manner described by equations (3) and (4). There is thus clear inter-

dependence in the trajectories over time of exchange rates, equity prices,

'and flexible goods prices that make possible a number of alternative pre-

dictions for the long—run effects of commercial policy on exchange rates.

     Finally, the distinction drawn above between medium—run and long—run

consequences of commercial policy may seem at this point too sharp. The

effects of commercial policy on capital formation and aggregate supply are

not necessarily slower in reaching fruition than is the elimination of

current—account imbalance through asset (F) trade. These adjustments may

well occur simultaneously, contrary to the implied assumption of standard

and familiar trade—theoretic models that current—account balance will be

attained with fixed factor endowments. Any overlapping of medium—term

capital—stock adjustment with medium—term current—account adjustment of
                                                                         30




 course alters the pattern of the latter, and alters also the concomitant

 adjustment of exchange rates and other asset prices.


                        MEDIUM—RUN CONCLUSIONS "IN PRACTICE"

      The transfer aspects of modern commercial policy make many of its

 consequences conditional on circumstances and parameters. The important

questions then become how likely some of the more anomalous consequences

really are, and how quantitatively significant. To answer such questions,

the model was empirically paranieterized to make country 1 reflect a stylized

"United States," and country 2, a stylized "rest of the world," in the late

1970's. The details of the empirical parameterization are found in Appendix.

B. Its implications for quantitative medium—run multipliers are summarized in

Table 1. Each entry in the table is the medium—run elasticity of an endo—

genous variable with respect to an exogenous reduction in imports (that is,

the signs of the elasticities with respect to D12 and          are reversed

in order to capture the effects of lower D12 and D21). Medium—run multi-

pliers are highlighted because they correspond to what would be obtained

from adding asset markets and explicit foreign exchange transactions to the

most familiar fixed—endowment, balanced—trade, general—equilibrium models

of commercial policy.

     Several findings are notable.

     (1) There is no sign ambiguity in the way import barriers affect U.S.

nominal income (Y1). But in the face of a fixed money stock, the quantita-

tive impact is very small. A ten percent shrinkage of imports is calculated

to increase U.S. nominal income by less than two tenths of one percent.

     (2) "Real" U.S. income (consumption possibilities)29 is by contrast,
                                                                                            31

                                                        Table   1

                                 ESTIMATED DItJN-RtJN PERCENTAGE EFFECTS OF
                                A ONE PERCENT REDUCTION IN IMPORTS CD12, D21)


                                         U.S. Imports (D21)            Rest—of—World Imports (D12)

                                           Distribution of                       Distribution of
                                                            a
                                         Rent—Like Revenues                    Rent—Like Revenuesa
                                 0
                                     I =0     0i 0.5         01 =1     0.=O
                                                                        1
                                                                                    01 =0.5       O.=1
                                                                                                  1
Nominal Income
    —       U.S.   (Y1)
                                 0.01525       0.01514      0.01247   —0.01596      —0.01744     —0.01338
    — R of W (Y2)               —0.00213      —0.00225     —0.00491    0.00229       0.00081      0.00487


Exchange Rate Ce)                1.106         1.047       —0.363     —1.139       —1.921         0.225

Net U.S.
Financial Claims                 0.3333        0.3192      —0.0224    —0.3444      —0.5338       —0.0143
on R of W (F)

Global Interest                                0.00281     —0.00100   -0.00306     —0.00517       0.00063
                                 0.00297
Rates (r1                 r2)

Tobin's q
    —    u.s.                   —0.0505       —0.0504      —0.0466     0.1287       0.1308        0.1250
    —    R of W                  0.0337        0.0339       0.0377    —0.0081      —0.0060       —0.0118

National
Consumption
Possibilitiesb
    —    U.S.                   —0.1596       —0.1324      —0.1116    0.2353        0.2199        0.1172
    — R      of W                0.0743        0.0539       0.0357    —0.0481      —0.0574       —0.0375



a           = 0    records effects when residents of the region restricting its imports
                   collect all the implied rent—like revenues, e.g., as for a one percent
                   reduction in imports brought about by a tariff of the appropriate size.

    0.
        1
            =0.5   records effects when residents of the region restricting its imports collect
                   half of the implied rent—like revenues, with the remainder going to resi-
                   dents of the other region.

            = 1    records effects when residents of the region restricting its imports
                   collect none of the implied rent—like revenues, i.e., when that region's
                   terms of trade decline (maximally) from its import barriers because its
                   trading partners take advantage of monopoly or political power to discrim-
                   inate perfectly and charge the full price that their customers' restricted
                   market will bear, approximated most closely by voluntary export quotas.
b
    Or real national economic welfare. See text and footnote 29 for calculation.
                                                                          32




significantly reduced by import barriers, falling by as much as 1.6 percent

from a ten percent reduction in imports. This figure is considerably larger

than most traditional estimates of the welfare cost of U.S. trade barriers.

Virtually all of its magnitude is due to increased import prices, hardly

offset at all by higher nominal income in the U.S. Import prices are higher

whether imports are restricted by tariffs (O = 0) or by the most extreme

voluntary export quotas (O =      1).   In the former case, dollar depreciation

more than offsets lower prices for importables in foreign currency (p22) that

U.S. import barriers force abroad. In the latter case, the U.S. is forced as

a nation to pay foreign suppliers the full higher dollar price of imports

      that import barriers force domestically. It is the exchange—rate

effects of commercial policy that cause the curious conclusion that the

welfare cost of import barriers is greater the larger the U.S. share of their

rent—like revenues.

     (3) Contrary to most familiar intuition, U.S. tariffs and other import

barriers can cause equilibrium dollar depreciation in the medium term. The

effects are quantitatively the most dramatic in the table, with the only

elasticities greater than one. In the two cases where import barriers cause

dollar depreciation, the nominal income transfer from the rest of the world

to the U.S. is large enough to increase U.S. portfolio demand for tradeable

financial assets (F) even though real wealth effects work to reduce it (see

below). The income transfer drives up the dollar value of tradeable assets

       and drives down their foreign—currency value (Pf2) forcing dollar

depreciation (e =                 When, however, foreigners seize most of the
                      Pf1/Pf2).
rent—like revenues from U.S. commercial policy (0. =     1),   the nominal income
                                                                         33




transfer to the U.S. is smaller and is swamped by lower real wealth in the

U.S. and higher real wealth abroad (see below). U.S. portfolio demand for

tradeable financial assets falls, as does their dollar price. Their foreign

currency price and the foreign—exchange value of the dollar rise.

        (4) Equilibrium real U.S. wealth is reduced in the medium run by import

barriers in exactly the same proportion as real income, given their propor-

tionality in equations (8). Import barriers can impoverish a region not

only in current purchasing power, but also in future purchasing power.

        (5) Real U.S. income and wealth would be reduced even further in the

long run, when account is taken of the shrinkage in the physical capital

stock that import barriers cause by depressing Tobin's q ——    the   ratio of

capital's market value to its replacement cost. To calculate these additional

welfare costs of import barriers, It would be necessary to know the elasticity

of the physical capital stock with respect to divergences of q from 1. A

ten percent reduction in imports is calculated to reduce U.S. q by roughly

half of one percent.

       Many of these calculations, and many of the observations that precede

them, have an unfamiliar flavor. It is worth reminding the reader therefore

in closing that most of the discussion is based on the marriage of two models

that   are   in isolation both familiar and well understood. One is the standard

general—equilibrium    model with which commercial policy is usually analyzed
in pure trade theory (albeit without production substitution); the other is
the    asset—approach/portfolio—balance model of exchange rates and international

asset trade. One lesson from the exercise is that we can't always predict

the personality of offspring from the personalities of parents. But the most

important lesson is that floating exchange rates do have serious implications

for the question of what commercial policy does.
                                               34




                                          APPENDIX     A




                  ALGEBRAIC MANIPULATION OF THE MEDIUM—RUN MODEL




        In   the medium   run, Y1 =         and substitution of equations (5) and (6)

into either (2.1) or (2.2) yields


                          0 =           + A2(eY2) + cF;                                          (Al)
                                —A1Y1

where
                               =        — (l_Oj)(l.i)(D./D.1),

and where        is the shorthand notation adopted here for the function

Log differentiation of equation (Al) making use of equation (1) generates an

equation that links the endogenous Y1' Y2' F, and e ——                       or,   more revealingly

for what follows, the endogenous ,              Y2     F, and Ce-F) ——         to   the exogenous B12 and

B21, where for any variables Z, Z              dZ/Z.

    Log differentiation of equations (10) yields equations (A2.1) and (A2.2)

below, which use: the differentiated version of (9) to replace W; the dif-

ferentiated version of (4) to replace                  with         —
                                                                        ri   (c1 and K1 being con-

stant); the differentiated version of (3) to replace f 1 with — and f2 with

—r2 —        and the relationship . =           +    .,     where


                          e     = (1—.)(D../D..) — .fi..
                           1         1  13 11 iJ   131
                                                        .
                                                                  35




The resulting equations are:


                       o     = —[E                       + (y + y                                  Jr1                  (A2.l)
                                                                                           1,1

                                                 (1
                                                             Yk1)EL,WIY1

                                     +[y E                   IF
                                                  1' 1


                                     _[EL W
                                            1' 1


                       o     =                           +   k2 —           -y                                          (A2.2)
                                                                                 2)E         ,     Jr2
                                                                                           2' 2

                                            - (1 -
                                                             Y)EL           ,W


                                                                        —
                                     +[1f2 EL ,W


                                     —[E
                                           L2,
                                                 ]8
                                                 2



where E            stands for the absolute value of the elasticity of variable Z
                                                                                a
            ZaZb
with respect to variable                     and         where ki81 y. are the shares of physical
capital and tradeable assets in i's total wealth.

      Since in the medium run, Wdi =                                    the right hand sides of equations (8)
                                                                  W1,
and   (9)   can be equated. Differentiation of the resulting equations and re-

placement of kj and          fi       as above generates:


                                             l-yId                                     y
                       r1 =           —[
                                                  + -rf1Jy 1
                                                             +                                         IF;              (A3.l)
                                            kl                                   'kl             f 1



                                                                                       f2                         -
                       r-2                                   2                                           -'
                                 =                                ]Y2 + [                              ](e    —   F).   (A3.2)
                                      —[
                                            k2
                                                     —
                                                             f2                   k2
                                                                                       —
                                                                                            'f    2
                                                           36




 These can be used to replace                       and          on the right hand side of (A2.l) and

 (A2 .2).


          The resulting equations can               be solved for F and for ( — F)                           to yield:



              A
              F   =    [1 +    lEL1,r1
                                            + 1kl + 1f1
                                                         A
                                                        jyl —
                                                                           kl   + 1f l)EL,w              A
                                                                                                                    (A4)
                                          E                                           E                 JC1;
                                      1f1                                      1fl
                                            L1,r1                                         L1,r1

 A
(e    —
          A
          F)      =   [—1   + 11EL2,r2
                                            + ''k2 —
                                                          1f 2   A
                                                                     —
                                                                         'k2    —
                                                                                      If 2)EL     '
                                                                                                      W2 A
                                           E                                          E                             (A5)
                                          2 L2,r2                              1f 2
                                                                                          L2,r2


where             is the share of cashbalances in i's total wealth                                      +        + 1f1 =
      +                        1).   The sum of (A4) and (A5) then yields an equation that
                      1f 2 =

expresses             as a function of the endogenous Y's and the exogenous C11s.

          Since by equations (3) and the assumption of perfect substitutability

among non—money assets (or really just a constant proportional rela-

tionship among their rates of return), r1 =                                the right—hand sides of (A3.l)
                                                                     r2,
and   (A3.2) can be equated, and (A4)                and (A5) can          be used to eliminate F and
(e   — F)
          in the resulting equation. The ultimate equation is very simple:




                         0= [1              ]
                                                                                                                   (A6)



                                      1
                               -[           JY
                               —
                                            1
                                            jCi
                                   IELw         A
                               +
                                            ]C2.
                                     2,r2
                                                          37



        The differentiated version of (Al), and (A4), (A5), and (A6) consti-

tute a system of 4 independent equations relating 4 endogenous unknowns ——

i' 2             and           (or —)    —— to 2 exogenous import variables              and D21.

and      are solely dependent on                           and         Solution of this 4x4 system

would give reduced—form expressions for all the variables, but those

for      and         are most useful. Once they are determined, F can be obtained

recursively using (A4) and                       can be obtained recursively using the sum of

(A4) and (A5).

        The reduced—form expressions for                         and    are the following divided by




             =                                        —
                                         ]
                                                 (A       A2)                                   (A7.l)


                 + tf2kl +

                           + 1fl
                                    e2EL2,r2
                                                      + k2 - Yf2fl
                                                                   1,w1         i
                 —
                       If l122,W2EL1,r1]                   c2


         2
             =
                       f
                           y E
                                 L2,r2
                                         )
                                                 1    —                                         (A7.2)


                 —
                                                          c1
                       f21elk1,W1EL2,r2]
                 +                           +    'kl + f1
                     EIf2(Y]1,r1
                           +                 —
                                                 1f
                               ''f1k2                       EL2,W2 c2

where
                                              38



              =                     + Yk] + fl +                  + 'k2 —
                  Yf2(YI1EL   ,r1                  f1(1e2EL2,r2

         6 =
                  A2(eY2)/[A2(eY2) + cF];

                     are dependent solely on         and D21 as sketched above.


         Tobin's q is defined in the model as                    and the proportional

change    in      its equilibrium value is therefore         —
                                                                      k1    is equal to

     —        from equations (4), and an expression for            in terms of Y1, l2'
         r1
and D21 can be obtained from equations (5) and (6). Equations (A3) and (A7)

can then be employed           to   obtain the reduced—form expression for the change in

q.
                                       39




                                APPENDIX B

                          EMPIRICAL PARANETERIZATI ON



Equation (4):

          is assumed to be equal to      based on Kuznets (1959, P. 9 passim),

and is defined as the share in national income of income from assets ——

rental   income, corporate profits, and net interest. For the U.S. in

1979, a 0.1888 = (30.5 + 196.8 + 143.4)/1963.3 (Source: Economic Report

of the President, January 1981, pp. 254—255).

Equation (5):

          is defined as the share of imports in national absorption.

   =   (Value of D21)/E1 = (Value of D21)/(Gross National Product (GNP) in
1 —   Value of D12 + Value of D21) = 0.1116 = 267.9/(2413.9 — 281.3 + 267.9)
(Source: Economic Report of the President, January 1981, p. 233).

   =   (Dollar   value of D12)/(Dollar GNP in 2 —   Dollar   value of D21 +

Dollar value of D12) = 0.0375 =     281.3/(7486.7   — 267.9 + 281.3). (The source

for dollar values of D12 and D21 is the same as above; the source for the

dollar value of world non—U.S. GNP is the 1981 edition of World Bank Atlas,

the sum of dollar GNP at market prices for all countries listed).

                    is equal to the absolute value of the own—price elasticity
       j( )/D1
of import dnand less 1. Stern, et al. (1976, p. 15 passim) suggest

—1.61 as the "best" estimate of the own—price elasticity of U.S. import

dnand,   and —1.41 as the "best" estimate of the own—price elasticity of
foreign demand for imports from the U.S. Thus j( )/D21           = 0.66;
                                         40




 ( )/D1 = 0.41.           These estimates are crucial for parameterizing A in

 Appendix A.


 Equation (8):

          is assumed to be equal to           based on Kuznets (1959, pp. 17—20),

 and is defined as the ratio of tangible assets (except military) to GNP.

For the U.S. on average from 1947 to 1958, y = 3.600 and was very stable

over that entire period. (Source: Goldsmith (1962, pp. 4, 117)). The

same value was assumed to hold in the late 1970's.


Equation (9):

       Using y1 = W11Y1 =       = w2IY2 = 3.600 from Equation (8), a value
for the U.S. capital stock (puL1) at the end of 1979 can be obtained from

the equation W1 = 3.600         =
                                    L + p.R1 + pflF, and from values f or
($2,377,090 million in 1979 from the 1981 edition of World Bank Atlas),

for L1($389,800 million at the end of 1979 from the heading "money" in the

May 1981 issue of International Financial Statistics), and for Pf1F defined

as the net International investment position of the United States ($94,959

million at the end of 1979 from the August 1980 issue of the Survey of

Current Business, p. 51). From this a value of U.S. wealth at the end of

1979 can be calculated ($8,557,524 million) and U.S. wealth shares:

      = 0.0456, k1 = 0.9434, 1f = 0.0111.          Comparable wealth shares for

the rest of the world can be calculated from the equation eW2 =                      =
                                                                        3.600(eY2)
      + ep2K2 —           and from values for eY2 ($7,486,653 million in 1979
eL2               ePf2F
from the 1981 edition of World Bank Atlas), for 2($1,834,038 million at

the end of 1979 from summing the product of money stocks and current

market exchange rates for all countries except the U.S. in the May 1981
                                          41



issue of International Financial Statistics) and for en F(=               F
                                                             f2     Pf1
($94,959 million as above). From this a dollar value of global non—U.S.

wealth at the end      of   1979 can be calculated ($26,951,951 million) and

global non—U.S. wealth shares:
                                      y2 0.0536, 'k2 = 0.9499, Yf2 = 0.0035.

Equation (10):

        A reasonable consensus estimate of the absolute values of E.           and

        was taken to be 0.7 based on Laidler (1977, P. 125 passim). Estimates
EL
  2'2
of EL       and             are much scarcer, especially In a money—demand
                  EL
     1,1            2'2
equation like (10) that inclues income as well as wealth. Goldfeld (1973,

p. 614, equation (4)) provides one such estimate for the U.S., for which

the medium—run counterpart is 0.118. That estimate of EL      (and, by
                                                         1' 1
assumption, EL W    is also almost exactly equal to the average of two such
              2' 2
estimates provided by Neltzer (1963, p. 240), one for a narrow definition

of money and one for a broad definition of money.
                                               42




Equations (Al), (A7.l), and (A7.2).

        Values of A1 are necessary to obtain a value of 6(= A2eY2/(A2eY2 + cF)).

Values of A1 depend on 0,                    arid D1/D11. The last two are obtained from

information above, and 01 is treated parametrically. For 01 =                         0,   A1 =

—0.1172, A2 = —0.0357.           For 0 0.5, A1 = —0.0028, A2 = 0.0009.                     For

01 =    1,   A,1 =   0.1116, A2 = 0.0375.       To obtain the corresponding values of

6 for the three values of 0,                 and eY2 are obtained from the data above,
                                        A2
and eF is set equal (using equation 3.1) to r1Pf1F and thence (using

equation 4.1) to (alYl/pklKl)pflF, establishing its value at $5,280

million, For 01             0, 6 =   1.0202.    For 01 =     0.5,   6 =   0.5593.   For 01 =      1,
6 =   0.9815.        It is worth noting that        for   certain values of           6 can be

made to become 0 or to become infinitely large in a negative direction.

In both cases, the reduced form equations have finite limits, Equations

(A7.i), for example, suggest maximal                values   of     that    are   roughly three

times   as    large as those estimated         in   Table 1. Not all other entries in

Table 1 would        be   three times   as   large, however, since         some (e.g.   the

effects on national consumption possibilities) are dominated by the

which are invariant to 6.
                                                                        43




                                  FOOTNOTE S



      'See   Meade (1951, Chapter XXI), Mundell (1961), Tower (1973),

and Eichengreen (1980) among others.


             observation has the same flavor and emerges for some of the

same reasons as Mussa's (1976, pp. 188 passim) conclusion that under

fixed exchange rates, a tariff may make the balance of payments and

the stock of official foreign exchange reserves either more positive

or more negative. Johnson (1966) and Eichengreen (1981) also demon-

strate the ambiguous effect that protection has on the exchange rate,

but in a model without asset trade. What raises the possibility there

is the presence of traded intermediate goods, with the resulting poten-

tial for negative (effective) protection. A recent empirical model of

this sort that yields similar conclusions is that of Deardorff and

Stern (1980).


     3mis is the way of interpreting the neglect of any monetary

variables or exchange rates in standard pure—trade—theoretic approaches

to commercial policy. It also seems to be what Blackhurst and Tumlir

(1980, pp. 3, 13) have in mind when they remark, "The economic value of

trade liberalization is not affected by increased variability of nominal

exchange rates.... exchange rate fluctuations in no way reduce the im-

portance of efforts to liberalize world trade." For a strongly dissenting
                                                                        44




 view, based on less familiar general—equilibrium models, see Chipman

 (1978, 1980).


         necessary condition is that import demand be own—price inelastic,

as noted by Meade (1951, pp. 279—280, 281) and Tower (1973, PP. 453).


      5Boyer (1977, pp. 224—225, 228) rules out such effects explicitly.

Yet there seem to be no behavioral or conceptual grounds for doing so.

If there is reason to believe that commercial policy affects aggregate

income and price levels significantly, and if these in turn affect aggre-

gate asset preference significantly, then their influence cannot be

neglected on any second—order—of—smallness grounds. Nor can it be

neglected even when industry—specific commercial policy is analyzed

in a disaggregated multi—sectoral model. Although the aggregate income!

price effects of such industry—specific commercial policy may   be   small

(even infinitesimal), they will necessarily induce similarly dimensioned

small (or infinitesimal) effects on aggregate asset preference. The

asset preference effects therefore can never be small relative to the

income—price effects and should never be excluded. Boyer does ascribe

such an exclusion to Nundell (1961) and Sobmen (1969), but it seems

more exactly that they ruled out effects of commercial policy on real

savings and investment (no Laursen—Metzler effects), and said nothing

about asset preference.


       natural reaction seems to be that these barriers to exchange—rate
                                                                        45




 neutrality are quantitatively small. Yet it seems difficult to argue

 that they are small relative to the traditional effects of commercial

 policy and should therefore be ignored.


         7A detailed discussion of the reduced form of the model for each

 of its three time horizons (see below) seemed inappropriate in the text.

 Reduced—form equations for the most important variables are derived in

 Appendix A. Equations for others are implied there as well.


      8See, for example, footnotes 5 and 6..


      9Boyer's (1977), Eichengreen's (1980) and Djajic's (1981) models

start from the same perspective. But Eichengreen applies his to tariffs

only, and Boyer and Djajic apply theirs to border tax adjustments (equl—

proportional changes in import tariffs and export subsidies) that are

equivalent to devaluation—revaluation under pegged exchange rates, except

for their wealth effects. Only Djajic presents a fully symmetric bilateral

model. Boyer exploits the small—country assumption instead, and Eichengreen

suppresses some foreign repercussions. All obscure the way in which commer-

cial policy creates a transfer problem. Other similarities and differences

will be noted below.


    10Despite mention of lump—sum transfer payments and neutral income

subsidies at one point, Boyer (1977, P. 225) appears to neglect them in

calculating income. This neglect is appropriate if Boyer's import tariff

revenues are used to finance his export subsidies. See also Djajic (1981,

p. 5).
                                                                    46




     11This discussion reveals that 8. could also be treated as the share

of tariff revenues paid by one country to another as a result of any

compensation arrangements sanctioned by the General Agreement on Tariffs

and Trade.


     12Boyer (1977) ignores this. Eichengreen (1980) avoids it by focusing

on non—interest—bearing monetary assets only. Djajic (1981) avoids it by

taxing it away domestically, and unilaterally transferring it back to the

foreign country.


     '3The conclusions from the paper will hold without alteration if

the assets are imperfect substitutes whose relative rates of return are

invariant to conimercialpolicy. Given this, or the stronger assumption

of perfect substitutability, it is straightforward, although cumbersome,

to allow international holdings of equities as well as non—secured finan-

cial assets.


     14 earlier version of the paper allowed equations (4) to capture

what might be defended as an additional characteristic of modern conimer—

cial policy: what rent—like revenues it does create are likely to be

reflected in large part in profits, and distributed to owners of physi-

cal capital (equities), not to labor. This distributive concentration

of the spoils of commercial policy would lead equations (4) to be re—

written as

                      =         — (1 —
               r          [Y1            i)piiQij/pkiKi,         (4'.i)
                                                                                 47




 and would be consistent with the institutional concentration of pricing,

hiring, and export decisions on owners of capital, and also with the

forces that continue to press management to pay workers only the value

of their marginal product. It is important in the specification to note

that when foreign sales are restricted, labor's marginal product is

worth           the domestic price of the product, since additional output

must be sold domestically. Other specifications than (4) are of course

plausible. One could treat parametrically the division of commercial

policy's rent—like revenues between domestic labor and capital, as done

with e• for their international division. Or one could allocate commer—
      1
cial   policy's rent—like revenues only to owners of existing capital,

and not to those who might be induced to engage in long—run capital

formation (see below) because of altered investment incentives.


       15The important implication of the literature on "rent—seeking"

(Krueger (1974), Bhagwati (1980), or for a context close to that of this

paper, Leith (1980)) ——       that   "rent—seeking" uses up resources ——   is
avoided, however, by treating parametrically the internal and inter-

national distribution of "rents."

       16                 .                       .
            Each equation is of course unaffected if
                       .
                                                       each   variable is made

"real" through deflation by some price index.


       17When   the   right hand sides of (8) and (9) are set equal to each

other, and (10) is substituted in, the resulting equation is the implicit

portfoUo demand equation for non—money assets (made up of the perfectly

substitutable financial assets and equities). See Appendix B.
                                                                         48




     '8Because .      itself   is a function of p1./p.., the index does not

have fixed weights.


     19The demand for cash balances must be wealth inelastic (see Henderson

(1980)) in order to assure stability, and also because otherwise simul-

taneous increases in the price level (P.) and nominal income (Y.), ceteris

paribus, would cause reduced demand for cash balances, an undesirable and

incredible result.


           Eichengreen (1980) and Djajic (1981) focus on horizons with

endogenous expectations. Theirs are, in addition, rational.



   21The capital stock might begin to adjust during the so—called

"medium" run   as   well, as discussed below.


       If capital represents accumulated foreign goods, as might be more

typical in developing countries, then its replacement cost is p1. If

two kinds of capital exist, being defined as productive stocks of the

two different kinds of output in the model, then matters become more

complex.


     23See Neade (1951), Nundell (1961), Tower (1973), Eichengreen (1980),

among others.


     24The short—run movement in the trade balance is the correspondent

to the short—run movement in income, of course.
                                                                            49




           25Other parameters play a role as well, principally those from

portfolio behavior, in a complicated configuration. They, however, do

not seem capable by themselves of generating the anomalous link between

commercial policy, income, and the trade balance.


          26There are feedback effects of this on flexible prices elsewhere

in the system but these are ignored in the verbal summary.

          27Henderson and Rogoff (1981) contains extensive references and

    further discussion.


          28The same is true of other asset prices and rates of return. They

may be made higher or lower in the medium run by commercial policy.


          29Real income or consumption possibilities might also be described as

real national purchasing power or welfare. It is defined as nominal income

          deflated by a variable—weight index of the "national" cost of living:

(1 —                 + [02p21/p1 + (1 —                     The national cost
          1)p11/p1                         O2)ep22/e°p2].
of living is composed of two elements: the price of domestic merchandise

           and the average price to the nation of imported merchandise t.2p21 +

      —
          0ei22L    reflecting the fact that foreign suppliers capture a share

e    of   the rent—like revenues from modern commercial policy.
                                                                       50




                                      REFERENCES



Bhagwati, J. (1980), "Directly—unproductive profit—seeking Activities:

    A Theoretical Generalization," processed, October.


Blackhurst, R., and J. Tumlir (1980), Trade Relations Under Flexible

     change Rates, GATT Studies in International Trade, Number 8, Geneva:

     General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

Boadway, LW., and J.M. Treddenick (1978), "A General Equilibrium Compu-

     tation of the Effects of the Canadian Tariff Structure," Canadian

     Journal.of Economics, 11, 424—446.

Boyer, R.S. (1977), "Commercial Policy Under Alternative Exchange Rate

     Regimes," Canadian Journal of Economics, 10 , 218—232,

Branson, W.H, (1977), "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange Rate

     Determination," Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen, Band 1, 69—89.

Brunner, K. and A.H. Mltzer (1963), "Predicting Velocity: Implications

     for Theory and Policy," Journal of Finance, 18, 319—354.

Chipman, JS. (1978), "A Reconsideration of the Elasticity Approach to

     Balance—of—Payments Adjustment Problems," in J.S. Dreyer, ed.,

     Breadth and Depth in Economics: Fritz Machluy —— The Man and His

     Ideas, Lexington, Massachusetts: D.C. Heath.

__________   (1980),   "Exchange—Rate Flexibility and Resource Allocation,"

     in J.S. Chipinan and C.P. Kindleberger, eds., Flexible Exchanje Rates

    and the Balance of Payments: Essays in Mem ofon Sohinen,

    Amsterdam: North Holland.
                                                                        51




 Corden, W.M. (1971), The Theory of Protection, London: Oxford University

      Press.

 Deardorff, A.V. and R.M. Stern (1980), "Tariff and Exchange—Rate Protection

      Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates in the Major Industrialized

      Countries," Research Seminar in International Economics Seminar Dis—

      cussion Paper Number 99, University of Michigan,

Djajic, Slobodan (1981), "Monetary and Commercial Policy in a Two—Country

     Flexible Exchange Rate Model with Perfect Capital Mobility," processed,

     May.

Dudley, L. (1981), "Review" of J,P, Martin and A. Smith, Trade and Payments

     Adjustment Under Flexible Exchange Rates, Journal of Money, Credit and

     Banking, 13, 262—264.

Eichengreen, B.J. (1980), "A Dynamic Model of Tariffs, Output and Employment

     Under Flexible Exchange Rates," Harvard Institute of Economic Research

     Discussion Paper Number 793, forthcoming in the Journal of International

     Economics.

_________ (1981), "Effective Protection and Exchange Rate Determination,"
     Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 822,

     forthcoming in P.J.IC Kouri. and J.B. de Macedo, eds.., Balance

     of Payments Adjustment and Exchane Rate Dynamics: The Portfolio Approach,

     New York: New York University Press.

Fischer, S. (1979), "Anticipations and the Nonneutrality of Money," Journal

     of Political Economy, 87, 225—252.
                                                                      52




Frank, I.., C. Pearson, and J. Riedel (1979), The Implications of Managed

     Floating Exchange Rates for U.S. Trade Policy, New York University,

     Graduate School of Business Administration, Monograph Series in Finance

     and Economics, 197 9—1.

Friedman, N. (1969), "Discussion" (of a paper by C.P. Kindleberger), in

     R.E, Caves, et al., The International Adustment Mechanism, Boston:

     Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

__________   (1981), "Do Imports Cost Jobs?" Newsweek, (February 9), 77.
Goldfeld, S.N, (1973), "The Demand for Money Revisited," Brongspers

     on Economic Activity, 577—638.

Goldsmith, R.W. (1962), The National Wealth of the United States in the

     Postwar Period, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Henderson, D.W. (1980), "The Dynamic Effects of Exchange Market Intervention

     Policy: Two Extreme Views and a Synthesis," in H. Frisch and G.

     Schwodiauer, eds., The Economics of Flexible Exchange Rates, supple-

     ments to Kredit and Kapital 6.

_________ and K. Rogoff (1981), "Net Foreign Asset Positions and Stability
     in a World Portfolio Balance Model," Board of Governors of the Federal

     Reserve System International Finance Discussion Paper No. 178.

Johnson, R.G. (1966), "A Model of Protection and the Exchange Rate," Review

     of Economic Studies, 33, 159—163.

             (1976), "The Monetary Theory of Balance of Payments Policies,"

     in J.A. Frenkel and H.G, Johnson, eds., The Monetary ppoach to the

     Balance of Payments,   London:   George Allen and Unwin.
                                                                         53




 Kouri, P.J.K. (1976), "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in

      the Short Run and in the Long Run: A Monetary Approach,t'

      vian Journal of Economics, 78, 280—304.

 Krueger, A.0. (1974), "The Political Economy of the Rent—Seeking Society,"

      American   Economic Review, 64, 291—303.
 Kuznets,   S. (1959),   "Distribution of National Income by Factor Shares,"
      Economic Development and Cultural Chan,      7,   Part II, 1—70.

Laidler, D.E.W. (1977), The Demand for Money, New York: Dun Donnelley

Leith, J.C. (1980), "Import Quotas and Macroeconomic Balance in a Simple

     Dynamic Model," Canadian Journal of Economics, 13, 280—295.

Lucas, R. (1967), "Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply," Journal of

     Political Economy, 75, 321—334.

Meade, J.E, (1951), The Balance of Payments, London: Oxford University

     Press.

Meltzer, A.H. (1963), "The Demand for Money: The Evidence from the Time

     Series," Journal of Political Economy, 71, 219—246.

Mundell, R. (1961), "Flexible Exchange Rates and Employment Policy," Canadian

     Journal of Economics and Political Science, 27, 508—517

Mussa, H. (1976), "Tariffs and the Balance of Payments: A Monetary Approach,"

     in J.A. Frenkel and H.G. Johnson, eds., The Monetary Approach to the

    Balance of Payments, London: George Allen and Unwin.

Sohmen, E. (1961), Flexible Exchange Rates, Chicago: University of Chicago

    Press.
                                                                        54



Stern, R.M., J. Francis, and B. Schumacher, (1976), Price Elasticities

     in International Trade: An Ariotated Bibliography, London: Macmillan

     for the Trade Policy Research Center.

Tobin, J. (1969), "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,"

     Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 1, 15—29.

Tower, E. (1973), "Commercial Policy Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange

     Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87, 436—454.

Treadway, Arthur (1969), "On Rational Entreprenurial Behavior and the

    Demand for Investment," Review of Economic Studies, 36, 227—239.

Wilson, C.A. (1979), "Anticipated Shocks and Exchange—Rate Dynamics,"

    Journal of Political Economy, 87, 639—647.
