                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EFFECT OF UNIONS ON PRODUCTIVITY
           IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR: THE CASE OF LIBRARIES


                        Ronald G. Ehrenberg

                         Joshua L. Schwarz


                      Working Paper No. 117




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            July 1981




The research is supported by National Science Foundation Grant No.
DAR 8O.11279. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                  NEER Working Paper #717
                                                               July 1981




                     The Effect of Unions on Productivity In the

                       Public Sector: The Case of Libraries



                                       ABSTRACT



     This paper presents an analytical framework that can be used to analyze

the effects of unions on productivity in the public sector. Our initial

focus is on public libraries because
                                       considerable effort has been devoted

to conceptualizing library productivity measures and because of the avail-

ability of data to implement the framework.
                                                  Preliminary estimates are
presented based upon data from 71 municipal libraries in Massachusetts.

We conclude by indicating the direction that our future research on the

subject will take.




                                              Ronald C. Ehrenberg
                                              Joshua L. Schwarz
                                              New York State School of
                                               Industrial and Labor Relations
                                              Cornell University
                                              Ithaca, New York   14853

                                              (607) 256—3026
 I.    Introduction

      Research by economists on the economic effects of unions in the

 private sector has tended to focus on unions' effects on their members'

 relative earnings positions.   Following in the tradition of H.G. Lewfs'

 pioneering work, a large number of studies have addressed this question.'

 The more sophisticated ones use micro—level data and seek to control both

 for quality differentials and the possibility that wages and Uniofl Status

 may be simultaneously deteined.2 Most recently, other nonwage outcomes,

 such as job satisfaction and labor turnover, have been considered and

analysts have attempted to ascertain if part of any observed union/nonunion

wage differential merely compensates unionized employees for relatively

unfavorable nonpecuniary conditions of employment.3



'H.G. Lewis, Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States
                                                              (Chicago,
 University of Chicago Press, 1963).

2See Peter Schmidt and Robert Strauss, "The Effect of
                                                        Unions on Earnings and
 Earnings on Unions: A Mixed Logit Approach,"
                                                 International Economic Review
  (February 1976), Lung—Fe! Lee, "Unionism and WageRates: A Simultaneous
 Equations Model With Qualitative and Limited
                                               Dependent Variables,"
 national Economic Review (June 1978) and Peter Schmidt "Estimation of a
 Simultaneous Equations Model With Jointly Dependent Continuous and Quali-
 tative Variables: The Union—Earnings
                                       Question Revisited," International
 Economic Review (June 1978).

3See Gregg Duncan and Frank Stafford, "Do Union Members
                                                       Receive Compensating
Wage Differentials," American Economic Review
                                              (June 1980); George Borjas,
"Job Satisfaction, Wage and Unions," Journal of Human Resources (Winter
Richard Freeman, "Individual Mobility and Collective Voice in the Labor 1979);
Market," American Economic Review (May
                                       1976); and James Nedoff, "Layoffs and
Alternatives Under Trade Unions in United
Economic Review (June 1979).              States Manufacturing," American




                                  1
                                                                            2




     The traditional neoclassical view of unions asserts that although unions

may benefit their members, by creating noncompensating wage differentials

they cause allocative efficiency losses. Hence, their net impact on the

economy as a whole is thought to be negative.4 Recently, however, this view

has been challenged by Richard Freeman, James Nedoff, and their associates

at Harvard.5 Drawing on hypotheses put forth long ago by institutional

economists, they argue that unions may well increase productivity.   Such

increases may occur through a number of routes including union induced reduc-

tions in turnover, increases in morale and motivation, and increases in

formal and informal on—the—job training. Indeed, several of their econo-

metric studies suggest that union/nonunion productivity differentials in the

private sector are often positive.6 To the extent that these results are

generalizable, one must become much more agnostic on the question of whether

unions in the private sector have had net adverse efficiency effects.

     Research on the effects of unions in the public sector has paralleled

the private sector studies. Numerous studies have sought to ascertain the



4 See, for example, Albert Rees, The Economics of Work and Pay, 2nd ed.  (New
 York, Harper and Row, 1979), Chapter 10, for a summary of the  neoclassical
 view, which does not necessarily represent his personal view.

5A good nontechnical treatment of their views is found in Richard Freeman and
 James Medoff, "The Two Faces of Unionism," Public Interest (Fall 1979).

6See, for example, Charles Brown and James Medoff, "Trade Unions in the Produc-
 tion Process," Journal of Political Econy (June 1978), for evidence for
 U.S. manufacturing; Kim Clark, "Unions and Productivity in the Cement
 Industry" (unpublished Harvard University Ph.D. dissertation, 1978) and his
 "The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study," Industrial and
 Labor Relations Review (July 1980), for evidence for the cement industry,
 and Steven Allen, "Unionized Construction Workers Are More Productive?"
 (mimeograph, 1979), for evidence for the U.S. construction industry. Lest
 one conclude that unions always increase productivity, the evidence available
 for coal mining in the U.S. suggests this is not true. See Marie Connerton,
 Richard Freeman, and James Medoff, "Productivity and Industrial Relations:
 The Case of U.S. Bituminous Coal" (mimeo, 1979).
                                                                             3




 effect of public sector unions on the relative wages of teachers, police,

 firefighters and other categories of municipal employees.7 Recent studies

 have moved beyond wage effects and analyzed the effects of public sector

 unions on nonwage employee benefits and on the trade—off between wages and

 retirement system characteristics. 8

      In contrast to the private sector research, however, no research has

 been directed towards ascertaining the effects of unions on productivity in

 the public sector. This fact is not completely surprising; the concepts of

 output and productivity in the public sector are often not well—defined and

 the difficulties inherent in trying to measure productivity are consequently

large. Nevertheless, the growing financial problems of state and local

governments suggest that this important problem cannot be ignored. Prior

studies of public sector wage determination have indicated, on average, that

unions have tended to have only modest effects on their members' compensation;

studies of public employee unions' effects on productivity are required to

complete our understanding of the effects these unions have had on municipal

finances and service flows.



7See, for example, Orley Ashenfelter, "The Effect of Unionization on Wages in
 the Public Sector: The Case of Firefighters," Industrial and Labor Relations
 Review (January 1971), Ronald Ehrenberg and Gerald Goldstein, "A Model of
 Public Sector Wage Determination," Journal of Urban Economics, July 1975, and
 Hirschell Kasper, "The Effects of Collective Bargaining on Public School
 Teachers Salaries," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, October 1970).

8See, for example, David Rogers, "Municipal Government Structure, Unions, and
 Wage and Nonwage Compensation in the Public Sector" (unpublished Cornell
 University M.S. thesis, 1979), Ronald G. Ehrenberg, "Retirement System Charac-
 teristics and Compensating Differentials in the Public Sector," Industrial
 and Labor Relations Review , July 1980, and Linda M. Edwards and Franklin
 R. Edwards, "The Effect of Unionism on the Money and Fringe Compensation of
 Public Employees: The Case of Municipal Sanitation Workers"
                                                              (mimeo, 1979).
                                                                            4




     This paper represents our initial efforts at analyzing the effects of

unions on productivity in the public sector. We first sketch an analytical

framework that can be used to estimate these effects, focusing for expository

purposes on municipal public libraries. We initially focus on libraries

because considerable effort has been devoted to conceptualizing productivity

measures for them and because of the availability of data to implement the
             9
framework.       After discussing the analytical framework, we present preliminary

estimates of the effects of unions on productivity in public libraries based

upon analyses of data from 71 municipal libraries in Massachusetts. We con-

clude by indicating how these analyses will be extended and the direction

that we hope our future research will take.



II. A Simply Analytic Framework

     Municipal libraries produce a variety of outputs which include, but are

not limited to, the circulation of books, periodicals, and other audio-

visual materials, responding to information and inter—library loan requests,

and providing reference facilities. These outputs can in theory be evaluated

in both quantitative and qualitative ways. While one can simply count circu—

lation figures or the number of information requests, more sophisticated

valuations of library output would focus on questions like "What proportion

of information requests were answered correctly?" or "How long did the

typical borrower have to wait for a book that he or she wanted?"

     For now we shall ignore the fact that libraries can be thought of as

multiple product firms and also ignore the quality dimension of the services they

provide. Instead, we assume that we can treat library output (Q) as being a



9For prior discussions of library productivity, see Malcolm Getz, Public
 Libraries: An Economic View (Johns Hopkins Press, 1980), Karen Feldstein,
 The Economics of Public Libraries (unpublished MIT Ph.D. dissertation, 1977),
 F.W. Lancaster, The Measurement and Evaluation of Library Services
 (Washington, D.C., 1977) and Ernst DeProspo, Ellen Altman, and Kenneth
 Beasley, Performance Measures for Public Libraries (Chicago, 1973).
                                                                                      5




  single variable. One can then specify the community demand function for

  library services by



         (1)        D =
                          D(PIV1,V2)


         Here    P is the "price"      the community must pay for a unit of library

  services,      other things equal the     higher the price the less library services
 will    be demanded.       The position of the demand    curve will depend upon com-
 munity       income or wealth, with higher income areas
                                                             demanding more library ser-
 vices and it will also obviously depend upon the size of the community
                                                                                  (V1).
 Finally, the demand curve will depend upon the community's "taste" for

 library services (V2). For example, more highly educated communities may

 demand more library services, as may communities with a large proportion of

 school—age children.

        The second element of our model is a production function for library

 services




        (2)       Q =
                        F(K,L!V3,U)


Here we have treated output, capital (K) and labor (L) as single variables.

The capital stock includes the library's entire stock of materials as of

the current period.         V3 is a vector which represents those community van—

ables that affect the position or shape of the production function. For

example, one early study found that two—thirds to three—quarters of all

library users lived within one mile of a library.10 This suggests that



'°Bernard Berelson, The Library is Public (New York: Columbia
                                                              University
  Press, 1949).
                                                                               6



increases   in population density, which make it   easier   to locate branch

libraries   within a mile of all individuals, would increase the output of
library services, ceteris paribus.
     The production function of library services may also      be a function of

whether   the library's employees are represented by a union. As noted by
Freeman and Medoff, unionization may well increase productivity through

routes including union induced reductions in turnover, increases in morale

and motivation, and increases in formal and informal on—the—job training.11

On the other hand, unionization of library employees may well reduce produc-

tivity if it places limits on library management's ability to substitute

factors of production or if it requires library management to devote more

resources to the contract negotiation process and to the resolution of

grievances.12 Of key concern to us is what the net effect of unions on the

production function is.

     The stock of capital that a library has depends upon its stock of capital

in the preceeding period (K1), its investment in new capital (I), and the

rate at which its previous stock of capital depreciates (6). The latter

depends upon the age distribution of the library's books (in the main books

are used most heavily in the initial years following their purchase) and the

resources that the library devotes to maintaining its collection and avoiding

theft. We shall ignore the latter two considerations here and treat the

depreciation rate as a constant.



11Freeman and Medoff, "The Two Faces of Unionism," Public Interest, Fall 1979.

'2See, for example, Marilyn Oberg, Mary Blackburn, and Joan Dible, "Unioni-
  zation Costs and Benefits to the Individual and to the Library," in Margaret
  Chaplan, ed., Employee Organizations and Collective Bargaining in Libraries,
  Library Trends, 25, October 1976, and Milton Byran, "Implications for Public
  Libraries" in Frederick Schlipf, ed., Collective Bargaining in Libraries
  (Urbana, Illinois, 1975).
                                                                                         7




            (3)     K =   I   + (l—ó)K



        The costs incurred by a library are primarily for
                                                          labor, for new
   acquisjjo, and for maintaining the
                                                  library's collection and buildings.
   Let W be the cost per unit of
                                 labor, m the per unit cost of maintaining the
   collection and C the user cost of
                                     new materials. Then the total costs the
   library incurs is given by



        (4)        C=wL+CI+

  For later reference, remember
                                         that a primary goal of unions is to increase
  their members' wages. To the extent that they are
                                                    successful, W will be
  an increasing function of U.

       The cost function for
                                    library services is obtained by
                                                                      minimizing (4),
 subject to (2) and (3). From this, one can obtain the
                                                       average cost function
 for library services.



      (5)         AC =
                         AC(QIW,C,m,v,oKFU)

 If the underlying library
                                  production function exhibits
                                                                 constant (decreasing)
 (increasing) returns to scale,
                                         average cost will be constant (increase with
output) (decrease with output).

     We have plotted the demand
                                         curve and average cost curve for library
 services in Figure 1; the latter under the assumption of
                                                          constant average
 costs. The average cost curve
                                represents the price to the library of pro-
ducing different levels of library
                                    services. Given the demand curve, D,
Q* units of library services
                             will be demanded and produced. At this level
of library services,
                     library revenues just cover its costs.
                                                                       8




   Price of
Library Services




                                                         AC


                                I
                                I
                                I
                                a                    D
                                I
                                                              Output
                                Q*




                              Figure 1
                   The Market for Library Services
                                                                              9




       The equilibrium level of library services can be expressed as the

  reduced form equation



       (6)       Q*
                      G(V1,V2,V3,W,C,m,tS,KFU)


 Obviously, anything that shifts the demand curve up will increase output

 while anything that shifts the average cost curve up will reduce it. The

 key point to note is that observed output is determined by both demand and

 cost factors.

      The effects of unions on service flows operate both via their effects

 on wages and their effects on the production function (2). If unions do

 increase the wages of library employees this would shift the average cost

 curve up and reduce output. If unions increase (decrease) the level of out-

 put associated with any given input levels (for the reasons discussed

earlier) this will shift the average cost curve down
                                                       (up), thereby increasing
 (decreasing) output.

     Equation (6) provides a simple framework which can be used to estimate

the effects of unions on productivity. If cross—section data on library

services, the demand and cost variables, and unionization can be obtained,

the model can be implemented. The coefficient of the unionization variable

in this model would represent the net effect of library unions on produc-

tivity. If one were to estimate (6) omitting the
                                                   wage variable, however,
the coefficient of the unionization variable would
                                                     capture both the net
effect of unions on the production function for
                                                  library services and the
effect of union induced wage gains on average costs and hence output.
                                                                                10



 III. Extensions of the Framework

      The simple framework sketched above may be inadequate for a number of

reasons. First, the wage of library employees is endogenous, in the

sense that it will be determined both by whether the library employees

are unionized and the forces that affect the demand for library services, as

well as other variables (V4).13 As such, if one were to specify a wage

determination equation of the form



      (7)       W =
                      W(V,V2,v4,U)


it is likely that tne error term in this equation would be correlated with

the error term in (6). This might happen, for example, if data on some

variable that affected the demand for library services was unavailable and

omitted from both equations (6) and (7). If correlated error terms occurred, biased

estimates of (6) would result if it was estimated by ordinary least squares.

     Second, the extent of unionization, as measured by whether a library's

employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement is also likely to

be endogenously determined. It is not unreasonable to expect that collective bar-

gaining coverage will be a function both of state laws governing public employee

unionization, and the proportions of public and private employees in a state

that are union members. The size of the library is also likely to matter;

large libraries may be more bureaucratic in nature and more conducive to
                14
unionization.         Finally, collective bargaining coverage is likely to be



13For a discussion of the variables that influence public sector wage
  determination, see Ehrenberg and Goldstein, .2P•    cit.
14Theodore Guyton, Unionization: The Viewpoint of Librarians (Chicago, 1975).
                                                                                   11




   related to both the estimated
                                   wage premium associated with collective bar-
   gaining and the estimated productivity differential
                                                          associated with collective
   bargaining; the former because it influences both
                                                        employees demand for collec-
   tive bargaining coverage and library management's resistance to it, the

   latter because the productivity effects
                                              associated with collective bargain-

   ing also influence management's resistance to it.

         This suggests the need for a full—blown
                                                   "selectivity bias" corrected
  model.15    Separate wage and library output equations can be estimated for

  libraries covered by and not covered
                                           by union contracts, in the context of
  a model in which the probability that
                                            a library is unionized is determined by the
  estimated union/nonunion wage and
                                        output differentials that exist for it, as
  well as other explanatory variables. The appendix traces out formally how

  this can be done.

        Third, the analyses described
                                        above focuses on the effect of unions on
 observed output; the latter is
                                 a determined by both demand and cost considera-
 tions. One might prefer instead
                                   to focus directly on the underlyLng produc-
 tion process for library
                          services and ask questions like "Does the existence
 of unions alter library
                         output per employee?", "Do unions affect the substi-
 tutability of capital for labor in the provision of library
                                                               services?".
 Or shifting to the
                    case of multiple types of
                                               library employees (e.g.,
 librarians, other professional
                                employees, library aides, other clerical
employees), "Do unions alter the
                                  Substitutability of different categories of
library employees in the face of
                                  relative price changes?". Such generaliza-
tions would involve
                    using a variant of the "production
                                                         function" approach


15See   Lung—Fei Lee, . cit., for the genesis of this
                                                      approach.
                                                                             12




used by Brown and Medoff, and Clark, and/or estimating the parameters of a

production function from cost share data.

       For example, if the production function for library service in equation

(2) can be written as




       (8)      Q   = a(L(l+BU))la

where B represents the proportionate marginal productivity differential of

union labor, and U equals one if the library is unionized and zero otherwise,

then



       (9)                logA ÷ cdog(K/L) + (l—ci)BU
                log()


Hence, regressing the log of output per library employee on those demographic

variables that affect library productivity (variables that underlie A, the

log of the capital/labor ratio, and whether the library is organized would

enable one to estimate the proportionate marginal productivity advantage of
               16
union labor.        The extension to allow for nonconstant returns to scale or

more than one category of labor is straightforward in this model. To test

for union effects on substitutability, however, obviously requires more

flexible functional forms such as the CES or translog ones.



16See Brown-Medoff,     . cit.
                                                                                  13


   IV.
          Preliminary Empirical Results: The Determinants
          2Productivity in Massachusetts Public Libraries in 1977
          In 1977 the International
                                      City Management Association conducted a survey
   of municipal public libraries,
                                      obtaining data on library revenues and

  expenditures, employment and wage scales for
                                                   different categories of library
  employees, the number of books in each
                                             library, and various measures of
  library usage including circulation,
                                           borrowers, and interlibrary loans.
  The latter three variables
                                were published, by library, in the 1978
                                                                            Municp
  Yearbook, and when coupled with published data on socioecononijc characteristics

  of cities obtained from the 1977
                                       City and County Databook and published data
  on whether any library employees were covered by a collective
                                                                     bargaining
 agreement in each Hassachusetts municipality in
                                                     1977, permit us to estimate
 equations of the form


                       10
         (10)   K1                                        K =
                            BK.r.. + KUi + EK.                  1,2,3,4,5

 for a sample of 71 municipal libraries.

      Equation (10) is a condensed version of the reduced form library
                                                                       output
 equation (6) derived in Section II. The
                                          output measures available are inter—
 library loans per capita
                             (Q1), number of borrowers per capita
                                                                    (Q2), circula-
tion per capita (Q3), interlibrary loans per borrower
                                                      (Q4), and circulation
per borrower (Q5); each measure expressed in
                                                 natural logarithm form. The
former three measures
                        may be thought of as measures of total
                                                                  services pro-
vided, while the latter two
                            may be regarded as measures of the quantity of
services provided per library user.

     The r are those variables that
                                         are expected to influence library out-
put, either from the demand or cost sides
                                             of the model. The cost side is
                                                                            14




captured here by population density (r1); as noted earlier previous studies

have suggested that increased population density reduces the cost of pro-

viding library services, and hence should increase library output. The

demand side is represented by a set of variables expected to influence a

community's preferences for library services; these include the percent of

the population that is female (r7), the percent nonwhite (r3), the percents

of the population that are older than age 18 (r4) and age 65 (r5), the median

education level in the community (r6), the female labor force participation

rate (r9), and the fraction of employees in the municipality employed in

education (r10). The demand side also is represented by the community's

capacity to pay for library services, as measured by median family income

(r7), and per capita intergovernmental revenues (r8). Finally, U. is a

dichotomous variable indicating whether any library employees in the munici-

pality were covered by a collective bargaining agreement in 1977.

     Several things should be noted about this specification. Data limita-

tions in this initial study preclude a number of variables that appear in

equation (6) from appearing in equation (10). The omitted variables include

the wage rates of library employees, the lagged stock of library materials,

and the rate at which library materials depreciate. The estimated coef-

ficients which we report below should be considered very tentative then;

they may well suffer from omitted variable bias. In particular, because

library employees' wages were unavailable in this sample, the coefficient of

the unionization variable will capture both the net effects of collective

bargaining on the production function for library services and of union

induced wage gains on average costs and hence output.
                                                                                     15



      Our preLiminary estimates ol ejuation (10) appear in Table 1. The

 populations of the mUILfpalltit:s in our sample varied from 10,000 to over

 500 ,000   and to cont rH for   heterscedasticity we have   weighted each obser-
 vation by   the   square root of its population, The employees were covered by a
 collective bargaining agreement in      approximately   one—quarter of the   libraries
 in the sample.
      Turning first to the vector of variables other than unionization, many

 of these variables af LOLt Library output in a manner consistent with our

 a priori predictions. An increase in the school age population (decrease in

 r,) increases library usage as does an increase in the proportion of the

population over age 65 (r.). An increase in the median education level of

the population (r6) also leads La higher usage, as does an increase in the

proportion of employees who are employed in the education industry
                                                                          (r10).
     in contrast, neither of the variables that reflect the communities'

capacity to pay (r7 and r8) are significantly related to library output.

While an increase in the proportion of the population that is female
                                                                              (r2)
leads to an increase in the number of borrowers, a result that might be

expected if females tend not to be in the labor force, an increase in the

labor force participation rate of females (r9) is associated with higher

circulation of library materials. Finally, an increase in population density

(r1) leads to a reduction in library output and an increase in the proportion

of the population that is nonwhite (r3) to higher output.'7



17Malcolm Getz, Public Libraries: An Economic View, finds a similar negative
  relationship between density and library output in his study of branch
  libraries in New York City. He argues that population density may be a
  proxy for the rental cost of structures, with more dense areas having
  higher rental rates. If this occurs, the average cost of library services
  may well be higher in denser areas which would lead, from Figure 1, to a
  lower level of library services. Thus, a negative relationship between
  population density and library output may well be consistent with our model.
                                                                               16



     The   primary vnri:hie of interest to us, of course, is the unionization
variable. These data suggest that libraries covered by a collective bargain-
ing agreement have, ceteris parii:us, some 29.2 (exp( .256)—i) percent more
borrowers per capita than do nonunion libraries. Both circulation and inter—
library loans   per capita appear to be lower in          unionized Libraries, however
these   effects are not   significnntly      different from zero. Because of these

results, it is not Surprising     t:hat on a per borrower basis, circulation and

interlibrory loans are also     lower   in   unionized    libraries 18

        How robust are these results to the estimation methods used? Row (1)

of Table 2 summarizes compactly the estimated collective bargaining effects

from Table 1. Rows (2) and (3) show that estimates obtained when the method

of ordinary least squares is used (row (2)) and when an additional variable,

median age, is included to more fully control for the age distribution of

the population (row (3)) are virtually identical.

        As noted in Section ILl, however, all of these estimates may well be

subject to selectivity bias. Using the method described in the appendix,
                                                     19
one can attempt to control for this problem.               First a reduced form probit

equation is estimated that determines the probability that a library's

employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement.              From these equa-

tions, one can compute estimates of variables which are then added to the

productivity equations to control for the probability that a library's

employees are covered by a collective bargaining agreement.               These "augmented"



18Put another way, if an increase in a variable causes the log of X1 to
  increase but does not affect the log of X2, it is not surprising that
  the log of (X2/X1) falls.

19Actually, the method implemented here is simpler since it ignores library
  employees' wage rates.
                                                                       17




 productivity equations can then be estimated by ordinary least squares

 and consistent parameter estimates obtained; this is done separately for

 libraries that are covered by a collective bargaining agreement and those

 that are not. Finally, the estimated parameters and the mean values of

 the explanatory variables can be used to compute consistent estimates of

 the union/nonunion productivity differentials.

      Estimates of the reduced form probit equation appear in Table 3. The

 variables that appear in the equation include those in the output equations

as well as population size, population growth, and the share of employment

 in the city in a number of industries. These latter variables were included

because they tend to be related to the extent of private sector unionization

across SMSA's.° ii1e the vector of coefficients is clearly jointly signi-

ficantly at the .05 level, most of the individual coefficients are statis-

tically insignificant. The few significant coefficients suggest that collec-

tive bargaining for library employees in Massachusetts tends to occur in

cities with older populations (r5), higher female labor force participation

rates (r9), and lower levels of service industry employment
                                                              (r15).
     These estimates are then used, as described above, to obtain consistent

estimates of the productivity equations and estimates of the Union/nonunion

productivity differentials.21 These differentials are summarized in row (4)

of Table 2; in the main their pattern is very similar to the previous results.



20See for example, Barry T. Hirsch, "The Determinants of Unionization: An
  Analysis of Interarea Differences," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
  January 1980.

21For brevity, we do not report the regression coefficients for the
  "selectivity corrected" output equations here.
                                                                        18



V.      Extensions and Euture Directions

        This paper has laid out a methodological framework for estimating the

effects of unions on productivity in the public sector and presented some

preliminary estimates for a sample of 71 municipal public libraries in

Massachusetts. The empirical estimates themselves should not be stressed,

however, as the underlying data suffer from a number of weaknesses. First,

there   are numerous important variables omitted from the data set, including
wages and employment levels of   library   employees, new acquisitions, and the
stock   of library materials; these omissions may seriously bias the estimated

union effects. Second, we have not made a serious attempt to specify the

determinants of whether a library is covered by a collective bargaining

agreement, only a limited number of variables were entered into that equation

and this could further bias our results. Finally, the libraries in our

sample all are located in one state and span a wide range of city sizes

(under 10,000 to over 500,000). Since libraries in different size cities

perform different functions and time likelihood of collective bargaining

coverage is positively related to city size, this will further distort our

findings.

     We hope to get around all of these problems in future work. The ICMA

has made the data tape, upon which their published report on municipal

libraries was based, available to us. This tape provides fairly compre-

hensive data on all of the "library variables" needed to implement the

various approaches discussed in Sections II and III for approximately 250

cities of population size 25,000 or greater. Socioeconomic characteristic

variables for these cities can be obtained from the 1977 City and County

Databook. Finally, we have obtained data on the collective bargaining
                                                                         19



 coverage of library employees in these cities by a mail survey; our response

 rate to this survey has been well over 90 percent.

      Because these cities do not all lie in one state, it will be

 possible for us to better model the forces that affect the probability that

 library employees in a city are covered by a collective bargaining agreement.

 These include the extent of public and private unionization in a state,

 variables for which published data exists, as well as the laws governing

 public sector collective bargaining in a state. Our colleague John Burton

 has expended considerable effort to collect data on, and to parameterize,

 these laws and has generously made these data available to   us. A
 substantially better specified probability of collective bargaining coverage

equation should reduce the likelihood that our estimates of union productivity

effects are subject to selectivity bias.

     In addition to our more comprehensive analysis of the effect of unions

on productivity in public libraries, we also plan to pursue the question of

the routes via which unions influence
                                        productivity in the public sector.

Our initial focus in this aspect of the project will be on public education

and we will make use of a unique set of longitudinal data on educational

outcomes, school, district background variables, and union contract pro—

visions that our colleague Sam Bacharach has constructed for local school

districts in New York State. Our analyses here will permit us to test for

the effects of specific union contract pvisions on educational outcomes,

rather than for the effects of collective bargaining coverage per se. The

longitudinal nature of the data will permit the application of econometric

methods that allow one to control for omitted variables that otherwise
                                                                         might
                                                                      20




bias the analyses.22 That is, these methods substantially reduce the like-

lihood that the estimates that result will be subject to selectivity bias

because   omitted variables that affect the probability of collective bargain-
ing   coverage or contract provisions may also affect educational outcomes.




22For details, see Ronald G. Ehrenberg, "Unions and Productivity in the
  Public Sector" (proposal submitted to the National Science Foundation,
  March 1980).
                                                                                             21
                                               Table 1

                    Determinants of Productivity in Massachusetts Public
                         Libraries in 1977: Weighted Least Squares
                                (absolute value t statistics)

     Ind./Dep.
     Var./Var.                           Q2               Q
                                                              3       Q
                                                                          4          Q
                                                                                         5

          r1a      -.111 (3.0)   -.056 (4.3)      -.066 (7.1)     -.059 (1.6)   -.009 (0.8)
                  —.060 (0.6)     .090 (2.6)      —.004 (0.2)     —.151 (1.6)   —.094 (2.8)

          r3        .138 (2.1)    .041 (1.8)       .021 (1.3)      .097 (1.6)   —.020 (0.9)
                  -.138 (1.9)    -.021 (0.8)      -.067 (3.8)     -.117 (1.7)   -.045 (1.9)
                   .192 (1.6)    -.006 (0.1)       .127 (4.3)      .197 (1.7)
          r5                                                                     .132 (3.2)

         r6        .487 (2.0)     .173 (2.0)       .186 (3.1)      .313 (1.3)    .013 (0.2)

         r7a      —.038 (0.5)    -.014 (0.5)       .015 (0.8)     —.023 (0.3)    .028 (1.2)

         r8a      —.045 (0.0)     .094 (0.2)       .014 (0.0)     —.149 (0.1)    .080 (0.2)

                  4.873 (1.2)    -.879 (0.6)      2.096 (2.1)     5.752 (1.5)   2.975 (2.2)
                  3.566 (0.8)    2.139 (1.4)      4.668 (4.2)     1.427 (0.3)   2.529 (1.7)

          U       —.540 (1.5)     .256 (2.1)     —.128 (1.5)      —.797 (2.3)   —.385 (3.2)

                   .334           .515             .731            .235          .417
n = 71 for all equations
a = coefficient has been multiplied by 1000

and

Q1
      = log (interlibrary loans per capita)
      = log (number of borrowers per capita)
Q3
      = log (circulation per capita)                                  in 1977
Q4      log (interlibrary loans per borrower)
Q5      log (circulation per borrower)
r1    = population density

r2
          percent female
r3 =      percent nonwhite
r4 =      percent of the population age 18 and over
r5        percent of the population age 65 and over                   in 1970
r6 = median education level
r7 = median family income

r8        per capita intergovernmental revenue
     =    female labor force participation rate
r10 fraction of employees in education
                                                                                      22



                                          Table 1 (continued)


U =   lany       library employees have a collective bargaining agreement, O=otherwise

Source:

                  to        — 1978 Municipal Yearbook
      (1)   Q1

      (2)   r, to r          —   1977 City and County Databook and 1970 Census of Population
                       10
                                                                           Guidance for
      (3) U —      Collective Bargaining in Massachusetts Libraries:
                   Administrators and Staffs (Boston, 1978)
                                                   Table   2

                         Estimated Effects of Collective
                                                         Bargaining Coverage on the
                               Logarithms of Library Output Measures: Various
                                 Estimation Methods and Model Specifications
                                        (absolute value t statistic)

                  Dep.
Specification/Var.                                                                 '<4
                                                   ____________
         (1)               —.540 (1.5)     .256 (2.1)      —.129 (1.5)         —.797 (2.3)   —.385 (3.2)
         (2)               —.573 (1.7)     .252 (1.8)      —.140 (1.5)         —.825 (2.5)   —.393 (2.9)
         (3)               —.535   (1.5)   .287 (2.1)      —.098 (1.0)         —.822 (2.3)   —.386 (2.8)

         (4)               —.994           .186            —.277           —1.052            —.471

where   (1)    weighted least squares (union coefficients from Table 1)
        (2)    ordinary least squares estimates — same model as in Table   1
        (3)    ordinary least squares estimates — median age added as an additional
               explanatory variable
        (4)    selectivity bias corrected estimates, separate equations estimated
               for union and nonunion sectors (see
                                                   Appendix A)
                                                           24


                           Table 3

Probit Estimates of Whether Any Library Employees Are
Covered by a Collective Bargaining Agreement in 1977
         (absolute value asymptotic t ratio)

      Variable                       Coefficient
           C                         17.499 (0.9)
                                       .119 (0.9)
           r1a
                                      —.189 (0.6)
           r2
                                      —.543 (1.0)
           r3
                                      —.496 (1.7)
                                       .541 (1.9)
           r5
                                       .586 (0.9)
           r6
                                           .116 (0.8)
                                      3.081 (1.2)
           r8a
                                     30.363 (1.9)
           r9
                                           .011 (0.1)
           r10
                                      —.045 (0.6)
           r11
                                      —.052 (0.4)
                                      —.470 (1.6)
           r13
                                           .151 (0,6)
           r14
                                           .037 (1.4)
           r15a
                                           .273 (0.1)
           r16a
                                           .042 (0.2)
           r17


      Log Likelihood                 —23.746

                                      32.313

           n                          71


where r11 fraction of employees in manufacturing

       r12 fraction of employees in transportation and
           public utilities

       r13 fraction of employees in the service industry
       r14 fraction of employees in construction
       r15 1975 population
       r16 percentage population change 1960—1975
       C       intercept term
and
aCoefficient has been multiplied by 1000.
                                   ppend ix



      Our goal is to estimate whether libraries whose employees are union

 members are more, or less, productive than otherwise identical libraries

 whose employees are not union members and to estimate the extent that unions

 increase library employees' wages. Suppose that the output of library i

would be Q. if its employees were covered by a collective bargaining agree-

ment and Q. if its employees were not covered by a collective bargaining

agreement. Suppose also that the wages that the library's employees would

receive in the two environments would be W   and W .      respectively.   Then we
                                          Ui      fli

can define the relative output differential, dqj and the relative wage

differential, d., associated with collective bargaining for the 1th library,

as




     (Al)     dqi =       uini)ni
              d   .   = (W .—W .)/W .    log(Wui.1W  .)
               Wi         Ui ni    iii            n3.



     In general, it is not possible to observe both Q . and Q .,
                                                     Ui      fli
                                                                     or   W . and
                                                                           Ui
W with cross—section data, as at a point in time either a library's

employees are covered by an agreement or they are not. A naive approach

that circumvents this problem is to estimate wage and output equations

separately for employees in cities with and without agreements, use the

estimated coefficients from these regressions and the characteristics of a

city to compute predicted values of the wage and library output that would

be observed in both sectors, and then estimate the differentials by calcu-

lating the percentage difference in these predicted values.
                                                                          A2




     More formally, suppose that we postulate that the wage rate library

employees would receive in a city if they are unionized is a log linear

function of a vector of variables, X, which represent all of the variables

that would appear in equation (7) in the text, plus a random error term




                          K
     (A2)     logW .
                  ui   = jl
                         . a.juX.
                               ju
                                  + c li

and that a similar functional relationship exists that describes the wage

that library employees would receive in a city if they were not unionized.


                          K
     (A3)     10gW .
                  ni     . a. X..
                         j--l jn ji
                                      + c
                                            2i


     Suppose also that similar output equations could be derived; these

correspond to the reduced form output equation (6) in the text, where the

    represent all of the variables in equation (6) save the extent of

unionization, and c3. and       are random error terms


                         M
     (A4)         ui = jljuji
              logQ .   . B. Y. .      + c
                                          11.


                         M
     (A5)
                  fli=j1. B.
              logQ .          Y..
                          jfl 31      + c
                                            4i

The naive approach would involve estimating the parameters of (A2) and (A4)
by ordinary least squares from observations on libraries whose employees

were unionized and the parameters of (A3) and (A5) by ordinary least squares
                                                                                     A3



  from observations on libraries whose employees were not organized. Given

  estimates of these parameters (si.
                                   ju
                                             , a.
                                               jn
                                                  , .ju, . )jnand   the relevant charac—

  teristics of a representative city (X.., Y..), one can then obtain estimates

  of the relative output and wage differentials from


                -'
                                              M
       (A6)     d .
                     qi
                            log(Qul./Qni.)   . (B. —B. )Y..
                                             j=l ju jn ji
                                              K
               d .
                 Wi
                          = log(W
                                 ul ni.) = j=l
                                    ./W     . (a.ju—ci. )X..
                                                     jn ji


      As is now well known, however, estimates of wage and output equations

 from truncated samples will not necessarily yield unbiased estimates of the

 parameters of the underlying wage and output equations (and hence d. and duj)

 since the assumption that the error term in each equation is random and

 uncorrelated with the other explanatory variables is
                                                               typically violated.
 This occurs because libraries are not randomly assigned to collective bargain-.

ing status, but rather employees and library
                                                      management make explicit choices
on the matter. Estimates of the wage and output equations that ignore the

underlying choice model will be biased because they will confound the effect

of an explanatory variable on wages and output with its effect on the proba—

bility that the library's employees are covered by a collective bargaining

agreement. To correct for this sample selectivity problem
                                                                      requires us to model
the underlying economic choice process that determines whether a library's

employees are unionized. This problem is complicated by the fact that such

an event is a product of both employee and employer decisions.

     To keep our estimation problem manageable, we assume that the choice

process that determines whether a library's employees are covered by a collec-

tive bargaining agreement can be approximated by
                                                                                 A4



                 *                          R
       (A7)     S.=ód.+ód.+
                 1 0 qi 1 wi
                              6Z.+v.1
                             r=3 r ri

                               *
                U. = 1 if S. > 0
                 1         1

                      0 otherwise



       Here S. is an unobserved variable that represents the likelihood that

a municipal library will be unionized, v. is a random error term, and the

Z are all of the variables expected to influence the probability of observ-

ing a collective bargaining agreement, other than dqj and d.. The parameter

    is assumed to be greater than zero, as positive output effects resulting

from collective bargaining should reduce employers' opposition to collective

bargaining. The sign of             is indeterminate, however, as positive union!

nonunion wage differentials will increase library employees' demand for

collective bargaining, but also increase municipal employers' attempts to

resist unionization.

       Although S. is not observed, we can arbitrarily scale its cut—off value

to be zero, so that if S. is greater than zero, the library's employees will

be covered by a collective bargaining agreement (U. =         1).   Similarly, if the

index is less than or equal to zero, the employees would not be covered by

an agreement (U.      0).

       Consistent estimates of the model specified in (Al) through (A7) can

be obtained using an iterative procedure originally suggested by Lung—fei

Lee.    One can substitute the wage and output equations (A2) to (A5) into

(Al) and (A7) to obtain a reduced form probit selection model


                *     T        *
       (AlO)   S. =
                1     t=ltti
                       )     +
                            B X .    n.
                                      1



*
Lung—fei Lee, op. cit.
                                                                                          A5



  where the X. are all of the predetermined
                                                    variables in the model (X, Y, and
  Z's) and n1 is a random error term. Now suppose that the error terms from

  this reduced form selection model and the
                                                  wage and library output equations
  are jointly normally distributed with means zero and the following covariance

 mat r ix




       (All)                          0
                                                            a11 012 013 l4 °ln

                            N                               021 022 023 024 02n
                                      0
                                                            U3l 032 033 034          03
                                      0
                                                            041 042 043        044 04
                                      0
                                                            °nl °n2 °n3 °n4 0nn


 Under these assumptions one can show that


                                           K
      (A12)    E(logW jx..,u. = 1) =
                     ui p. 1              jl. , juX..p. +   ( in/0n)A.
                                                                     iu   + h
                                                                                ii


                                           K
      (Al3)    E(logWni
                      .X..,U.
                        p. i = 0)
                                  =       . a•jnX..
                                          j=l    p.
                                                       + (a /0 )A. + h
                                                          2n n in              2i
and
                                          N
      (Al4)    E(logQ    .,U.i = 1) =
                    uiH.p.                Jl
                                          .E B. Y.. + (a Ia
                                               ju p.         3n n)A.
                                                                   iu + h 3i

      (A15)    E(logQrI]_
                       HY..,u.
                          p. 1
                               =   0).j=lH B. Y• + (a4nIan)A.in + h
                                           jn p.                          4i


Here the h. are normally distributed random
                                                  variables with mean zero and the
  are given by
                                                                                                 A6


                                  T        *                   T        *
         (A16)      A. =
                               (AiBX./o)/[l
                                      T        *          n         *
                    A.
                     in
                          = — q(—
                                      t=l t    ti n
                                           B X ./c )/(—
                                                                    ti n
                                                             B X ./c )
                                                          t=1 t



where q(       ) denotes   the normal probability density function and '               the corres-

ponding distribution function.

         Equations (A12) through (A16) make it clear why OLS estimates of the

underlying wage and output equations (A2) through (A5) may lead to biased

estimates. As long as the error terms in the wage or output equations are

correlated with the error term in the reduced form selection rule (c O,
                                                                  in
G
    2n
          0
              3n
                   °4nO)       OLS estimates will be biased due to an omitted variable.

While A. and A.           are not directly observed, estimates of them may be obtained
          iu        in
by first estimating the reduced form probit selection model (AlO) obtaining

estimated coefficients (Be/cr), and then using these estimates to compute

predicted values A. and A. for each individual. Lee (1978) shows that
                          iu          in

estimation of (A2) to (A5) by OLS, with A.                    (A. )     added as an additional
                                                      iu           in
explanatory variable, over a sample of libraries that are covered by (not

covered by) a collective bargaining agreement, will lead to consistent

estimates of thea. and B.                  (a. and B. ).      Consequently, consistent estimates
                          ju          ju     jn     jfl

of the estimated wage and output differentials associated with collective

bargaining coverage may be obtained from (A6).
