                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE EFFICIENCY OF DECENTRALIZED INVESTMENT
                       MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS



                         David S. Jones


                      Working Paper No. 719




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           July 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #719
                                                            July 1981



          The Efficiency of Decentralized Investment Management Systems



                                    ABSTRACT



     The primary purpose of this paper is to demonstrate that decentralized
investment management systems may not always be efficient. Specifically,
within the context of a particular portfolio choice paradigm it is shown
that a given decentralized investment management system is (weakly) efficient
if and only if the joint probability distribution of asset rates of return
satisfy certain covariance restrictions. If these restrictions do not
obtain then the asset portfolios generated by this decentralized structure
will generally be inferior to those which would be generated by a completely
centralized structure.
     This paper also discusses how the managers of departments within an
efficient decentralized structure should behave so as to generate portfolios
which are optimal from the point of view of the institution as a whole.
Generally, departmental managers should behave as if they have less risk
aversion than the institution as a whole. In fact, a given manager should
be more risk averse the greater the value of his portfolio.
     Finally, we note that the efficiency concept employed in this paper
is equivalent to the proposition that certain assets admit consistent simple
sum aggregation. It is shown that this implies that the efficient decen-
tralization of investment decisions permits the institution to economize
on the information which must be passed to higher level departments.


                                               David S. Jones
                                               Department of Economics
                                               Northwestern University
                                               Evanston, Illinois 60201

                                               (312) 492—5690
       THE EFFICIENCY OF DECENTRALIZED INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS

By David S. Jones

 Introduction

      Most large institutional investors have some form of decentralized

investment management system. Many of these systems take forms similar in

spirit to the hierarchical structure depicted in Figure 1. At each tier

in this structure a department committee or manager allocates the funds

entrusted to it among various subordinate departments. When investible

funds reach one of the departments along the bottom rung they are directly

invested into the individual assets under the purview of that department.

The solid lines in Figure 1 delineate the alternative channels by which

investible funds flow through the institution.

      The departments in a decentralized investment management system

also tend to be informationally segmented in the following sense: each

department formulates its investment decisions solely on the basis of its

subjective assessment of the joint probability distribution of the rates

of return of the assets under its purview. Information concerning the

investment decisions or opportunities of departments specializing in other

assets is either not available or is not used.

      In the present paper we will discuss the conditions under which

decentralized investment management systems of the above type are efficient.

Before defining the concept of efficiency that we shall employ in this

paper it will be useful to first describe the portfolio investment paradigm

which underlies our analysis.

     We shall assume that the investing institution as a whole has a
                                                       Figure 1
                                 A 4-LEVEL DECENTRALIZED INVESTMENT   MANAGEMENT   SYSTEM




                                                BOARD OF DIRECTORS




         Equity   Department                      Bond Department                             Mortgage Department




                                                           Corporate Bond
                                                             Department




Domestic Equity       Foreign Equity    Government       Utility       Industrial           Commercial     Residential
 Department             Department         Bond
                                        Department
                                                             A
                                                          Bond
                                                       Department
                                                                          Bond
                                                                       Department
                                                                                             Mortgage
                                                                                            Department
                                                                                                             Mortgage
                                                                                                            Department
                                   —3—



certain amount of funds to allocate at the beginning of a period. It

desires to allocate these funds among assets so as to maximize the expected

utility of its end—of—period wealth.i" Transactions costs associated with

the purchase and sale of assets are assumed to be nonexistent.

      Our analysis also abstracts from information costs. That is, the

costs of acquiring and disseminating information about future asset rates

of return are taken to be zero. We also assume that the subjective joint

probability distributions of rates of return employed by the various

departments are consistent with one another. Thus, in Figure 1, the board

of directors, the equity department, and the domestic equity department all

have the same subjective joint probability distribution of rates of return

for domestic equities.

      Within the context outlined above, the efficiency concept that we

have in mind is as follows: a given investment management structure is

efficient if for all information sets it gives rise to the same portfolio

allocation as would a completely centralized scheme in which all individual

investment decisions are made by the board of directors. Since we are

abstracting from information and transactions costs it is clear that there

is no reason for a decentralized structure to be preferred to a completely

centralized structure. Hence, the best a decentralized structure could

hope to accomplish is to replicate the investment decisions of a completely

centralized structure with the same information.

      Since the existence of information costs is presumably a major reason

why decentralized investment management structures are adopted in practice,
                                                                         2/
the reader may find it curious that we choose to abstract from them here.—
                                              —4—



 We do so in order to highlight as simply as possible an innate problem

 with decentralized investment structures. To anticipate, such schemes

will normally generate inefficient portfolio allocations because the

 informational segmentation inherent in these structures does not permit

 individual departments to accurately assess the effects of their indi-

vidual actions on the "riskiness" of the institution's overall portfolio.

II. The Paradigm of Investor Behavior

      Consider an institutional investor with wealth W0 to be allocated

among "k" assets at the beginning of a period. The institution desires to

allocate this wealth so as to maximize a utility function defined in terms

of the mean and variance of its portfolio's rate of return for the period.--"

That is, its objective is to choose the (kxl) portfolio share vector h

which maximizes the utility function

(1)        u(p,a2) ; u1 > 0 ; u2 < 0

where i   = the   subjective mean of the portfolio's real rate of return and

           the subjective variance of the portfolio's real rate of return.

      Denote the (kxl) vector of expected rates of return on the "k" alter-

native assets by r and denote the associated variance—covariance matrix

by        Then the investor's portfolio choice problem can be formulated

mathematically as the following constrained maximization problem:
                               T—    T
(2)        maximize         u(h r , h h)
              h
                             T
           subject to: 1 h = 1

where 1 is an appropriately dimensioned column vector of ones.

      For simplicity, in the analysis below we shall presume that the mean—

variance utility function u(i,2) takes the particular form:
                                            —5—



               2
          u(p,a )    =p   —    (p/2)a
                                     2


where the parameter "p" is the investor's relative risk aversion with respect

to wealth. While, in general, this parameter may vary with respect to the

other parameters of the problem, for simplicity, we shall take ?ItI   to   be a

constant below. That is, we shall assume that the investor displays constant

relative risk aversion. Thus, problem (2) becomes

(3)       maximize        hTr —    (p/2)   hTQh
             h
                           T
          subject to: ih= 1.

      The specific utility function given above can be motivated or justified

in a number of ways. It can be interpreted as a first—order Taylor series

approximation to an arbitrary mean—variance utility function. Alternatively,

Friend, Landskronner, and Losq [1976] and Friedman and Roley [1979] have

shown that, under certain conditions, as holding periods become short the

solution to a constant relative risk aversion von Neumann—Morgenstern

expected utility (in terms of end—of—period wealth) maximizer's portfolio

choice problem tends to the solution to problem (8). Jones [1979] has also

shown that Lintner's [1972] lognormal securities market model of investor

behavior tends to (3) as the conditions needed for Lintner's approximations

to be exact are approached. Finally, under general conditions Merton's [1973]

continuous—time asset trading model for an investor with constant relative

risk aversion can be shown to imply that the investor continuously solves

the instantaneous portfolio choice problem (3) if r and   are interpreted

as the instantaneous mean vector and variance—covariance matrix of a

Gaussian diffusion process which generates actual rates of return.
                                            —6—



 III. The Efficiency of 2—Level Investment Management Systems

      Before investigating the efficiency of multilevel management

structures like the 4—level structure depicted in Figure 1, it will prove

to be convenient to first examine the efficiency of 2—level structures like

that illustrated in Figure 2. To this end, partition the portfolio share

vector h into the "5"     asset   groups implicit in the structure of Figure 2.

Also, partition r and Q conformably. Hence,


                                                                     l,s
(4)


                                                           IQ      ...Q
                                                           L,s,l
      It   is straightforward to show that the portfolio share vector which

solves problem (3) ,    h,   is given by:

(5) h = (lip)       Br + b


where B            —   (1/1T_l1)_l1   1TQ_l] and


      b     (1/1TQ—l1)-l1


      By definition the optimal fraction of the investor's wealth allocated

to the th group of assets is 1T Thus, the optimal portfolio share

vector for the th department in the decentralized structure of Figure 2

is

(6)   (l/iTh*)h*

where we recall that this department is constrained to invest only in the

assets under its purview (i.e., those of the 1th asset group).

      Because of the informational segmentation implicit in the structure
                                   Figure 2
           A 2—LEVEL DECENTRALIZED INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM




                            BOARD OF DIRECTORS




                                                                               -J
Department for                Department for                 Department for
Group 1 Assets                Group 2 Assets                Group "S" Assets
                                          —8—



of Figure 2, the only information available to the th department on which

to base its investment decisions is its subjective assessment of the joint

probability distribution of the rates of return of the            group of assets.

Hence, in order for the structure of Figure 2 to be efficient, it must be

possible to express the quantity in (6) solely as a function of           and Q...

That is, a necessary and sufficient condition for (strong) efficiency is

that there exist functions               such that

(7)   (l/iTh*)h* =                 for   i =   1,..'. ,s
for all r and Q in the domain for which problem (3) is defined.

      It is demonstrated in the appendix that g—functions satisfying the

restrictions in (7) generally do not exist for k>s>l unless the domains of

r and Q are restricted. Consequently, a given decentralized investment

management structure will generally only be efficient relative to a restricted

class of i and   .   We   also show in the appendix that if r is permitted to

be unrestricted in Rk then g—functions satisfying (7) for k>s>l do not exist

regardless of the restrictions on the domain of .          Since there is in practice

no a priori reason why expected yield vectors should be restricted to lie

in a lower dimensional subspace of Rk, this result would seem to suggest that

our present concept of (strong) efficiency is not very applicable to real

world situations.

      It turns out, however, that if we permit departments to have one

additional bit of information, then we can find a limited class of Q for

which the structures in Figure 2 are efficient even if r is unrestricted in

Rk. The additional information that the 1th department requires in order for

this weaker efficiency to obtain is the fraction of the institution's total
                                           —9—



 wealth allocated to the 1th department (i.e., iTh*)           Weak efficiency

 is then equivalent to the existence of functions f.(.,.,.) such that

 (8)    (1/iTh*)h* =    f.[.,Q..,   lTh*] for i=l,... ,s

 for all    and      in the appropriate domain.

       In the appendix we provide the following theorem:

       Theorem 1: Suppose the domain of r is unrestricted. Then the largest

       class of nonsingular covariance matrices Q for which the decentralized

       management structure in Figure 2 is (weakly) efficient is that in

       which the covariance matrices .        . (i#j)
                                           1,.J
                                                        are of the form:
             =        — 1c    ij; i,j1,...,s
       where the —1
                 c. are fixed vectors and the covariarice matrices 2.       .    for
       i=l,. .   . ,s are unrestricted.'
       Theorem 1 essentially states that the covariance matrices associated

with the partitioned Q matrix must assume the form in (9) in order for the

management structure in Figure 2 to be efficient for all values of r. The

covariarice parameter vectors c ,...,c must be constant if the f—functions

in (8) are to be stable functions of the ,        Q.,     and iTh*   As the sufficiency

portion of the proof of Theorem 1 indicates, the function f. is parameterized

by —1
   c,. Hence, unless the c. are constant vectors the f—functions will not
                         —1
be stable in the above sense.

       Several corollaries of Theorem 1 are readily apparent. First, if the

rates of return of the assets in each group are uncorrelated with those of

assets in all other groups, then the underlying 2—level management structure

is (weakly) efficient. This corresponds to the case for which c. = 0 for

all "1"
                                               —10—



        Another special case occurs when there are two groups of assets and one

of these groups contains a single asset. For such a partitioning of the assets

the associated covariance matri,                      will always be of the form in (9).2'
                                                 2'

Hence, a decentralized 2—level investment structure in which one department

oversees a single asset while the other department oversees all the remaining

assets is always (weakly) efficient.

        Finally, another special case, of limited interest, obtains when there

are "k" departments and each department has responsibility over a single asset.

Trivially, such a 2—level investment management structure is always efficient.

        When condition (9) is satisfied the optimal portfolio share vector for

the 1th department in Figure 2 is given by:

                                                             (llTh*)
                                                               —1
(10) v 1 E (lTh)h
            — —1 —1        =   (I
                                p.
                                     .lTh*)
                                      —  —1
                                            B. r. +  b. -
                                               1 —1 —1              T *
                                                                          B. c.
                                                                           1 —i
                                 1                            lh.
                                                              — —1


                           =         1
                                              G.(r.—ic.) + g.
                                 1T*
(11)
                                               i—i —1      —2
                               (p.' h.)
                                    —1

                       — (1/1TQ_l1)
                                              1,1 1T-l
where    B. =              —
           1     1,1                 1,1—          1,1
         b. =
           1
                (1/1TQT11)
                   —   1,1—
                                 T1.i
                                  1,1—

         C.
          1
            E [_l —
                 1,1
                           (lIlTTl.l)
                              — 1,1—          E.1. 1 lTz_l]
                                               1,1—— 1,1        ,




         g. E (l/1TE_ll)
         —1     — 1,1— E.1.i  , and
                         1,1—

                     1 —    cJ —        1T1
        1,1      1,1 ——1              —1—

        This expression, moreover, is easily seen to be the solution to the

following mean—variance portfolio choice problem:
                                             —11—



                              —                *       T
 (12)        maximize      v.(r.—pc.) —
                           —1 —i —1          (p./2)
                                               1      v.E. .V.
                                                      —1 1,1—1
                V.
                             T
             subject to:   —1 —1
                              v.   1



where p =     p.(iTh*)     Thus, when the investment management structure of

Figure 2 is efficient, it is optimal for the manager of 1th department to

allocate his funds as if he is trying to solve the portfolio choice problem

in (12). That is, he should act as if his relative risk aversion is

and he is investing in a vector of assets with expected yield vector r. —

and variance—covariance matrix E. ..           Only then will his investment decision
                                       1,1
be optimal from the point of view of the institution as a whole.

         There are two interesting aspects to the portfolio choice problem (12)

and its solution (11). First, it is generally optimal for the department

manager to act as if he has less relative risk aversion than the institution

as a whole. This follows because p<p. in the likely event that iTh<l.

In fact, the appropriate relative risk aversion for the manager increases

linearly with the size of his department's portfolio: the more funds allocated

to his department, the more risk averse he should act. The basic reason for

this centers on the informational segmentation implicit in Figure 2.          Since

there is usually more than one department, the risk of a particular depart-

ment's portfolio is being pooled with that of other departments. In particular,

if the        of (9) are zero, then the th department's contribution to the

variance of the institution's overall portfolio is (1Th)2.Var{.} where

Var{.} is the variance of the real rate of return of the th department's

portfolio. Behaving in a less risk averse manner is one way in which a

department manager can compensate for this pooling effect if he desires to
                                             —12—



focus upon the variance of his own          portfolio   in isolation. If   is

collinear with 1, then his optimal portfolio will equal the sum of the

first two terms on the right—hand side of (ll).2"

      In general, covariances between rates of return of assets in different

departments will not be so proscribed and allowances must be made for this

fact by the department managers. This is why when c. is not collinear with

1 it is optimal for the th manager to behave as if he is investing in an

artificial set of assets with mean vector and variance—covariance matrix

given by r —   pc. and E.. as in (12). His doing so essentially contributes
the third term on the right—hand side of (11) to his optimal portfolio share

vector. Notice that as lTh* tends to unity or as - tends to a vector collinear

with 1 this correction tends to zero.

      When c. is collinear with 1 then the th department manager need not

pretend that he is investing in artificial assets. His portfolio choice problem

in this case is to:

      maximize
                      —1—-i
                              —   (p/2)
                                    1     vQ. .v
                                          —1 1,1—1
         v.1
                       T
      subject to: v.1 = 1
                     —1—
where r and Q.   are the "true" mean—vector and variance—covariance matrix
                 .
      —1     1,1
of the assets under his purview. Notice, however, that he must still adjust

(lower) his level of relative risk aversion relative to that of the institution

as a whole to compensate for the pooling effect described above.

     Before extending Theorem 1 to multilevel investment management structures

like that in Figure 1, it is interesting to note that condition (9) is

equivalent to the requirement that the assets in each group within Figure 2
                                       —13--




 admit consistent simple sum    aggregation.   A similar duality between the

 conditions for decentralization and aggregation obtains in consumer choice

 theory. This duality relationship will prove useful in Section V wherein

 we demonstrate that within an efficient management structure the information

 required by higher level departments in order to efficiently allocate funds

 to subordinate departments is only a small subset of the information available

 to these subdepartments. Efficient management systems thereby permit

 information flows between departments and subordinate departments to be

economized.

 IV. The Efficiency of Multilevel Investment Management Systems

      We return now to the original focus of our study: to determine the

conditions under which multilevel decentralized management structures, like

that in Figure 1, are weakly efficient. An important result which we shall

employ to this end is the following lemma:

      Lemma 1: A given multilevel investment management structure, F,

      is efficient if and only if every 2—level structure formed by

      concatenating nonoverlapping departments and subdepartments of

      F is efficient.

To illustrate the use of this lemma,    consider   the 4—level structure of Figure 1.

All told, there are 12 2—level structures which can be formed by concatenating

departments and subdepartments with mutually exclusive asset domains. These

are displayed in Figure 3. Lemma 1 essentially says that the structure in

Figure 1 is weakly efficient if and only if each of the 2—level structures in

Figure 3 is weakly efficient.

      The formal proof of Lemma 1 is tedious, but straightforward, and we shall
                                  -14-



                                Figure 3
             THE 2—LEVEL STRUCTURES IMPLICIT IN THE 4—LEVEL
           INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM DISPLAYED IN FIGURE 1


 1) Equities, Bonds, Mortgages

 2) Equities, Bonds, Commercial Mortgages, Residential Mortgages

 3) Equities, Government Bonds, Corporate Bonds, Mortgages

 4) Equities, Government Bonds, Utility Bonds, Industrial Bonds, Mortgages

 5) Domestic Equities, Foreign Equities, Bonds, Mortgages

 6) Equities, Government Bonds, Corporate Bonds, Commercial Mortgages,
         Residential Mortgages

 7) Equities, Government Bonds, Utility Bonds, Industrial Bonds, Commercial
         Mortgages, Residential Mortgages

 8) Domestic Equities, Foreign Equities, Bonds, Commercial Mortgages,
         Residential Mortgages

 9) Domestic Equities, Foreign Equities, Government Bonds, Corporate Bonds,
         Mortgages

10) Domestic Equities, Foreign Equities, Government Bonds, Utility Bonds,
         Industrial Bonds, Mortgages

11) Domestic Equities, Foreign Equities, Government Bonds, Corporate Bonds,
         Commercial Mortgages, Residential Mortgages

12) Domestic Equities, Foreign Equities, Government Bonds, Utility Bonds,
         Industrial Bonds, Commercial Mortgages, Residential Mortgages
                                   —15—



only outline it here. The "necessity" part of Lemma 1 derives from the fact

that in our hypothesized world without transactions costs intermediate level

departments in a multilevel structure (e.g., the equity department in Figure 1)

function only to funnel the appropriate amounts of funds to their subordinate

departments. If the multilevel structure is efficient then the portfolio of

the institution as a whole would be invariant to whether funds are allocated

by the board of directors to the subdepartments among the bottom tier of the

structure directly or whether they are channeled to these subdepartinents via

intermediate departments. Hence, in order for a multilevel structure to be

efficient the structures obtained from it by eliminating arbitrary intermediate

and bottom level departments must also be efficient.

      To prove the "sufficiency" portion of Lemma 1, simply note that if

all 2—level structures implicit in a given multilevel structure are efficient,

then any intermediate or bottom level department in the multilevel structure

possesses sufficient information to allocate its funds directly to the

individual assets under its purview. Hence, these intermediate departments

certainly have enough information to optimally allocate funds to subordinate

departments. Moreover, when funds reach a bottom level department, this

department also has sufficient information to optimally allocate funds among

individual assets. Hence, "sufficiency" obtains.

      By employing Lemma 1, one may verify the weak efficiency of any specific

multilevel structure by using Theorem 1 to verify that each of the 2—level

structures implicit in it is efficient. The weak efficiency of a given multi-

level structure thus implies a set of covariance restrictions across asset

rates of return. These restrictions are found by applying Theorem 1 repeatedly
                                         —16—



 to the 2—level structures implicit in the multilevel structure. We have

 derived these implied covariance restrictions for the 4—level structure of

 Figure 1. Figure 4 summarizes these restrictions by displaying the required

 structure of the covariance matrix of rates of return. In this diagram

 underscores, "—,"   denote   constant vectors and the c•     's and c 's are
                                                        1,3         1,]
 scalars.   For comparison, in Figure 5 we display the covariance restrictions

 implied by the efficiency of the structure displayed in Figure 2. Notice

 that the efficiency of the multilevel structure in Figure 1 is a much more

 restrictive proposition than the efficiency of that in Figure 2.

 V. Efficiency and Consistent Simple Sum Aggregation Over Assets

      As in the deterministic theories of production and consumer choice,

 there is an intimate relationship between the concepts of efficient decen-

tralization and consistent simple sum aggregation. In order to explicate

this relationship within the simplest context, let us first reexamine the

generic 2—level decentralized structure of Figure 2. It will be recalled

that, from Theorem 1, a necessary and sufficient condition for this structure

to be efficient is that the variance—covarjance matrix of asset rates of

return satisfies the restrictions given in (9).      In another paper, Jones

[1980], the author has shown that (9) is also both necessary and sufficient

for the universe of assets to admit consistent simple sum aggregation

across each of the "s" asset groupings implicit in the structure of Figure 2.

Hence, for a given 2—level decentralized structure, the notion of weak

efficiency is essentially equivalent to the requirement that the universe

of assets admit consistent simple sum aggregation with respect to the natural

aggregation scheme implicit in the structure.
Domestic    Foreign     Government          Ut   iii ty          Industrial   Coninerc1a   Residetlal
            Equities     Bonds               Bonds                 Bonds      Mortgages    Mortgages




                                                                                                        I.-




                                 FIGURE 4

THE COVARIANCE STRUCTURE IMPLIED     BY   THE EFFICIENCY OF THE INVESTMENT

             MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE DEPICTED                IN   FIGURE   1
                                     utility         Industrial   Cormiercial   Residential




                               FIGURE 5

THE COVARIANCE STRUCTURE IMPLIED BY THE EFFICIENCY OF THE INVESTMENT

             MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE DEPICTED     IN   FIGURE 2
                                    —19—




       There is a natural extension of this result to multilevel management

 structures. To illustrate, consider the 4—level management structure

displayed in Figure 1 and recall that its efficiency is equivalent to the

proposition that each of the 2—level structures in Figure 3 is efficient.

This implies that the structure in Figure 1 is efficient if and only if each

of the simple sum aggregation schemes implicit in Figure 3 is consistent.

      One useful implication of the above result concerns the choice of

aggregation scheme to be employed in a portfolio choice model. Suppose that

a multilevel management structure is efficient. Then all aggregation schemes

formed from the 2—level structures implicit in the multilevel structure are

consistent. That is, any one of them may be validly invoked. To a limited

extent, then, a researcher is free to choose the aggregation scheme so as to

simplify his task at hand.

      The relationship between consistent simple sum aggregation and

efficient decentralizability also has implications regarding the information

which must be disseminated to departments in order for them to be able to

efficiently allocate their funds to subordinate departments. As Jones [1980]

makes clear, when a particular multilevel structure is efficient, it is not

necessary for each department to know the joint probability distribution of

yields on all assets within its purview. Rather, if the department's role

is merely to allocate funds among subordinate departments then substantially

less information will suffice. Specifically, this department can efficiently

operate knowing only the joint probability distribution of the yields on as

many "composite" assets as there are subordinate departments immediately below

it on the organization chart. The allocation of funds among these subordinate
                                              —20—



departments then may proceed as if the department were itself directly

 investing funds among these few ttcomposicelt assets.---"

         The yield index for the "composite't asset corresponding to the th

subordinate department is constructed in the following manner: First,

notice that efficiency implies that the covariance matrix between the 1th

and 1th subordinate departments takes the form             lc
                                                       —1- —J
                                                                —        for some vectors

      and c., where     does not depend on "j."       Next,    define:


                                    1,1 —1———1
                                             lc]
                          G.              —
                           1


and                            =   [C.1   —   (l/lTGll)G_1IITG_l]
where .
         1,1
            . is   the variance—covariance matrix associated with the yields on

the assets within the purview of the 1th subordinate department. Then the

yield index for this subordinate department, .,           is   given by:

                                1 = —1         —1 — E.l).
                                          .(r.—pcj/(l
                                          1—i         1—

        The reader should refer to Jones [19801 for a more detailed discussion

and a derivation of this expression.

VI. Summary and Conclusions

        In this paper we have endeavored to demonstrate that decentralized

investment management systems of the type described in Section I are not

always efficient. Specifically, within the context of the portfolio choice

paradigm employed in this paper, it is shown that a given decentralized

investment management system is (weakly) efficient if and only if the (sub-

jective) joint probability distribution of asset rates of return satisfy

certain covariance restrictions. If these covariance restrictions do not

obtain then, from the point of view of the institution as a whole, the asset

portfolios generated by this decentralized structure will generally be
                                    —21—



 inferior to those which would be generated by a completely centralized

 structure.

       This paper has also discussed how the managers of departments within

 an efficient decentralized structure should allocate their funds so as to

 maximize the "expected utility" of the institution as a whole.   Generally
 it is optimal for these managers to act as if they have less risk aversion

 than the institution as a whole. In particular, the smaller is the dollar

amount of funds controlled by a given manager, the less risk averse that

manager should act.

      Finally, we noted that the efficiency of a given decentralized invest-

ment management structure is equivalent to the proposition that the universe

of assets admits consistent sum aggregation across certain asset groups.

This result was shown to imply that the decentralization of investment

decisions permits the institution as a whole to economize on the information

which must be passed to higher level departments (e.g., the board of directors

in our example) in order for them to be able to efficiently discharge their

responsibilities.

      Several shortcomings of the above analysis should be pointed out at

this juncture. First, the analysis abstracts from information costs. It

is likely that if such cost were included in the analysis, weaker conditions

for a given decentralized investment management structure to be "economically

efficient" would result.

     Also, the generic decentralized investment structure probably presumes

more informational and asset segmentation than is the case in real world

institutions: Departments overseeing disjoint assets in the real world may
                                    —22—



exchange some information concerning each other's investment opportunities

or investment decisions. Furthermore, in actual practice several depart-

ments may have the authority to invest in the same assets. For example, at

some institutions, most department managers have the option of investing in

a "cash" asset like deposits or Treasury bills. Efficiency for this latter

type of structure has been partially analyzed by Jones [1979]. Therein, he

derives a sufficient condition for the (weak) efficiency of 2—level invest-

ment management structures in which each department has the alternative of

investing in a set of assets specific to that department and in a riskless

asset which is the same across departments. This condition essentially

replaces condition (9) of Theorem 1 with the requirement that

(9)            = 0    for all i#j; i,j=l,. ..   ,s.
                                        —23—



                                 FOOTNOTES

*1 wish to thank Vance Roley for his helpful comments on an earlier draft

of this paper.

1/ While the actual utility function that we employ below is of the mean—

variance variety, it is motivated within an expected utility maximization

framework.

2/ A similar criticism may be directed toward the extensive literature on

decentralizability or budgetability within the theories of consumer demand

and production.

3/ Below, this paradigm is motivated within an expected utility maximization

framework.

4/ In the ensuing discussions,    is always presumed to be nonsingular. This

assumption may be motivated by postulating the absence of default free indexed

bonds within an inflationary environment.

5/ Within the framework of Merton's [1973] saving—investment model this

result obtains if unexpected changes in the vector of instantaneous mean

rates of return is uncorrelated with the vector of unexpected actual

instantaneous rates of return. The portfolio problem (3) can also be shown

to result if the investor is assumed to have negative exponential von Neumann—

Morgenstern utility function defined in terms of portfolio real rates of return.

6/ As shown in Jones [1980], these covariance restrictions are essentially

equivalent to the requirement that the objective function in (3) is separable

in terms of the "s" asset groupings. In the language of Green [19641, this

means that a two—stage budgeting procedure would be consistent.

7/ This is because in this case l       is one—dimensional.
                                    2
                                        —24—



 8/ This scheme is formally equivalent to a completely centralized manage-

ment system in which the board of directors itself directly invests funds

in individual assets.

 —9/   When c. is collinear with —
           —1                       1—i =—0.
                                 1, B.c.

10/ To see how this fact economizes on information flows, consider a completely
centralized investment management structure and the structures depicted in

Figures 1 and 2. Suppose also that all are (weakly) efficient.

        Within the completely centralized structure, the board of directors

must have knowledge of r and Q, involving a total of k(3+k)/2 independent

parameters. For k = 100 this number is 5150.

        Within the context of the structure in Figure 2, the board of directors

requires knowledge of the mean vector and variance—covariance matrix associ-

ated with "s" composite assets. This involves only s(3+s)/2 independent

parameters. For s = 10 this number is 65.

        Within the context of the structure in Figure 1, the board requires

knowledge of only nine independent parameters.

        A similar economization of this information required by intermediate

and bottom level departments can be shown to result as the investment

management structure becomes more decentralized.
                                    —25--




                               BIBLIOGRAPHY

Friedman, B. and V. Roley, 1979, "A Note on the Derivation of Linear
    Homogeneous Asset Demand Equations," National Bureau of Economic
    Research Working Paper No. 345.

Friend, I., Y. Landskronner, and E. Losq, 1976, "The Demand for Risky
    Assets Under Uncertain Inflation," Journal of Finance, 31 (December),
    1287—1297.

Green, H., 1964, Aggregation in Economic Analysis: An Introductory Survey
    (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

Jones, D., 1979, A Structural Econometric Model of the United States
    Equity Market, Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University.

________   1980, "Consistent Simple Sum Aggregation over Assets,"
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 573.

Lintner, J., 1972, "Equilibrium in a Random Walk and Log Normal Securities
    Market," Harvard Institute for Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 235.

Merton, R., 1973, "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,"
    Econometrica, 41 (September), 867—887.
                                                              —26—




                                                        APPENDIX


Proof    of Theorem 1:

Necessity: Problem (3) can be rewritten in terms of partitioned matrices as:
                                                                                    A.




                                                   T—                     T                                  T
(Al)         maximize                          [h. r, —        (p/2)h. 2. •h,]
                                                                    1 1,1—1              — (p12)         E h. Q. .h.
                                     i=l                                                           i=l
             —l ,...,

             subject to:
                                          ST
                                          E 1 h.       = 1
                                         i=l
                                              --1
             The first order conditions for this problem are:

(A2)                 —   p.1,1—i
                             .h.
                                     —
                                          p   E   .1,J—J
                                                        .h.    —   1A=O
                                                                   —      for i=l,.. .,s


(A3)
             1=1
             •
                 S

                      1  lTh =   1


where      is the Lagrangian multiplier associated with the balance sheet

constraint.

         Equations (A2) and (A3) may be solved to obtain the optimal portfolio

shares   as functions of the 1 h.:
                                                  T*
                                                  —1

(A4)        h.
                 *               —
                         (lIp)B.r.       +    (1T*
                                                 h.)b.         — B.
                                                                                 *
                                                                               •h. for il,...,s
                               1—i             ——1  —1                    1,J—J

where       B. =                 — (1/1TQT11)QT11
                                      — 1,1—      1T—l1 and
             1             1,1                                1,1—--- 1,1

            b. =         (1/1TQ_l1)_1
                            — 1,1— i,i—1.
                 1

        A necessary condition for (weak) efficiency is that for each "iT',

(l/iTh*)
           - be          invariant with respect to all perturbations in the r• (j=i)

which leave 1 h. unchanged. For simplicity set i=l and define


                                                          ll l2                            rB11 B12
(A5)        hE[1 ;                                                            ; and B


                     L2                                   [2 22                            LB12
                                            —27—



 From (A4) we have

 (A6)                                 T*)                     *
             -2 =     (l/p)B2     + (1 -2 -2 —
                                                 B1Q11
 where                [l (1/jTQ_l1)çl1)ç2_l 11Tç_l] and
             B2

                      (l/i''c 1)2 i.

 Under the above notation we have

 (A7)                        =
             B1                  B1c21.
 This may be inserted into (A4) for i = 1 to yield:

                                 + (1T*
              *             —                     -'

 (A8)             =
                      (l/p)B1r        h1)b1 —
                                              B1Q1J2
                            —
                  = (l/p)B1r1
                                     T*
                                 + (1 h1)b1 —                                     T* "T *
                                                 B1Q12            {(1/p)B2r2 + (1—i
                                                                                      h1)b2—B2212h1J
or

(A9)
                           *
             (I+BQ12B2Q12)h1 =
                                            —
                                                         T*
                                                 + (1 h1)b1 —                                  T*
                                     (l/p)B1r1                           (l/p)B112B2r—     (1—i h1)B1c212b2.
         Thus, a necessary condition for (weak) efficiency is that the quantity

(AiD)
             B1Q12B2
be invariant with respect to all perturbations of -2 which leave (1 T*
                                                                     h1)
unchanged. From (5) it is seen that perturbing r2 by x leaves (iTh*) invariant

if and only if

(All)        1T        =

The set of x's satisfying this relation are the vectors in the column
                                                                      space of
the matrix

(A12)        [I —     (l/iTB2i)BiiTj
Thus, if we are to have

(A13)       B1c212B2 = B1Q12B2(r2 + x)

for all x satisfying (All), then it must be true that

(Al4)       {(l/1TB2 i)B 11T                           1T =
                                                                  [B1c12B2JT.
                                                 —28—



However, since the first matrix in square brackets on the left—hand side of

 this expression is symmetric and indempotent (i.e., an orthogonal projection

matrix) ,    this       implies that

 (A15)       B1212B2 = z 1TB

for some vector z. Also, it is easily shown that, since the rank of B is

"k—i," B22 1O. Hence, upon postmultiplying (A15) by 1 and noting that

B2 1       0 we obtain

 (A16)       0 =   z.
Thus,

(A17)        B1c212B2 =     0.

         From the structures of B1 and B2, it is clear that all
                                                                  Q12 satisfying
(A17) must be of the form

(A18)                     1T +
             l2
for some vectors             and c.
         Since our original choice of i=l was arbitrary, conditions analogous

to (A18) must hold for values of "i" different from unity. These conditions

when taken together imply that each Q.. takes the form

(A19)               =    T    + i
                                       T
                                           ij; i,j=l,. . .   ,s

                                 1
for some fixed vectors c and c. This is condition (9) in the statement of
                            —J
the Theorem.

Sufficiency: Sufficiency follows upon noting that if (9) holds, then
             T*       i           —
(A20)      — hjh. = (
         (1/1                 )B.r.
                                 1—]
                                       b. — (__——i)B c
                                     + —1
                        .
                          iTh                 T *
                                                         ih.
for each "i." Because c. is a constant vector, this implies that f—functions

satisfying (8) exist where f. is given by the right—hand side of (A20).

       From (A20), it is also apparent why strong efficiency cannot obtain
                                  —29—



if the r vector is unrestricted in Rk and k>s>l. If strong efficiency

obtained then it would be necessary that the right—hand side of (A20) be

independent of r. for all "1" and "j" (ti). This is impossible if the r•

are unrestricted since by suitably choosing the r•, lTh can be made to

achieve any desired value.




                                 Q.E.D.
