NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE RELATIVE PRODUCTIVITY

HYPOTHESIS

OF INDUSTRIALIZATIO: THE AMERICAN CASE,
1820 to 1850

Claudia Goldin

Kenneth SokoIo'
Working Paper No. 722

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
July 1981

The authors have benefited
from the comments of Richard
Arnott,
Douglas Blair and Stanley
Engerman. They are grateful to Jeremy
Atack, Fred Bateman, and Tom Weiss for providing Sokoloff
with a
copy of their sample of Northeastern
firms from the 1850 Census of
Manufactures. Goldin's research has been
supported by NSF Grant
C78—15O37. The research reported here is
part of the IER's
research program in Development of the American Economy.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the
National Bureau of Economic
Research. Please do not cite or quote
without the author's
pernhissjon.

NBER Working Paper 722
July 1981

The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of Industrialization:
The American Case, 1820 to 1850

ABSTRACT

The American Northeast industrialized
rapidly from about 1820 to
1850, while the South remained
agricultural.
Industrialization in the
Northeast was substantially
powered during these decades by female and
child labor, who comprised about 45
the manufacturing work force in
1832. Wherever manufacturing spread of
in the Northeast, the wages of females
and children relative to those of adult men increased
greatly from levels
in the agricultural sector which
were previously quite low.
Our hypothesis of early industrialization is that such development
proceeds first in areas whose
agriculture, for various reasons, puts
a low value on females and children
relative to adult men. The lower
the

"relative productivity" of females

children in the pre—industrial
agricultural or traditional economy theand
earlier
will manufacturing evolve,
the Proportionately greater will the relative wages
for females and
children

increase, and
economy produce.

the relatively more manufactured goods will

the

A two—sector model which
incorporates a difference in "relative
productivity" between two economies is used
to develop seven propositions
relating to the process of early industrialization
Data from two early
censuses of manufactures, 1832 and 1850, and other sources provide
evidence for our hypothesis,
demonstrating, for example, the low relative
productivity of females and children in the
Northeast agricultural sector,
and the increase in relative
wages for these laborers with industrialization.
We conclude that factors with low
were instrumental in the initial relative productivity in agriculture
adoption of the factory system and of
industrialization in general in the U.S., and we believe these results
are applicable to contemporary
phenomena in developing countries.

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk/CR

Philadelphia, PA 19104
(215) 243—7733

Kenneth Sokoloff
11655 Mayfield Avenue, No. 6
Los Angeles, California 90049

"Extensive manufactures can only be the offspring of a redundant, at
least of a full population."
•

. in

general, women and children are rendered more useful, and the
latter more early useful, by manufacturing establishments than they
would otherwise be."
Alexander Hamilton, Report on Manufactures (1791),
reprinted in F.W. Taussig, editor, State Papers and
Speeches on the Tan. ff (1892), p. 3 and p. 19.

Introduction: The Role of Females and Children in Industrial Development
There are diverse and complex reasons why certain countries have
industrial-

1.0

ized

early in their histories and why within countries there has been regional

variation in industrial development. One contributing factor to the early
industrial history of the U.S., which appears to have more universal significance, is the productivity of females and of children relative to that of

men within the agricultural sector. The contributions of this factor, which
we term "relative productivity," to the evolution of the factory system and to
regional variation in industrial development have been

substantially underrated,

although they were clearly recognized by those living at the time.

Our study

focuses on the influence of the single factor "relative productivity," on
the nature and the location of early industrial development in the U.S.

We will show that the labor forces of early manufacturing firms in the U.S.
were comprised largely of females and children, that wages of females and

children relative to adult men rose with industrialization, and that industrial
development seemed to flourish in areas which previously had low relative

productivities of females and children in the agricultural sector.
In countries having high birth rates, a significant proportion of the total

population will be between ten and twenty-five years (35% in the case of the U.S.
in 1820), and the young will comprise an even larger fraction of the potential

—2—

labor

force. The efficient employment of the young and of women outside their

child-bearing years can make a substantial difference in the standard of living
of the entire populace.

It is thus not surprising that the Industrial Revolu-

tion both in the U.S. and in Great Britain was, at least initially, powered by
these laborers.

Prior to industrialization the relative productivity within the agricultural sector of the young and of females was low in the hay, wheat, and

dairy regions of the North. But relative productivity was substantially higher
in the cotton, sugar, rice, and tobacco regions of the South, where slavery
had long been established and industrial development lagged behind that of the
Northeast

to that
in

and differed in form. The ratio of manufacturing and mining output

in agriculture in the non-South was almost nine times that in the

South

1860; the ratio of manufacturing and mining output to all commodity output

in the non-South was about five times that in the South.

During the pre-industrial period, females and children in the Northeast

were typically perceived and described as "redundant" laborers. The introduction
of machinery and

the

factory system radically changed this view. By 1832 about

45% of the industrial work force in the American Northeast was young and female,

although this percentage peaked not soon thereafter. Furthermore a remarkably
high percentage of all young New England women were employed in manufacturing,

even though the factory system was still in its infancy. As the manufacturing
sector expanded, wages for females and the young relative to those for adult males

rose rapidly. But as the century progressed various changes, including the large
Irish immigration, served to increase the supply of unskilled workers and
the increase in this wage

The period from 1820

to

slow

relative.
to 1850 is

generally viewed as encompassing

Industrial Revolution in the U.S. Although

in 1850

the

the

U.S. population was still

-3-

primarily

decreased

agricultural, the percentage of the labor force in that sector had
substantially in the three decades preceding, from 79% in 1820 to

55% by 1850, and in the North, the primary area of industrial development,
this percentage decreased even more dramatically, from 75% to 30% over this

period. Significant changes occurred within industries regarding the nature of

work and mechanization particularly in

cotton textiles. But many other industries,

(e.g. iron, glass, paper, shoes), which witnessed far less technical change and

mechanization, also saw increased scale of firm and division of labor during the
first half of the nineteenth century.
Our findings encompass many aspects of early industrial development, but
central to this more involved tale is

of the location and nature of

a critical finding about the determinants

industrialization. Within a land rich country

where, for various reasons, the relative

price of unskilled male labor is high, the

factory system will locate where it can utilize those individuals least productive
in agriculture, and it will in general locate where their relative productivity

is the lowest. This "relative

productivity" hypothesis is the focal point of our

study.

This hypothesis has important precedents, both in the "surplus labor theory"
of W.A. Lewis (1958) and in the labor-saving technical change literature
stimulated by H.J. Habakkuk's (1962) monograph. 2
from their's in fundamental

But our framework differs

ways. We distinguish among laborers in their pro-

ductivity within the agricultural and traditional sectors at full employment.
Our focus is on relative productivity

within the class of laborers, and not on

"cheap" or "dear" labor relative to capital and land.

Our study also differs

from past industry studies (e.g. Ware 1931) by utilizing the manuscripts of

various censuses of manufactures. (See Note at end for descriptive material
on these sources.) We therefore do not focus on a single industry and have a

-4-

large and diverse enough sample to test hypotheses about the process of early
industrialization that have previously been unexplored.

Section 2.0 presents a simple two good (A and M), two factor (Lm and Lf) model
in which two economies (N and S) differ only as regards the technology used to
produce the A good, thus incorporating a difference in "relative productivity.'t

Such a difference in "relative productivity" between sectors and between countries is only one of many possible factors determining the degree and nature of

industrialization. But because we strive to isolate the implications of this one
factor, the construction of our model is sparse, and we have standardized the

two economies in a particular way. In Section 3.1 we justify our assumption
of low initial relative productivity of females and of children in the North with

data from its pre-industrial period. Section 3.2 presents evidence on the effect
of industrial development on relative wages, labor force participation rates, and

the nature of the manufacturing production process. We summarize our findings
in Section 4.0 by reviewing the historical evidence we present on the seven
propositions developed in Section 2.0
2.0 A Two-Sector Model of Early Industrialization in America

Consider two economies (N and 5) facing the same relative output prices
(P

m"a'

and having two inputs of given amounts, male labor (1T) and female

and child labor (Lf), which are not able to migrate between the economies.

The inherent differences between these two factors may be the result of physical
strength, dexterity, job experience, maturity, skill, or cultural factors.

In the pre-industrial economy there is only an agricultural good (A), which is
relatively male labor intensive in comparison to the as yet unavailable or

unprofitable manufacturing technology (M). Our notion of "relative productivity"
is

incorporated by assuming that the N economy has an agricultural technology

—5-

which is more L intensive, at any set of factor prices, than is the agricultural
technology in the S economy. Each economy has a unique A good technology which
cannot

be transferred to the other.

The pre-industrial economies are illustrated in the Lerner-Pearce diagram
of Figure 1. The isoquants AN and AS represent equal quantities and thus equal
values of the agricultural good, assumed to be the same in the two economies and
to be produced with homogeneous of degree one production functions differing

in factor intensity. Ray OR gives the global factor intensity of the two
economies, and the intersection at point r on ray OR of the two agricultural
isoquants implies that the two pre-industria]. economies

amounts of the A good at full employment. This

produce identical

standardization assumption ensures

that any difference between the two economies in the industrialization process
does not arise from an inherent inefficiency of

one in the production of the A

good.

is

The factor price ratio in the pre-industrial N economy, at full employment,
N
.
.
S
and it will be lower than that given
given by (Wf/W)
by
for
(Wf/W)

,

.

the pre-industrial S economy. This difference in relative input prices at full
employment in the pre—industrial economies is precisely what we mean by relative

productivity." It is even possible that

N

(Wf/W)

reservation wage ratio, say the dashed line

will be lower than some

(w'7), which

would imply that the

supply of Lf schedule would have a flat portion of amount (Lf*Lf) at the
reservation wage.

What happens when a manufacturing sector (M) is available to these traditional

economies? We have assumed that the M sector is, compared to both the N and the
S agricultural sectors, Lf intensive, at all factor prices.

in

Isoquant M0

Figure 1 represents a value of M equal at the output price ratio p0 to that

of the A output given by isoquants AN

or

AS. But p0 is insufficient to induce

-6--

S AS

Lf* Lf

Figure 1: Lerner-Pearce diagram of pre-industrial economies and
economy

AS

/
/

/
/
/
/
/

R

AN

Lf

Figure 2: Lerner-PearCe diagram of industrial N and S economies

industrial

N

—7--

either economy to industrialize
p1 >

Consider a small increase in p, say to

p0, or alternatively, a small change in the manufacturing

sufficient to yield

as the manufacturing isoquant, again with the same

value of output as those given in the A sector. An increase
Hicks-neutral technical
that is it is equivalent

in p, or a

change in M, shifts isoquant M toward

the origin,

to renumbering the M isoquants.

These exogenous changes are now sufficient for the N
M good, but insufficient for the S economy. Thus

advances, the N economy industrializes

economy to produce the

as p increases or as technology

first. The new equilibrium for the N

economy in Figure 1 will be a factor price ratio of (wf/w)N1

duct ion of

and

,

and Ob in manufacturing.

,

pro-

and factor intensities given
by Dc in agriculture
Equilibrium in the S economy will involve the previous

factor price ratio (wf/w)S0 >

when only the N

technology,

(wf/w)N1.

Therefore during this initial phase,

economy industrializes, the factor price ratio in the N

economy rises, but does not exceed that in the S economy. Indeed,
the two
economies will have the same
input price ratio only at the point of specialization in M.
Now consider another

Lerner-pearce diagram, that in Figure 2, in which

the M isoquant has been shifted to the origin
further increase in p or to further

are

neutral technical change. These changes

now just sufficient to induce the

good. The new equilibrium for the
of (wf/w)N2, production of AN

(M2) in response either to

S economy to produce the manufactured

N economy involves a factor price ratio

and , and

factor intensities of Od in agri-

culture and Oe in

manufacturing. The factor price ratio in the S economy
rises to (wf/w)SJ >
(wf/w)N2, but the percentage increase in the N factor
price ratio is greater than that for

*

*

A and M

,

the S economy. The S economy produces
and for the case drawn M >
*S
A > A > M
The N economy produces

*M * *N

.

-8-

aLsolutely more M than does the S economy, and also produces a higher
ratio of (M/A) than the S economy. The factor intensities in the S economy
are Of and 0g. bounded by those in the N economy.

The following seven propositions summarize our characterization of the
pre--industrial economies and of the general equilibrium impact either of an

increase in the relative price of manufactured goods (o) or of a neutral
technical change inducing the same effect:
•

N

S

(1) Prior to industrialization (Wf/W) < (WifW)
(2) As the relative price of manufactured goods rises or as technical change
advances, the N economy industrializes first;
(3) After the introduction of the M sector in the N economy only, (wf/wm)N
increases but is less than (wf/w)S. After the introduction of the M sector

both economies (wf/w)N increases further and increases proportionately more
than does (wf/w)S;
in

(4) Factor intensities in the S economy are more alike between the two
sectors than are those in the N economy;

(5) The M sector is relatively Lf intensive, and therefore relatively
more Lf than Lm migrates to it;
(6) The N economy produces absolutely more

also

M than does the S economy and

produces a higher ratio of (M/A).

If the ccmplication of a Teservation wage is added: —

in

(7)

Before the introduction of the M sector, (Lf/Lm)

is higher in S

than

N, but the labor force participation rate of Lf increases in the N economy
with the introduction of the M sector.
Some further remarks should be made regarding propositions (3) and (6).
These propositions accurately represent the responses in the two economies
when we consider the exogenous shock to have been a small increase in the

relative price of manufactured goods or a small change in technical efficiency
of M production. If, however, we consider a global change, such as the introduction of a new technology, further qualifications would be needed. But since
initial industrial development implies a small change around the point of

specialization in agriculture, we believe these propositions to be valid

-9-

characterizations of early industrialization
There are two sets of implications from

our analysis. One concerns dif-

ferences between two economies that embrace a new sector, and one concerns
the impact of industrial development within an economy. We focus primarily
on the latter with respect to the North, but also use our analysis to explore
the relative absence of industrialization in the South.5 The two-sector model
summarizes the essential outlines of industrialization

during the Early Republic.

Industrial development in the U.S. at the turn of the nineteenth century was
fostered by production techniques that utilized new forms of capital equipment
and that employed a greater division of labor and the factory system of

production. The proximate cause of industrialization, though, was the increase
in the relative price of manufactured goods with the cessation of trade during

the Napoleonic Wars and the maintenance of a high relative price with
the imposition of a tariff on manufactured goods. But it was only in the hay,
wheat, and dairy regions of the American Northeast, where the wages of females
and boys relative to those for adult men were initially low, that this industrial
development flourished.

-10-

3.0 Relative Wages and the Unskilled Labor Market in Early Industrialization

3.1 Pre-Industrial Relative Productivities and Employment
Both relative wages and labor force participation rates for females and
children were low in the pre-industrial Northeast, in apparent contrast to
the general "scarcity of hands" and "dearness of labor" that characterized

the late eighteenth century adult male labor market. As the above quotations

indicate, Hamilton, like many of his contemporaries, looked toward this
under and unemployed segment of the economy to provide industrial labor power.
Both

the low initial relative productivities of females and children and their

related low labor force participation rates were to have profoundly influenced
the

nature of industrial development in the U.S.

Measures of relative productivity in agriculture during the pre-industrial
Early Republic exist in only fragmentary form, and our understanding of the

sources of such differences is somewhat limited. Our quantitative knowledge
about relative wages in agriculture and in the traditional sector is given
in Table 1, which presents data on the agricultural sectors of the North and
the South at a time when industrial development was very limited and, in the

North, during the period of increasing industrialization. The data from 1808
to 1815 for Massachusetts indicate the very low relative productivity of women

and children (generally defined as less than sixteen years old) in the agri-

cultural sector. Evidence for 1832 pertaining to areas somewhat removed from
industrial development shows the same pattern.

Several difficulties have arisen in constructing these ratios for the

pre-industrial economies. As industrialization spread, wage ratios in the
agricultural sector rose, and care was taken to ensure that the wage ratios

in agriculture reflected the pre-industrial relative productivities. The computation of all in-kind payments for male laborers working on monthly or yearly

—11—

TABLE 1

Relative Wages for Females and Boys in the Agricultural and Traditional
Sectors of Various Economies (with and without board)

Including a Value

Excluding a Value

for Board a

for Board

b

b

Wf/Wm

Wb/Wm

(1) U.S. Northeast
(a) Massachusetts
1808
0.288

0.149

1832

<0.260

(c) Ohio
1836-40

(2) U.S. South
(a) Old South
1850
(b) Entire South
1860
1867
1868

wb/w

0.198
0.366

1811

1815
(b) Middle Atlantic

wf/w

0
'0.191-0.260

0.572-0.769
0.584
0.559
0.573

0.247-0.433

c

0.446
0.438
0.483

(3) Egypt

c.1965

0.65-0.69

0.48-0.50

for board has either been added

or payment was exclusive of board.

bFemale wage divided by adult male wage; boy's

wage divided by adult male wage.

cThese ratios also exclude values for clothing and
medical care.

—12-

Notes:
(la)

1808, 1811: Carroll Wright, Sixteenth Annual Report of the Commissioner
of Labor of Massachusetts, (1885). This retrospective of wages and
prices does not indicate whether or not board is included, but the
absolute level of wages indicates that it must have been. In 1808 boys
84.44: per day or about
were given is/day = 16.74:/day and men 5s 0.8d
$21.70 per month. Adams has found that men were paid $16.50 inclusive
of board in 1808 in the Brandywine, (Donald Adams, "Workers on the
Brandywine: The Response to Early Industrialization" Regional Economic
History Working Paper, 1980, p. 22, Table 5). The figure given for
female domestics in the Wright report does not appear to include a value
for board, and one of $1/week has been assumed. 1815: Wright gives 504:/week
for females with boaitland 86.84:/day for males without board. A six day
week is assumed, as is $1.00/week board for females. Males with
board received 564: per day.

(ib) The figure for children is for board only and that excluding a value
respondents in New York
for board is zero. McLane Report (1832)
counties almost unanimously stated that children in the agricultural
sector earned only their board, if that. Typical of their statements
are the following from the McLane Report, Vol. II ". . . children's
wages are not worth any thing, but to make cotton goods," (p. 38), and
"Children, under 16, cannot obtain wages; their board and washing is
generally considered of about as much value as their labor " (P. 77).
(lc) 1836-1840: G. Holmes, (1912), Table 5: Ohio Farm Record of Wages Paid
Butler County Ohio. Female help: wages per week; male labor; daily wages
times 6. Means of ranges given used. The lower ratio uses the harvest wage.

(2a) Read off Figures 19 and 22 in R.W. Fogel and S.L. Engerman, Time on
For comparability with the florthern figures,
the Cross (1976), Vol. I.
only females between 15 and 29 years old have been considered and only
earnings from field production have been used. The earnings have been
weighted by the age distribution of females working in the Hamilton
Mills. Dublin (1979) gives this distribution as: 39% between 15 and 19
years and 61% between 20 and 29 years. The smaller number uses the
peak male net hire as the denominator and the larger number uses a
weighted average of male net hires, 15 years and older where the weights
are the proportion in each group (Historical Statistics, 1976, p. 17).
Boys are between 10 and 15 years old for the smaller estimate of (Wb/W );
boys are defined as 15 year olds for the larger estimate for comparabihty
with the (2b) series.
(2b) Unweighted averages for southern states from U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture for the Year 1867
(Washington, 1868), p. 416. Boys were defined as not under 14 years old.
(3)

Bent Hansen "Employment and Wages in Rural Egypt," American Economic Review
(June 1969), Vol. LIX, p. 307. The first figure includes all villages in
survey; the second includes only those with records for 50 weeks and over.

-13-

contracts was another problem. Because male laborers on long-term contracts
frequently received lodging in addition to board, we have constructed esti-

mates only where we could get daily hires. Finally, some of the most persuasive
evidence we have gathered on the relative cheapness of female wages in the
traditional sector was of a qualitative nature and could not be included in
Table 1.

Numerous accounts of the early nineteenth century indicate that weekly
wages for female domestics rose during the first third of the nineteenth
century (Ware 1931, p. 241) .

Such accounts also indicate that male wages in

agriculture did not increase over these years, and therefore that relative
wages for females within the agricultural sector rose with increasing industrial-

ization. Henry Carey (1835), in his comparative study of wages across industrial
nations, noted that in the U.S. case "agricultural labour has not varied
materially ...

in

its money price [from 1793 to 1833] ...

the

wages of men

having been very steadily about nine dollars per month [with board, but]
the wages of ...

females have greatly advanced being nearly double what they

were forty years since (p. 26) ."

Considerable strength is added to our

quantitative evidence on relative wages in agriculture by the commentary of.
those who lived through the period and those who have studied it intensively.
In sharp contrast to the low relative productivity of females and children
in northern agriculture are the data for the cotton and tobacco growing regions

of the South, where wage ratios were approximately double. There are several
factors that could account for this difference, among them that women in the
North rarely worked in the fields and that the wage rates used for the North

are those of domestics.6 Why females in the North did not work in the fields
or even in dairying tasks is an issue of great complexity, but one which may
be related to our explanation of differences in the agricultural production

-14-

function. Differences in the relative productivity of boys between the
North and the South probably arose from the physical strength required and

the costly supervision needed in the farming chores of the Northeast. Cotton
and tobacco agriculture tended to conserve both on supervision costs and

strength for a number of reasons. Females and children were relatively more
productive in crops requiring extensive cultivation such as cotton and
tobacco, and cotton, in particular, favored the small in harvesting operations.
Furthermore cotton picking allowed a piece rate system of self-supervision
and was not only unaffected by incomplete harvesting, but also required
harvesting over a long period as the boils matured.7
Because high relative wages for females in the South persisted into the

post-bellum period (see line (2b) Table 1) and exist in cotton regions today
(see line (3)), it does not appear that slavery was the dominant cause

of the ante-belium wage ratio differences. Indeed slavery may have been a
comparatively more profitable labor system in areas whose dominant crops
favored the utilization of the female and younger portions of the labor
force, whose leisure, education, and home production were valued far less
than in a free labor system.8
Not only were the relative productivities of females and children low
in the Northeast, but their employment also appears to have been below that

considered, in the pre-industrial period, "full." While there are no formal
estimates of pre-industrial labor force participation rates, Hamilton spoke
of manufacturing affording "the employment of persons who would otherwise be
idle (p. 19)," the typical McLane Report respondent referred to the employment
of "females who had little else to do (Vol. I, p. 819)," and the view that
"mill labor was ...

largely

composed of women and children who were otherwise

—15-

unemployed (Ware 1931, p. 226)" has been accepted by most scholars of the
Early Republic.

Regional variation in the process of industrialization has been attributed

to many factors. Among them the most widely debated for the American case
have been: capital market imperfections, political and cultural differences,
and the relative efficiency of slaves in cotton and tobacco production. We
have added another possible reason for the superiority of the North in the

initial transition. When industrialization first took root in the North, it
was fueled by abundant and relatively cheap female and child labor. The
South may have had a large pool of unskilled labor, but it has no group
whose relative productivity was low within the region.
The two-sector model has indicated that during the initial phase of industrialization, female labor would migrate to the industrial sector in a

greater proportion than would male labor. In the North this is precisely
what happened during the 1820 to 1850 period. The daughters of northern farm
families left home to work in factories for relatively brief periods of time.
This use of labor having a low product in agriculture encouraged the industrial-

ization of the Northeast. The impact of manufacturing and the factory system
on relative wage rates and employment of females and children is the topic
we next address.

-16-

3.2 The Impact of Industrialization on Relative Wages and on the Unskilled
Labor Market, 1820 to 1850

It has long been recognized that women and children played an important
role in the early industrialization of both the U.S. and Great Britain, but
the actual extent of their employment has not been fully appreciated.

Al-

though we have no information on the pre-industrial labor force participation
rates of females, the data that we have amassed, sketchy as they are, highlight
a spectacular change in the labor markets of the Northeast during the period
of early industrialization.

Over the two decades from about 1810 to 1832, the percentage of young
women (between the ages of 10 and 29) engaged in factory work increased from
near zero to somewhere between 10% and 30%, depending on the location in the

Northeast.

10

.

In Massachusetts and Rhode Island, the states which industrial-

ized most rapidly and for which we have the most reliable data, about 19% to
27% of all females 10 to 29 years old were reported in manufacturing employ-

ment in 1832. This figure increased in Massachusetts to about 40% by 1837,
if one also includes employment in the home production of palm leaf hats and

other items. Using the same procedures for 1850 results in figures ranging

from 27% to 33% for these states. Thus, at an early date in the nineteenth
century the states of New England were employing a substantial fraction of

their unmarried women in factory work. Because other occupations existed
for young women, e.g. teaching, domestic service, these figures provide a
lower bound to the actual labor force participation rates of this group and
attest to the tightness of this early labor market.

Another statistic that indicates the importance of non-adult male labor
in the process of industrialization is the percentage of the industrial labor

force composed of women and children. As we pointed out in the introduction,

-17-

this figure was higher during the early period of industrialization than it

was after. For the states of the Northeast, about 45% of the industrial
labor force was comprised of nonadult
had been reduced to about 33-s.

males in 1832, but by 1850 this figure

11

A decomposition of the sources of the

relative decline in female workers for Massachusetts over the period 1837
to 1850 indicates that the sectoral shift

by industry in the total labor force

was more important than was the decline of the employment of women within
particular industries.

The high percentage of the industrial labor force composed of females
and children during the initial period of industrialization indicates the

extent to which individual firms substituted

relatively cheap female and

young labor for relatively expensive male labor. Traditional historical sources
on early industrialization have pointed to the existence of different technologies within a wide range of industries,

giving entrepreneurs a broad menu

of factor proportions from which to choose. Although the substitution of
unskilled labor and capital for skilled artisans is well known in the case
of cotton textiles, the substitution of females and of children for adult

males was also achieved in boots and shoes

(Hazard 1921), wool (Cole 1926),

glass (Davis 1949), and paper among other industries. The percentage of a
firm's labor force that was composed of females and of children rose substantially from the small size class of one to five workers, to the intermediate

class from six to fifteen workers. Thus, it was the change from the
artisanal shop to the small factory that was behind the early utilization

of women and children. While some of this substitution involved large
amounts of capital, much involved merely an expanded division of labor, in
the absence of the employment of a new and more capital intensive technology. 12

The substantial utilization of females and of the young within manufacturing and the large percentage of these groups in the population employed

—18—

TABLE 2
RELATIVE WAGE RATES IN MANUFACTURING, for two regions 1832 and 1850

Wb/W

Wf/W

New England Middle Atlantic

1832a

.434

[.388-.479
1832b

.459

[.448—.470J

1850a

.416

[.334-.497]

1850b

.440

{.388—.492

.424

[.379-.468}
.451

[.438-.463]

New England Middle Atlantic

.393

.408

[.304-.500] {,294-.482]
.431

.446

[.370-.503]

[.358.-.486]

.489
[.393-.585]
.483

[.426-.539]

Sources and Notes:

1832a: The estimate of the female to adult male (Wf/Wm)

and boy to adult male

(Wb/Wm) wage ratios are derived from a set of wage regressions estimated over
a sample of 853 manufacturing firms from the McLane Report (1832); See Table 3.
Because these wage ratios vary somewhat across industries, we have given the
ranges in brackets. The average ratios given are the midpoints of the reported
ranges in the case of (wf/wm), and the average of the wage ratios estimated for

the various manufacturing industries in the case of (wb/Wm)
1832b: These ratios utilize the 1832a femal.e and boy wage figures, but are
divided by 1832 wage rates for common laborers. The New England estimates is
Lebergott'S
Lebergott's (1964, p. 541), adjusted for a value of $1.50/week board.
too high and
estimate for the 1832 Middle Atlantic common laborer wage appears
is inconsistent with other evidence. For example, it implies that common laborers
were paid higher wages than were the employees of most manufacturing industries,
laborers fell in the
and it also indicates that the nominal wage for common
Middle Atlantic between 1832 and 1850, while rising significantly in New England.
of 964/day, we use a figure
Thus, instead of employing Lebergott's estimate
We have derived this
of 75.5/day, obtained from two independent methods.
differential from
estimate by applying the New England-Middle Atlantic wage
terms) to the New
the regressions over manufacturing firms (in percentage
England wage for common laborers. In addition, an average of the common
laborer wage rates given by J. Zabler, "Further Evidence on American Wage
Differentials," Explorations in Economic History (1972), and D. Adams, "Wage
1785-1830," Journal of
Rates in the Early National Period: Philadelphia,
estimate.
Economic History (1968) yields an almost identical
continued .

-19-

by industry suggest that relative
by industrialization

wage ratios may have been radically altered

We therefore turn to a discussion of how early in—

dustrialization affected relative
wages, which were initially quite low in

these regions. Our estimates
given in Table 2, where we

of relative wage ratios in manufacturing are

summarize findings from our more comprehensive

study of early industrialization
Albert Gallatin, twice

(Goldin and Sokoloff, 1981).

Secretary of the Treasury, noted in 1831 that

"female labor employed in

manufactures appears from the rate of their wages
to be more productive than
if applied to the ordinary occupation of women."3
Our principal finding confirms this Supposition; wherever

manufacturing and

the factory system evolved, the relative wages of females
and of boys rose.
The wage data underlying Table 2 have been derived
primarily from a set of

wage regressions on firm-level data, of

which that for 1832 is given in

Table 3. Two wage ratio

estimates are presented in Table 2 for each year:
figure 'a' uses our estimate of
male wages in manufacturing and figure 'b'
uses estimates of a more uniform
worker's wage, that of a 'common laborer.'
Estimate 'b', which we prefer, is constructed to standardize
male workers,
because industrialization
may have widened the wage distribution for adult
men (Willianson and Lindert,
1980) although the majority of men were not
industrial workers.

Table 2 continued

l8SOa: The estimates of (Wf/W) are derived from a set of wage regressions
run
over a sample of firms from the Census of
Manufactures for 1850; see Goldin and

Sokoloff (1981) for details.
in brackets, and the point estimate is the midpoint of the
range. The 1850
census did not require manufacturers to
distinguish between adult males and
boys, and thus we are unable to

Thag industries, is given

compute (wb/w). Because of this aggregation

of adult males with boys,
we have used wage rates for males only in industries
which employed few boys.

1850b: The (wf/w) figures are based on the lSSOa female
wage estimates, but
utilize Lebergott's (1964) estimates of the wages for common laborers in 1850
for the male wage.

3

=

paper)

R2; Number of Observat ions

Other

Shoes

Coach

Tanneries

Mills

Iron Products

Iron

Wool

Cotton

(0

Industry Dummies:

Region Dummy:
New England

0.476; 414

(1.10)

0.076

-0.648
(-9.25)

0.161
(0.85)

(1.09)

0.182

(-1.40)

-0.267

0.079
(1.20)

(1.44)

(0.49)

(0.24)

(1.47)
(2.42)

(0.24)
-0.112
(-0.89)

(1.47)
-0.391
(-8.27)

0.186; 284

(1.08)

(2.31)

0.374; 853

0.127

0.099

(1.19)

0.080
(0.55)
0.040

—0.056
(-0.76)
-0.144
(-3.00)
0.081

0.435

0.233

0.179

(-0.97)
0.101

-0.206
(-1.73)
-0.114

0.243
(4.26)

0.066
(1.42)
-0.112
(-2.49)
0.012

(9.44)

(5.18)

0.094

0.207

0.230

Dependent variable: Log Average Daily Wage X 310 days; unweighted ordinary least squares regressions
of firm averages from all firms in McLane Report with quality and complete reporting, giving
Wf
Wm or Wb wages. t' statistics in parentheses.
Log (Wm)
Log (Wb)
Log (Wf)
5.498
4.523
Constant
4.447
(108.5)
(32.3)
(53.5)
0.033
0.028
0.031
Log (Labor Force)
(4.27)
(1.38)
(1.98)
Urbanization
0.019
0.004
0.056
(County's
Log
(4.98)
(0.67)
Rate)
(0.18)

WAGE REGRESSIONS FOR FEMALES, MALES, AND BOYS, 1832

TABLE

—21—

The usual assumption of homogeneous labor is a more accurate description of
the female and child labor force than of adult males.

Compared to the relative wages in Table 1 those for females in Table 2
are about 50% greater and indicate an increase in this ratio of about 1.6%
per annum from 1815 to 1840.14

The relative wage of females in manufacturing

increased even more later in the nineteenth century, reaching a long term level
of about 0.58 by 1880, where with only one decline (the early l930's) and
one large increase (World War II period) it has remained.15 Therefore, in

the brief period of early industrialization the relative wage of females
increased at a remarkable rate, achieving a value that was 83% of its long
run figure, as opposed to that of the traditional sector which was only 52%
of it.

The estimates of (wf/w) in Table 2 may even understate the impact of
industrialization on relative productivities, because they are not fully
adjusted for changes in the composition of the female labor force.

Girls,

that is females below the age of sixteen years, compris1from 20 percent to
25 percent of the total female workforce in manufacturing in 1832, and their

wages were about 60 percent of a full-grown female worker's. But

young

girls were rarely hired in the agricultural and traditional seétors since
their absolute wages barely covered their board, and the use of young workers

was reduced considerably in the later periods of manufacturing. The bias
from including girl wages in the 1832 female average is on the order of 10
percent, and thus our best estimate of an adult female wage divided by an
adult male wage increases to about o.so.16
What accounted for the rise in relative wages in advancing industrialization?
We suggest in Section 2.0 that the explanation could be found in the implications

of a simple two-sector model. The division of labor and adoption of certain

-22-

machinery in the industrial sector enabled both greater substitution of females
(unskilled) for males in manufacturing and relatively greater female (unskilled)

labor intensity. It might also be claimed, particularly during this early
period, that factory labor had to be compensated for harsher conditions, longer

hours, and more days per year than in the agricultural sectors. Although
there may be some truth to this statement, our findings indicate that females
and children were compensated, percentage-wise, to a greater degree than were
adult males, and thus there would still be an unexplained asymmetry.
Vthile the regressions for 1832 in Table 3 do indicate that female wages

rose with the size of the firm, male wages rose as well and in approximately

the

17

same proportion.

.

.

.

The vast majority of these firms, particularly in

textiles, operated the maximum number of hours per day and about 310 days per

year, regardless of size. The increase in wages by size of firm, rather than
capturing a "satanic mill" differential, probably measures compensation for
additional living costs incurred away from home and for the costs of vacation

travel back home. Furthermore, the differential by size of firm is insufficient
to reverse the contention that relative female and child productivity rose
with increasing industrialization.18
It should also be stressed that farm work was highly demanding, perhaps

requiring even more days per year than did manufacturing employment. Wage
ratios (Wf/Wm) in the agricultural sector closely resembled those in industry,
rising during both this period and at other times throughout the century,
as might be expected in a competitive labor market.19 The fact that relative

wages rose in the agricultural sector is prima facie evidence that the increase
in relative wages observed in manufacturing is not solely accounted for by

various types of compensatory payments to females.

-23-

Industrialization not only increased relative wages, it also served to

increase greatly the participation of females and the young in the market
economy, a factor of perhaps even greater

importance. One would expect,

therefore, that during the early years of industrialization relative

might have been affected somewhat less,

rather elastic. In terms of the

be from (w) to (wf/w)N1,

wages

since labor supply would have been

two-sector model, the observed movement would

thus understating the increase in relative

productivity at full employment. The decrease in the price of cotton textiles
and various other, previously

to lower the reservation
that we record for the

home-produced goods, may have served in addition

wage of females. Thus the increase in relative

wages

early nineteenth century is even more impressive.

It should also be noted that wage ratios were somewhat higher in New

England than in the Middle Atlantic in 1832
erosion had taken place in the

but that by 1850 a noticeable

wage ratio for New England, while that for the

Middle Atlantic continued to rise,

The decline in relative wages for females

in New England in 1850 appears to have been the result of the large Irish

immigration to cotton mill towns and the first

major substitution of boys and

men for young women in various industries.

We have followed through the

implications of the two-sector model for the

case of the North, and have shown that both

relative wages and labor force

participation rates increased for females and children. The most important
evidence with respect to our hypothesis as applied to the South is that

industrial development was rather limited in that region. We have somewhat
less to report on the form that

industrial employment took in that region

during the Early Republic. Evidence for both regions from the 1850 Census
of Manufactures indicates that factor proportions between the agricultural

and industrial sectors differed more in the North than in the South,
as

-24-

predicted by the two-sector model. A precise comparison is hindered by the
fact that global factor proportions differed between the two regions. A related indicator is the size distribution of firms by industry, since a more
intricate division of labor was frequently accompanied by the use of females

and children. In 1860 average employment in boots and shoes, and cotton
textiles was considerably lower in the South than in the North, but in industries that rarely used females and children (machinery and lunther) the South

had more laborers per firm (Bateman and Weiss 1981, p. 53). Another indication
of the inherent differences in the regions is that when industrial development
did come to the South in the form of cotton textiles, the family labor system

was utilized as it had been in Great Britain. Thus females and children,
although employed by cotton textiles in the South, formed a smaller percentage
of its labor force than they had done in the North earlier in the century.

-25-

4.0 Concluding Remarks
Throughout our discussion of the historical evidence
empirical verification of our "relative productivity"

we have pointed to an

hypothesis. Each of the

seven propositions we developed in Section 2.0 has been explored with our data

on, for example, relative wages and factor intensities. To

unify the discussion,

we summarize the empirical evidence bearing on each of the propositions:
(1)

In the pre—industrial North the relative factor
price (Wf/W) was quite
low, ranging from about 0.30 to 0.35, while in the South this ratiowas considerably higher, with a mean of about 0.58;

(2) The Northeast industrialized rapidly from 1820 to 1850, while the South
remained agricultural;

(3) The relative factor price
(wf/w) rose with industrial development in
the North, achieving a value of about 0.50 during the early period, but it was
still less than that in the agricultural South;
(4) Females and children comprised a large percentage of the northern manufacturing labor force, and although their employment was associated with increasing mechanization in certain industries, the adoption of an intricate division of labor expanded their employment in many others. itt is therefore important
to note that firms in the industrial sector of the South were considerably smaller
than those in the North;
(5) Female labor migrated to industry in the North in relatively greater
numbers than did male labor, and they were able to migrate separately from men
because they were young, single women who only temporarily left their rural
families;
(6) The value of manufacturing output in the North greatly exceeded that in
the South, and the ratio of manufacturing and
mining to agricultural output for
the non-South states was 8.7 times that for the South in 1860; and
(7) In the industrial countries of New England,
a surprisingly large
fraction of the potential female labor force was employed in manufacturing,
and such employment substantially increased the participation of females and
children in the market economy.
One may wonder why these phenomena have gone largely unappreciated. There

are several equally worthy responses. In the first place, they have not been
entirely neglected. Various industry studies, particularly of cotton textiles,
have •hinted at some of our general results. But a paucity of data has hampered

-26-

previous scholars, and none was able to recognize fully the universal nature

of the employment of females and children in the Early Republic. Furthermore,
although the first half of the nineteenth century can well be viewed as the
Industrial Revolution, various aspects of the industrial sector and of unskilled
labor markets were to change so markedly after 1850 that the initial features

we have detailed were to become relatively forgotten ones. Finally, our interpretation of the changes in relative wages and employment by using a two-sector
model of industrialization weaves each of the seven propositions into a more

coherent story of economic change than has previously been suggested. In conclusion, factors with low relative productivity in agriculture were instrumental
in the initial adoption of the factory system and of industrialization in
general in the U.S., and we believe these results are applicable to contemporary phenomena in developing countries.

FOOTNOTES

1See Stanley Engerman, "The Economic Impact of the Civil
War," Table 1, in
S. Engerman and R. Fogel, editors, The

Reinterpretation of American Economic

History (1971). All commodity outputs are expressed in 1879 prices. The ratio
of manufacturing output to all regional income for the Northeast was 2.7 times
that in the South.
2Habakkuk (1962) hothesjzed that land abundance in the U.S.
provided the

critical difference between its industrial development and that of England.
Simple two-sector, three input models (e.g. Clarke and Summers, 1980) suggest
that the Habakkuk thesis

may be incorrect, since if the demand elasticity for

agricultural goods is less than one, an increase in land will, under most reason-

able assumptions, decrease the capital to labor ratio in manufacturing. We
differ with both the original Habakkuk

argument and the revision for two reasons:

(1) other factors such as land ownership and

differential land fertility could

account for intercountry differences in factor returns to farming, and (2) it

is our contention that the employment of women and children in the U.S. was
responsible for some of the observed differences in

machinery. Habakkuk re-

cognized the importance of female and child labor in his discussion of the nature
of capital (see p. 65 in particular), but this part of his analysis was ignored
in the debate that followed.
3The assumption concerning migration between the two economies is
a reasonable

one in the case of the U.S. because of slavery.

4The difference between the A and M sectors in
Lf intensity may be due to a

third factor, capital. Although capital may now be complementary to skilled labor
it appears that capital was a substitute for skilled labor and human strength

in the nineteenth century. This substitution was delayed in agriculture for

various reasons, but when technology did alter agricultural work, it was hoped

that it would raise the relative productivity of boys. Bidwell and Falconer
(1925) note in their post-1840 section that "one of the great benefits anticipated
from the introduction of agricultural machinery was the more complete utilization
of boy labor, for it was thought that the work which formerly required strong men

could then be done by means of machinery and boys (p. 275)."
5Our focus on relative productivity and therefore our standardization of the
two economies direct attention from other possible differences between the two

regions that could also account for their differential development. We ignore
differences in the accumulation of capital and factors which would give the South
an absolute advantage in agricultural production over the North.

6Bidwell and Falconer (1925) summarize their extensive reading of travellers'

reports with the statement that: "In New England only men as a rule were to
be seen in the fields, the women of the family assisting only occasionally

in harvest time (p. 116)." Harriet Martineau, reviewing her wide ranging
travels through the U.S. during 1834 to 1835, states: "The German women
are the only women seen in the fields and gardens in America, except a very
few Dutch, and the slaves in the South" (Vol. 1, p. 299) and "It is not the
custom in America for women (except slaves) to work out of doors" (Vol. II,

p. 54), Society in America (New York, 1837). It is curious that New England
women did not engage in much dairy work, as was the custom in the other dairy

regions in America. On this issue see Bidwell and Falconer (1925), p. 163.
7Metzer's (1975) study of ante-helium southern plantations indicates that
slave children began picking cotton at age five and that "the number of days
in which slaves were engaged in picking declined with age, and females picked

for more days per season than males in each age group (p. 135)." Even though

males (over age 16) had an absolute advantage over females in cotton picking,
females had a comparative advantage and

therefore picked a greater percentage

of the mandays allocated to that task.
81t should also be noted that because northern women and children
may have had

reservation wages above the full employment" equilibrium (see model in section
2.0), observed wage relatives are overstated for the N economy in comparison

to that for S, where all slave labor was employed.
9Lebergott's (1964, pp. 125-129) perceptive discussion,whjch stresses the
importance

of female labor and changes in female wage rates in early cotton

textile factories,is an exception.
'°These

figures have been computed by dividing total female manufacturing

employment by the female population 10 to 29 years old. The 10 to 29 year
old group is used because female workers were almost always unmarried. The
1832 data are from the McLane Report (1832), the 1837 figures are from the
1837

Statistics

of Industry in Massachusetts, and all other data are from

the relevant U.S. Census of Manufactures. Additional information about the
data can be found in Goldin and Sokoloff (1981).

Manufacturing. Labor Force Participation Rates, 1832 to 1860
1832

Connecticut

.116

1837

1850

1860

.226

.231
.284
.220

Massachusetts [.27l;.187J {.402;.297] .329
New Hampshire {.ll6;.l05J
.201
Rhode Island
.265
[.226;.246J

.333

Where two figures have been given, the larger one includes women in home workshop
production.

11

The 1832 figure for the Northeast adjusts the McLane Report (1832)

data for the under-enumeration of small firms, given industry mix, but
does not adjust for the possible bias toward industries with large firms.

There was no separate enumeration of boys from all males in 1850. Data
for Massachusetts from its industrial censuses indicate the decline in the

percentage of females occurred after 1837. The data for female and
child workers as a percentage of all workers in manufacturing for the states
of the Northeast are as follows:
Females

1832
1850
1860
1870

Northeast
Northeast
Northeast
Northeast

Boys

38.2
28.3
26.1
2l.1(adults
only)

Females and Boys

8.6

46.8

27.1

12

The percentage of a firm's labor force that was female rose from 1.9% (3.7%)
for 1 to 5 workers, to 12.8% (11.9%) for 6 to 15, to 20.2% (32.6%) for > 16 in

1820 (1850, Northeast). The role of a greater division of labor in determining
these percentages is made most forcefully by Davis (1949) in the case of the
glass industry, with regard to boy labor:
"When window glass was first manufactured in the U.S., it was
customary not only for the blower to gather his own glass but also to
blow, cut, and flatten it. In 1820 [larger firms]. . . frequently
had assistants or apprentices who relieved the blowers of certain
of the more minor and unskilled steps of the process. In time,
the division of labor was greatly elaborated. . . (p. 48)"
13Albert Gallatin, "Free Trade Memorial," reprinted in F.W. Taussig, editor,
State Papers and Speeches on the Tariff (1892), p. 129.
14This growth rate uses an estimate of 0.30 for (wf/wffl) in 1815 and one of 0.45
for 1840.

15Wages in manufacturing are for full-time workers. The 0.58 figure is an

average of those for 1900 to 1929 and 1955 to 1960. The late nineteenth

century

data are from Long's reworking of the Aldrich Report, (C. Long, The Labor Force
Under Changing Income arid Employment, Princeton, 1958). Those for the twentieth

century splice figures from A. Beney, Wages, Hours, and Employment in the U.S.

1914-1936, National Industrial Conference Board(l936),Current

Population Surveys,

Series P-60 (1945 to l960),and Lebergott (1964).

16From Table 2

(Wf/W)

for female children,

0.45, where Wf -

aWf

÷ (l-a)wf, and Wf = the wage

Wf = the wage for adult females, and a the percentage of

all female laborers who are girls. We estimate from the McLane Report that
from 20 percent to 25 percent of all female workers were girls (i.e., a =

0.20

to 0.25) and from the Rhode Island returns of the McLane Report that
(Wf /wf )

Wf

c=

0.60.

Therefore, when Wf = $2.50 per week, and W =

$2.72 per week (with a =

Thus (wf/w)

0.50 .

0.20) or Wf

$5.56,

$2.78 per week (with a =

0.25).

the issue of theaages of females working in the

agricultural sector, McLane Report respondents frequently used the age category
sixteen to twenty-four in describing female domestics

(e.g. Vol. II, p. 46),

and generally stated that younger children could barely earn their board.
(See also Notes to Table 1).

17The use of size class dummies indicates that it was primarily the
very large
firms ( >100 workers) which had higher female wages, although female
wages

did begin to rise with firms having 25 or more workers.

18

The implicit argument we are making is that the very large firms whose labor
forces were overwhelmingly housed in "dormitories" had to pay a premium to all
workers as compensation for the real costs of moving and for additional board.
Firms locating in more rural counties, therefore, would have to attract workers

from further distances and would have higher wages as a result. The Table 3
female regression, though, appears to indicate that the county urbanization rate

was unimportant, but this results from the inclusion of indtry dummies and
the total labor force.

The equation omitting these factors is:

log (wf) = 4.466 + 0.075 New England dummy - 0.137 log (urbanization rate)
(83.6)

(—5.68)

(1.44)

0.83;

393; "t" statistics in
parentheses
Thus there is collinearity between large firms (mainly in textiles) and low
R2 =

N

rates of urbanization (water power sites). It should also be mentioned that
regressions similar to those in Table 3 for 1850 (see Goldin and Sokoloff, 1981)
indicate that size of firm was not a determinant of earnings. Migration and
immigration during the 1840's therefore eliminated the premium we measure
for 1832.

19D. Adams, "Workers on the Brandywine: The Response to Early Industrial-

fm for

ization," (1980) finds nearly identical ratios of (w 1w )

agriculture and

manufacturing in the Brandywine area of Delaware, which industrialized quite early

in the nineteenth century. Data on agricultural wages on a rural Ohio farm
(Holmes 1912, p. 16) indicate that the rate of increase of (wf/wm; with board)

from 1836-40 to 1885-91 was about 1.26% average annually. More extensive data
from the early twentieth century show that relative wages in agriculture were
approximately equal to those in manufacturing, e.g. in 1906 (Wf/Wm) = 0.565 in
the North Atlantic states, for hiring by the day, without board (Holmes 1912,
p. 41 and p. 68).

BIBLIOGRAPHIC REFERENCES

Bateman, Fred and Thomas Weiss, (1981). A Deplorable Scarcity: The Failure of
Industrialization in the Slave Economy, Chapel Hill, University of North
Carolina Press.
Bidwell, Percy W. and John I. Falconer. (1925). History of Agriculture in
the Northern United States. Washington, Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Carey, Henry C. (1835). Essay on the Rate of Wages: With an examination of the
causes of the differences in the condition of the labouring populations
throughout the world. Philadelphia.

Clarke, Richardand Lawrence Summers. (1980). "The Labour Scarcity Controversy
Reconsidered," Economic Journal (March).
Cole, Arthur Harrison. (1926). The American Wool Manufacture. Two Volumes.
Harvard University Press.
Davis, Pearce. (1949). The Development of the American Glass Industry. Harvard
University Press.
Dublin, Thomas. (1979). Women at Work: The Transformation of Work and Community
in Lowell Massachusetts, 1826-1860. Columbia University Press.

Goldin, Claudia and Kenneth Sokoloff. (1981). "Women, Children, and Industrialization in the Early Republic: Evidence from the Manufacturing
Censuses," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, forthcoming.
Habakkuk, H.J. (1962). American and British Technology in the Nineteenth
Century. Cambridge University Press.
Hazard, Blanche. (1921). The Organization of the Boot and Shoe Industry in
Massachusetts Before 1875. Harvard University Press.

Holmes, George. (1912). Wages of Farm Labor. Department of Agriculture Bulletin
#99. Washington, D.C.
Lebergott, Stanley. (1964). Manpower in American Economic Growth: The American
Record Since 1800. McGraw-Hill.
Lewis, W. Arthur. (1958). "Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of
Labour." In A. N. Agarwala and S. P. Singh, Eds., The Economics of Underdevelopment. Oxford University Press.

McLane, Louis. (1832). Documents Relative to the Statistics of Manufactures
in the U.S., Volumes I and II. U.S. Congress Serial Set #222 and 223.
Duff Green.
Metzer, Jacob. (1975). "Rational Management, Modern Business Practices, and
Economies of Scale in the Ante-Bellum Southern
Plantations," Explorations

in Economic Hist (April).

Ware, Caroline F. (1931). The Early New England Cotton Manufacture: A Stud.y
in Industrial Beginnings. Russell and Russell.

Williamson, Jeffrey and Peter Lindert. (1980). American Inequality: A
Macroeconomic History. Academic Press.

A Note on Our Sources:

We have relied extensively on two sources: the Documents Relative to the
Statistics of Manufactures in the U.S., known as the 1832 McLane Report, and
the 1850 schedules of the Federal Census of Manufactures, sampled for the
Northeast by Fred •Bateman and Tom Weiss. There was no census of manufactures
in 1830, and the 1832 document contains the answers to an extensive set of
questions circulated to manufacturing firms by the Secretary of the Treasury,
Louis McLane. Various problems exist in using each of these data sets. Most
important among our concerns is that the 1832 data under-represent small firms,
and the information on workers and their wages differs in coverage and definition from census to census. The McLane Report generally listed adult males
separately from boys less than 17 years old, with females of all ages grouped
together. Wages were typically given as a daily average for each group of
laborers, although coverage and detail varied considerably by state. The 1850
labor force and wage data were given for males of all ages and for females of
all ages separately, with no separate category for children.

