                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                SAVINGS AND LOAN USAGE OF THE AUTHORITY
                      TO INVEST IN CORPORATE DEBT


                        Patric H. 'Iendersiiott
                          Kevin E. Viliani

                        Working Paper No. 125




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138

                              July 1981




Presented at. "Savings and Loan Asset Management Under
Deregulation," the Sixth Annual Conference of the Federal Home Loan
Bank of San Francisco, December 1980. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program on Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #725
                                                             July 1981



                     Savings and Loan Usage of the Authority
                           to Invest in Corporate Debt



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper examines the portfolio choice of savings and loan associa-
tions (SLAs) between mortgages and bonds, first in a certainty world and
then under uncertainty. Differences in servicing and transactions costs,
in default losses, in tax treatment and in the timing of payments are
accounted for in a certain world. SLAs are seen as investing in bonds
only if the demand for mortgage funds is sufficiently weak that more prof-
itable SLAs compete away some of the value of their tax preference by
bidding down mortgage rates; in this case less profitable SLAs would find
corporate debt attractive.

     In an uncertain world, mortgages will command a premium over bonds
to compensate for the prepayment option extended mortgage borrowers.
The appropriate value of this premium depends on uncertainty regarding
future interest rates and aversion to this uncertainty. SLAs that view
future interest rates as more uncertain than the market does generally,
or who are more averse to this uncertainty, will require an options premium
greater than that determined in the market. Thus they will find corporate
debt to be attractive relative to bonds, even when the demand for mortgage
funds is strong and their mortgage tax preference is not competed away.




Patric H. Hendershott                       Kevin E. Villani
Krannert School of Management               Department of HUD
Prudue University                           Office of Economic Analysis
West Lafayette, Indiana 47906               451 7th Street, S.W.
                                            Washington, D.C. 20410
(317) 493—1884
                                               (202) 755—5980
                             TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                                        Page


                                                                          3
 I.   Bond and Mortgage Investments Under Certainty


           A.   Comparable Bond and Mortgage Rates ...                    3


                                                                          6
           B.   Underwriting Advantages


                                                                          9
           C. Tax Preferences of Savings and Loans


           D. Transactions Costs and Other Factors                       13



           E. Determination of Market Yields .                           15



                                                                         18
II. Bond and Mortgage Investment with Uncertainty

                                                                         20
           A.   Portfolio Options


           B. Options Pricing, Market Yields and Portfolio Choice ...    22



           C. RiskAversionarIdPortfOiiOChoiCe                       -    25


                                                                         29
III. Summary
       The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of

 1980 caps two decades of occasionally intense efforts to reform the

 housing finance system.1! The basic philosophy underlying thoe efforts

 and the 1980 Act is that the public interest is best served when individual

 firms operate in their own self interest with as little interference as

 possible from the government. One of these interferences has been a

 prohibition against federally insured savings and loan association

 investments in consumer loans and corporate debt securities. The 1980

Act authorizes allocation of up to 20 percent of total assets in these

investments. The subject of this paper is the likelihood that savings

and loans will find it profitable to purchase the second of these assets,

corporate debt securities.

       Corporate investment powers were first advocated for savings and

loans in 1961 by the Commission on Money and Credit. The general rationale

offered for greater flexibility in the choice of investments was that the

relaxation of binding portfolio restrictions would stimulate economic

growth.?i This recommendation was repeated a decade later in the Report

of the Presidential Commission on Financial Structure and Regulation

(commonly called the HUNT Commission), which also proposed investment in

equity securities, direct real estate, and some forms of direct loans to


1/    Our favorite discussion of these efforts and the issues involved is
      Patric H. Hendershott and Kevin E. Villani, Regulation and Reform of
      the Housing Finance System, American Enterprise Institute for
      Public Policy Research, 1977.

.?I   Report of the Commission on Money and Credit, Prentice-Hall, 1961,
      pp. 160-161.
                                    2

business such as construction loans. The expansion of investment powers

was recommended on grounds of increased competition and/or public con-

venience./ Rather than passing legislation to provide greater flexibility,

Congress did the reverse in the l970s. The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act

of 1975 and the Community Reinvestment Act of 1978 both require mortgage

lenders to consider credit needs of the local community. The latter, in

fact, implicitly imposes quotas for local community mortgage investments.

     Passage of the Financial Institutions Act of 1975, in part the

legislative embodiment of the HUNT Commission recommendations, would have

permitted savings and loans to invest up to 10 percent of their assets in

high grade corporate bonds. Proponents of this provision argued that

savings and loan earnings would be improved, thereby allowing them to

compete more effectively with commercial banks for deposit funds.

Opponents countered that the provision would reduce the supply of mortgage

credit and result in less housing. The most revealing aspect of this

debate was the absence of the voice of the savings and loans. While they

argued for the ability to make direct real-estate related loans, they

never advocated the corporate bond authority.!/ This alone probably

provides an excellent clue as to the likely expected usage of this

authority.


./ Report of the Presidential Commission on Financial Structure and
    Regulation, Washington, GPO, 1971.

    U.S. Congress, Senate, Subcommittee on Financial Institutions of the
    Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban ffairs, the Hearings on
    the Financial Institution Act of 1975 94th Congress, first session,
    May 1975, p. 165.
                                    3

     The present paper is divided into two main sections and a summary.

The first examines the choice between bonds and mortgages under certainty.

The coupon rates on bonds and mortgages are seen as being comprable only

after adjusting for differences in servicing and transaction costs, in

default losses, in tax treatment and in the timing of payments. The

likely market relationship between bond and mortgage rates is then considered

in order to detrmine the likelihood that savings and loans will, in fact,

purchase corporate bonds. Section II extends the analysis to an uncertain

world and considers the implications of this uncertainty for mortgage

coupon rates and the portfolio behavior of both risk-neutral and risk-averse

associ at ions.



I.   Bond and Mortgage Investments Under Certainty

      In a certain world, four factors are relevant to the savings

and loan investment choice: mortgage and bond coupon (net of known

default) rates, advantages or disadvantages savings and loans may have in

underwriting mortgages and bonds, any special tax treatment that is

not independent of this choice, and transactions costs of liquidating

assets. Each of these factors is considered in turn. For our current

purposes, all facets of the investment are assumed to be known in advance

with certainty. Thus, the concept of an exante net yield employed below is

equivalent to an expost yield where expectations are exactly realized.


      A. Comparable Bond and Mortgage Coupon Rates

      There is no readily available and generally accepted method for

calculating comparable yields. Even quoted mortgage and bond coupon

rates on par value securities of identical default risk are not comparable
                                    4

owing to differences in the timing of coupon payments and expected principal

repayments and in the cost of collecting these payments. Bonds promise a

single principal payment at maturity, while mortgage principal is repaid

according to an agreed upon amortization schedule.   In addition, the

remaining mortgage principal may be repaid at any time at the borrower's

option. In an earlier paper, we showed that unless interest rates are

expected to remain constant comparisons are only possible for securities

with the same expected cash flow because unequal flows would be reinvested

at different rates.../   As a first step in making bond and mortgage

coupon rates comparable, we specify the alternative to the purchase of a

mortgage to be the purchase of a portfolio of bonds with expected principal

repayments identical to those expected on a mortgage. Thus the correct

bond rate to compare to the mortgage rate is an appropriately weighted

average of coupons on bonds of varying maturity. Given a continuous and

nonflat yield curve, there is a single maturity bond with a coupon equal

to this weighted average. It is this particular coupon that underlies our

yield comparisons below. In general, this single maturity depends on

interest rate expectations at the time the mortgage is originated.

     The mortgages not only repay principal on a different schedule than

bonds but interest as well. Annual bond coupon rates (BCoup) are stated



i   "Termination Rates, Interest Rate Uncertainty and Mortgage Rate
    Premia: Some Tests From the GNMA Market," presented at a joint
    session of the Annual Meetings of the American Economics and Finance
    Associations, Denver, Colorado, September 1980.
                                     5


as twice the six month coupon rate, and coupons are paid every six months

(a bond with a stated 12 percent annual coupon rate actually pays a 6 per-

cent coupon every six months). Annual mortgage coupon rates (MCoup) are

stated as 12 times the one month coupon rate, and payments are made

monthly (a mortgage with a stated 12 percent annual coupon rate actually

pays 1 percent per month). Moreover, a servicing fee (SER) of between

3/8ths and 1/2 of a percent (at an annual rate) of the outstanding mortgage

principal is typically charged for collection, but no fee is charged for

clipping the bond coupon.

     A second difference between coupon rates and expost yields on par value

securities held to maturity is that the former are based on promised pay-

ments and the later on those realized. For our current purpose, we assume

that lenders know in advance that they will lose through default an

annual yield equivalent of dm basis points on mortgages and db basis

points on bonds. The net yield on a mortgage, on an annualized basis

and after adjusting for monthly coupon payments and default losses, is

defined as:

          =   [1+ (MCoupdm_SER)/l2]12
     The net yield on a bond, again on an annualized basis and after

adjusting for semi-annual coupon payments and expected default losses, is

defined as:

        b =   [1+ (BCoup_db)/2]2-l
In the certainty model described above, these net yields are comparable

as long as the bond maturity is chosen in the above described manner.

Thus, a firm should invest in bonds if and only if b>m.
                                    6


     B.   Underwriting_Advantages
     Origination costs are generally paid by the issuers and thus are
not of concern to the investor. Bond issuers pay investment bnkers
directly to underwrite new issues, and mortgage originators can be viewed
as charging borrowers an up front fee in a similar manner. However if

savings and loans have a cost advantage in underwriting (originating and

servicing) mortgage loans or corporate bonds, then this might affect

their profits and investment strategy.

     Mortgage originating requires fairly close contact with buyers arid

sellers in local markets as well as with a variety of other service

providers. Thus local 'production" offices must be established to take

applications, conduct property appraisals and surveys, verify income,

review title searches of local records and close loans. Mortgage

servicing may also require local market proximity, especially in the

event of default and foreclosure.

     Depository institutions have likely enjoyed a comparative cost

advantage in the production of mortgage loans, especially in less densely

populated areas. This is because deposit intermediation requires a

similar network of local offices. Limits on deposit rates stimulated

further branching into smaller sub-markets. The marginal fixed cost of

producing mortgages in existing branch offices thus amounts to little

more than the salary of a loan officer and cost of an additional desk.

Depository institutions have thus been able to operate mortgage production

offices in narrow markets where it may not be feasible for a mortgage

banker to do so.
                                    7


    It is difficult to quantify the magnitude of this cost advantage in

the past and speculative to do so for the future. Improvements in

communication and transportation systems reduce the cost advantages of

physical proximity. For example. the technology currently exists for

computerized land recordation systems with long distance telephone access.

Similarly, most income verification data are computerized. Property

appraisals and surveys must be done locally, but these services are

typically provided by independent firms and the information is easily

communicated over long distances. Even applications may be taken through

the mails, albeit with some delay. Moreover3 the gradual phaseout of

deposit rate ceilings required by the Depository Institutions Act of

1980 may result in fewer branches. In summary, what cost advantages

savings and loans currently enjoy will likely erode gradually over time

but not be eliminated completely. Because similar cost advantages probably

exist for mortgage servicing in that the collection and compilation of

monthly payments closely resembles the deposit-taking function, savings

and loans would also appear to have a comparative advantage in servicing

mortgages..-' This analysis suggests that at least some savings and

loans can compete successfully with mortgage bankers in the origination

of mortgages for other investors.

     Savings and loans have a special advantage in originations for their

own investment: they avoid the costs of putting the loan in the portfolio



I Moreover, in the event of default, foreclosure requires on-site
    representatives and knowledge of local real-estate markets and
    state and local law regarding the foreclosure process.
                                        S


of a permanent lender. These costs include commitment fees or dealer

fees of one sort or another and the additional expense of conveying

information to the lender regarding the probability of loss or"quality

of the underwriting" (the investor may require an independent appraisal

or guarantee, e.g., FHA, PMI, FHMA or FHLMC "approved underwriter').

This special advantage will have one of two possible direct effects.

The first is   that   savings and loans pass these savings on to homebuyers.

The second is that they earn additional profits from mortgage originations

for their own portfolios, profits that will affect the bond/mortgage

investment decision. We have no direct evidence on which of these is

more likely. Intuition suggests that mutually—chartered institutions

are more likely to do the former (especially for depositors) and stock-

chartered institutions the latter. If p is the additional annualized

profit on a dollar of funds invested in mortgages, then the investment

decision becomes: buy bonds if and only if b>m+p.

     Next consider the economic potential for savings and loans to

originate corporate securities. The underwriting of corporate debt

requires a substantially different set of skills and services than that

described above. Evaluation of the borrower's credit-worthiness requires

information and sophisticated expertise in analyzing corporate balance

sheets and profit and loss statements, industry trends, etc. Because

corporate debt issues are much larger than mortgage debt issues, there

are economies of scale to this information and expertise. Savings and

loan institutions are at a competitive disadvantage to large investment
                                    9

bankers in the underwriting of large corporate issues by major firms and

would not underwrite such loans for their own portfolio. The underwriting

of small corporate loans (commercial and industrial loans) resembles

mortgage underwriting more closely than the underwriting of large corporate

issues. Thus savings and loans likely would have similar production

functions to those of commercial banks for commercial --   particularly   real

estate related -- loans and would have obvious advantages over investment

bankers. However, legal restrictions preclude savings and loans from

originating such loans.


     C. Tax Preferences of Savings and Loans

     The tax-preference currently granted savings and loans (SLAs) is

their ability to compute loan loss reserves that far exceed a reasonable

provision for normal losses.   In effect, SLAs have been allowed to transfer

large portions of their before-tax income to reserves, thereby avoiding

taxation on this income. Prior to 1963, the effective tax rate on aggregate

SLA income never exceeded 2 percent; SLAs were, in effect, allowed to

transfer virtually all income to reserves. In the 1962 Revenue Act,

Congress limited the transfer to reserves, with some exceptions, to 60 percent

of taxable income. The Tax Reform Act of 1969 lowered this percentage

in steps over time, still with some exceptions, so that in 1979 the

percentage is only 40.1/


21 The 1969 legislation also introduced a minimum tax of 15 percent to be
   applied to SLA tax preferences, the most important of which is the
   difference between their bad debt deduction and that allowed under the
   experience method, less $10,000 and the regular tax paid. (The minimum
   tax has been modified in recent legislation.) In the Financial
   Institutions Acts of 1973 and 1975, the Treasury proposed substitution
   of a 3 1/2 percent mortgage interest tax credit for the extraordinary
   provisions for loan losses.
                                              10

      The usual approach to the determination of optimal portfolio behavior

is maximization of the net worth of the firm. In general, this is

equivalent to maximizing the discounted present value of expected net

after-tax profits (where the appropriate rate of discount is the after-tax

real rate). To simplify matters, the following two assumptions are added.

First, future interest rates are known with certainty and equal current

rates. Second, there are no transactions costs to buying or selling

securities. Under these assumptions, maximizing net worth is equivalent

to maximizing current after-tax profits.

      Here we consider the simple case where total financial assets at

the beginning of the year (A) are exogenous, and there are only two possible

assets in the portfolio, mortgages (M) and bonds (B). The firm is assumed

to carry over these stocks of mortgages M_1 and bonds B...1 with average

net yields of ii and b, respectively. The problem then reduces to the

allocation of new funds made available at the beginning of the year

between bonds and mortgages so as to maximize current profits. The cost

of all funds is, for simplicity, c, which includes the cost of collecting

and servicing them. The before-tax profit of a firm is



           =       [     (m+p)+(l- )b-c]F                           (1)




and


           =
               (i-c)M1   +   (-c)B1   +   X
                                       11

where


            represents predetermined profits,


        X is non—investment earnings less costs not otherwise specified,

     F is the amount of "new funds" made available at the beginning of
       the period.  [F = AL+R, whereAL •is the (exogenous) net increase
       in liabilities and R is the repayment from amortization and
          prepayment 5.]

          is the proportion of new funds invested in mortgages, and

     p is the profit from the mortgage underwriting of loans held.

     The SLA is assumed to pay the normal tax rate,7, subject to an

extraordinary provision for loan loss reserves. This provision is calculated

in the following manner. If the SLA holds 82 percent or more of its

assets in mortgages (the dominant "qualified" asset), then it pays

taxes on l- of its "taxable" income (by statute,       is currently 0.4);

if the SLA holds less than 60 percent of its assets in mortgages, then it

pays taxes on all of its income; for each percentage point below 82, but

above 60, the firm holds in mortgages, the fraction of income that is

not taxed is reduced by three-quarters of a percentage point ./ In

effect, the SLA is allowed to avoid paying tax on a fraction (s) of its

normally taxable income. That is,


            = [1—   7(l—s)]'b-,                                       (2)




!I These are the current regulations for SLAs. MSBs pay taxes on 1- of
    their taxable income if they hold more than 72 percent of their assets
    in the favored investment, and for each percentage point below 72, but
    above 60, the fraction of income taxed declines by 1.5 percentage points.
                                                  12

where

        s =        — O.75(O.82-)Z,

         = (M_1+F)/A        =
                                 M/A, and


              (/o.75(o.82_ &)
     z=                                 O.6±O.82
              (o                            >O.82.

     As long as >O.82 or <O.6, there is no tax advantage to incremental

investment        in mortgages   and the investment rule derived in the previous

section holds, namely purchase bonds if b>m-i-p. The               more interesting   case

arises when O.6<O.82. To determine the allocation of new funds to

mortgages that maximizes after-tax profit in this case, we take the

partial derivative of (2) with respect to, after substituting from

(1) and allowing for the dependency of s on S ,              set   the result equal to

zero and solve for the optimal               ,   denoted by *:


                    h                       4
                  77 +(bc)F             (1-7)A
              =                     —
                   2[b-(m+p)]F          l.5F

where =           [(l--O.75(O.82-M1/A)]          is the effective tax rate when no

mortgages are purchased.
                                               13

       An explicit expression for current purchases of bonds, B, can be obtained

by substituting the definitions 6* =            Mr/F, where M is current mortgage
purchases, and M 4-B
                     pp       = F   into (3) and solving



       B (1-            b-c           )F +     (1-MA   .                     (4)
                     2[b-(m+p)]                     l.i5

Bond purchases will be greater,

            (i) the greater is the net premium earned on bonds [b-(rn+p)],

        (ii) the greater are net funds (F),

       (iii) the lower is the premium earned on bonds over the cost of
              funds (the greater is this premium, the more valuable are
              mortgages as a device to lower taxes)

        (iv) the lower is the effective tax rate in the absence of
              mortgage purchases (1).


       D.    Transactions Costs and Other Factors

       Technically, the only relevant range for solutions in the model are

for 6* between zero and one. In this range, the maximization implies

that   the after-tax yield on the marginal dollar invested in mortgages
equals the after-tax yield of the marginal dollar invested in bonds.
Beyond this range other factors not incorporated in the model, such as
transactions costs and capital gains taxes, come into           play.

       When     5k>l, current after-tax profit may (or may not) be increased

by selling existing bonds in the portfolio and buying new mortgages with
                                        14

the proceeds. The result depends on the treatment of realized capital

losses (or gains) and sales transactions costs involved. Because SLAs

currently do not hold bonds to sell, this case may not appear relevant.

However, we note that the issue of mortgage-backed bonds is analogous

to the liquidation of bonds from the ass.et portfolio. Finally, when

<O, possibly the firm should sell mortgages out of its existing portfolio

and buy bonds. Again, the ability to sell existing mortgaqes, the existence

of sales costs, and the tax treatment of capital gains or losses are

relevant.       It may be optimal to buy only bonds for several years, rather

than to sell existing mortgages, in order to avoid transactions costs.

     Consider the implications of the additional transactions costs

involved in selling existing mortgages. Suppose that<O. We can calculate

the mortgage yield such that the SLA firm is holding the desired stock

of mortgages by setting 6= 0 and solving equation (3) for m0. The

result is


    m0 =    b   -          rb   -
                                    '
                                                                     (5)
                    (1—   ')A


where the three terms denote the yield earned on bonds, the tax advantage

foregone by investing in bonds, and the origination profits lost by invest-

ing in bonds. Let t denote the annualized yield equivalent sales cost

of selling a dollar of mortgages. The firm should sell mortgages and

buy bonds if the yield it gives up (m+t) is less than m°, the yield

at which it is willing to hold mortgages. If m+t>m0, then the

sales   costs are greater than the potential yield advantage to the sale
and the firm is better off not selling old mortgages to buy new ones.
                                                      15

    E. Determination of Market Yields

     As discussed above, savings and loan assocations receive a tax

preference that allows them to invest profitably in mortgages at a lower

yield than other investors. Here we consider how this preference may

affect the determination of market yields, assuming that markets equilibrate

after-tax net yields.

     A   supply curve for mortgage credit at savings and loans may be
derived directly from         equation (3) by multiplying           through by new funds (F)

and summing across all n institutions. The total (implicitly annual) flow

supply of mortgage credit at savings and loans is:

           n             n
                    =
                                  F.j,                                         (6)
          i—i   1
                        i=l   1




where the i     subcript refers to the ith individual SLA. The                       may

vary widely across associations owing to differences in yields on existing

bonds and mortgages (5 and               ii),   in   other income and expenses (X), and

in effective tax rates (M_1/A). Equation (5) indicated the relationship

between mortgage and bond rates that is consistent with zero desired

mortgage purchases (
                                  =   0).       By setting * = 1 and solving for m1, we can
obtain the relationship that is consistent with zero desired bond purchases:




          =    b-            o.75T                                                   (7)

                    (l—)A+0.75TF

This differs from (5) only in the appearance of 0.757F in the denominator.

Table 1 illustrates the sensitivity of SLA flow mortgage supply to a key
                                        16

              Table 1: The Spread (in Basis Points) Between the
             Net Bond and Mortgage Rates That Would Result in the
                      Purchase of Only Bonds or Mortgages*


Assumed Profit                Mortgage Purchases             Bond Purchases
Rate  (b/A)                          Only                           Only


     0.001                          b-rn< 4                         b-rn> 5
     0.005                          b-rn<23                         b-rn> 25
     0.01                           h—rn<45                         b—rn> 50
     0.015                          b-m<68                          b-rn> 75
     0.02                           b-m<91                          b-rn>lOO


* Assumed values of other variables: p = 0.0,=O.5,7O.25, F = O.2.

variable,    the before-tax return on assets.2! When the spread between the
net bond and mortgage rates is large, say 100 basis points, only associations

with very high profit rtes,'rb/>o.o2, will purchase mortgages. As the

mortgage rate rises relative to the bond rate, SLAs with lower and lower

profits will find it advantageous to purchase mortgages. As the profit

rate approaches zero, associations will purchase mortgages only if the

mortgage rate (plus p) approaches the bond rate.

      We may infer the following regarding the properties of this supply

function. First, there is a net mortgage rate sufficiently below the

net bond rate such that no SLAs will invest in new mortgages. This rate

is denoted in Chart I by rn and depends on:(l) the increase in the portion

of income upon which savings and loans pay taxes when they shift from


2!   For the savings and loan industry as a whole,7Tb/A rose from 0.0081
     in the first half of 1976 to 0.0121 in the second half of 1978 and fell
     back to 0.0009 in the first half of 1980.
                                        17


qualified to other assets --   the current three-quarters of a percentage
point and (2) the profit rate of the most profitable institution.

Second, as the net mortgage rate increases, progressively more thrifts

will find it profitable to invest in mortgages and the share of deposits

allocated to mortgages by individual SLA firms will rise. At the extreme,

all new funds of all SLAs -- even those with no profits --     will   be invested

in mortgages when the net mortgage rate approaches the net bond rate.

These properties allow us to specify a continuous (and, for simplicity,

linear), rising aggregate mortgage credit supply function for SLAs as

dericted in Chart I. In this model the supply of mortgage credit at

SLAs is truncated at F -—   total   new funds available for new investment -—


                                      Chart I

               Tax Preferences, the Demand for Mortgage Credit
                    and Determination of the Mortgage Rate

Mortgage
Yield




                                                                      S
        m= b




                                                      '2




                                                                      Credit
                                       18

because this supply was taken as exogenous. However, at the point where

m=b, "bond" investors switch to mortgages either directly or via the

purchase of GNMAs, FHLMC participation certificates or FNMA debt.19!

Thus the aggregate flow supply of mortgage credit, S, becomes horizontal

atb.
       When the flow demand for mortgage credit by households, D1, falls short

of the potential supply at SLAs, the equilibrium before-tax net mortgage

yield is below the before-tax net bond yield, only investors

with tax preferences invest in mortgages, and some tax preference investors

(e.g., those with low profits or little marginal tax preference) invest

in bonds. When the household demand for mortgage credit, D2, exceeds

the potential supply by tax-preference investors, the equilibrium before-tax

net mortgage yield equals the before-tax net bond yield, and some SLAs may be

indifferent to bonds if there is no tax consequence.

       Before concluding this section, it is probably useful to consider

the implications of a reduction in, or outright removal of, the savings

and loan tax preference. In 1978, the Treasury proposed a gradual

reduction in the percentage of taxable income that can be transferred to

loan loss reserves from 40 to 30, and preliminary discussions were based

on a reduction to 20. More recently, the Interagency Task Force on Thrift



E.I    For a discussion of this behavior, see Hendershott and Villani,
      "Secondary   Mortgage Markets and the Cost of Mortgage Funds,"
      AREUEA Journal, vol. 8, Spring 1980.
                                       19


Institutions implicitly recommended removal of the tax preference.Ji/

Removal would make the entire supply schedule in Chart I horizontal;

savings and loans would be indifferent between bonds and mortgages unless

there were profits from originating mortgages for their own investment.

More importantly, removal might cause sayings and loans to invest as much

as 10 percent of their assets in tax-exempt securities..1?!


II. Bond and Mortgage Investment with Uncertainty

        In the simple model employed above, portfolio decisions were assumed

to be motivated by net (of taxes, transactions costs and default losses)

yields, wiere the relevant variables in the yield equations were assumed

to be known with certainty. Here we allow for uncertain future interest

rates and describe the relationship between mortgage and deposit life and

actual future interest rates. Part A of this section describes the various

"options" that characterize the SLA portfolio. Part B discusses how

efficient financial markets would price these options, how these prices

should affect market-determined mortgage and bond coupon rates, and how



.11.!   The Report of the Interagency Task Force on Thrift Institutions,
        Department of the Treasury, June 30, 1980, pp. 107-1 13. The Task
        Force was established, at least in part, to study the problems
        that SLAs might have during the transition to competitive markets.
        The Task Force then implicitly proposed a tax increase (removal of
        the tax preference) as a cure for the problem of severely depressed
        SLA earnings.

1?!     Patric H. Hendershott and Timothy W. Koch, "The Demand for
        Tax-Exempts by Financial Institutions," Journal of Finance,
        June 1980.
                                     20

heterogeneous interest-rate expectations will lead some associations to

invest in bonds. The portfolio risk of SLAs and the investment strategy

of risk-averse associations is the subject of Part C.


     A. Portfolio_0ptionsl'

     In   our earlier analysis we compared net yields on a mortgage and a

bond, assuming that they had identical, certain repayment cash flows

and that future interest rates were known with certainty. If we were to

drop only the interest rate assumption, then interest rate outcomes

other than those expected would affect the values of these investments

identically. Unexpectedly low interest rates raise the market values of

both by equal amounts and unexpectedly high interest rates do the opposite.

However, mortgage cash flows are not certain, and are in fact correlated

with interest rates. The stochastic mortgage cash flow is related to

the "put and call options" imbedded in mortgage contracts. In addition,

depositors may prematurely cash existing certificates if interest rates

rise sufficiently. As it turns out, this is a "put option" which has the

same properties as mortgage put options.

     The typical manner in which SLAs originate mortgages is to give (for

an "origination fee") a commitment to a homebuyer that the lender is

willing to make a loan at a predetermined rate of interest and, implicitly,

price (loan principal less points). The homebuyer has bought a put-option



     For a fuller discussion of these options, see Kenneth J. Thygerson,
     "Futures, Options, and the Savings and Loan Business," in this volume.
                                    21

from the lender; i.e., he has the right to "put" the loan in the lenders'

portfolio during the life of the commitment which may vary from a month

to over a year. The value of the put option to the homebuyer at the

time of loan closing is positively related to the spread between the

commitment rate and the new issue spot rate.

     A second form of put options SLAs often implicitly sell is also con-

tained in the mortgage contract. Borrowers can terminate fewer (or

more) than the normal volume of mortgages. When interest rates rise,

more mortgages will be assumed by buyers than is normally the case, and

some homeowners will forego moving so as to avoid giving up their now

below-market fixed-rate mortgage. In effect, borrowers have "put" a

greater than anticipated volume of "old" mortgages in the lenders' port-

folio. Conversely, when interest rates fall, borrowers will "call"

mortgages and refinance them at lower rates.

     A third form of put options SLAs implicitly sell relates to their

deposits. Consider the simple case of a fixed-rate, two-year certificate

with no penalties for early withdrawal. If interest rates rise after

one year, then the certificate-holder will "put" the certificate back in

the lenders' portfolio. That is, the holder has the right to cash the

certificate in at par value when the market value is below par. In

reality, penalties limit this potential, but the "put options" aspect of

SLA certificates nevertheless remains.

     The portfolio of savings and loans is thus exposed to incredible

options risks. SLAs sell put options for new mortgage loans (commitments),
                                        C-




old   mortgage loans (assumptions) and deposits (early withdrawal). Moreover,

they sell call options on mortgage loans (refinancings). Most important,

the effect of the put options is cumulative; i.e., there is a strong

likelihood that they will all be exercised if interest rates rise sharply.


       B. Options Pricing, Market Yields and Portfolio Choice

       Conceptually, we may separate mortgage yields into two component

parts. The first reflects the cost of financing when the terms of the

contract --   the   timing and magnitude of all interest and principal

payments -- are known with certainty. The second reflects the price of

the "option' that the timing and/or magnitude may differ from that contracted

for. In Section I we described the determination of market yields when

the terms were known with certainty. Here we provide an intuitive

description of how competitive, risk-neutral markets would price the

"options" in mortgage and savings certificate contracts and point out the

implications for mortgage and bond yield comparisons and portfolio choice.

       When a borrower exercises his "option" to default on a mortgage

loan, the investor loses interest (during the period in which the loan

is in default) and perhaps principal (depending on the proceeds from sale

upon foreclosure). Similarly, when interest rates fall and a mortgage

is refinanced, the investor loses the difference in interest payments

over the life of the loan. The loss from an assumption or delivery of a

mortgage against a below-market rate commitment, or the loss from the

cashing in of a certificate of deposit at an old rate and the reissue at
                                       23

a higher rate may be calculated in a similar manner. In other words, we

may calculate the actual loss when the option is exercised.

        We do not know a'priori when, or if, the option will be exercised.

But we may know what the determinants of the exercise of the option are,

and we can assign a.'priori probabilities to the likelihood that these

determinants will take on the value such that the option will be exercised.

The appropriately discounted present value of the product of these

probabilities and the losses upon exercise of the option is:

              n lL
     0m
             .j=l    (l-'-i)J


where

        l,j is the contingent probability distribution based on current
           expectations that the option will be exercised in period j,

     L is the loss in period j if the option is exercised,

     i     is the nominal risk-free discount rate, and
                     n     h      h
     lj L =         h=l
                          1. L•
                           33

The superscripts denote the likelihood of a particular outcome (h)

resulting in the exercise of the option and the loss associated with

that outcome.

     In the case of commitments, refinancings and assumptions, the

contingent probabilities and the loss if the option is exercised depend

on the difference between current and expected future mortgage rates.

Similarly, the contingent probabilities and the loss from early withdrawal
                                       24

depend on the difference between current and expected future deposit

rates. In both cases, the loss associated with every potential interest-

rate outcome is weighted by the anticipated likelihood with which it will
                        h
occur. For example, 12 could be the likelihood, given current expectations,

that the mortgage rate will be 200 basis points (h = 200) less in two
                            h
years than it is now. L2 is the loss resulting from refinancings in this

event.

     For a mortgage commitment, lenders typically charge a front end price

proportional to the principal. This is a single-premium fee (commitment

fee) which in competitive, risk-neutral markets will equal the "actuarial"

present value of the loss. The price of the refinancing and assumability

options are typically paid in the form of a higher mortgage coupon rate,

where the premia built into the rate, 0m' is determined actuarially

such that the discounted present value of the monthly premia and the

probability-weighted losses are equal.

     The actuarial monthly premia for mortgage default risk and semi-

annual mortgage premia for bond default risk are calculated in a similar

manner and were defined above as dm and db, respectively. The net-yield

on a par-value mortgage, adjusted for the "actuarially" determined

monthly options and default premia in mortgage rates, is:


         =
             [l+(MCoup_Om_dm_SER)/12]12_l.

The net yield on a par-value bond adjusted for the actuarially determined

semi—annual options (Ob) and default premia in bond rates is:

     b° =
             [l+(BCoup_Ob_db)/2]2-l.
                                    25

     In the absence of tax preferences, the bond purchase decision is

again buy bonds if and only if b°> m0+p, where the yields are defined

above and p equals any excess returns to mortgages placed in the firms'

own portfolio.

     If potential investors have homogeneous or uniform interest-rate

expectations and thus identical valuations of Om(and of Ob). then

competitive, risk-neutral capital markets will --   in   the absence of tax

preferences or relative underwriting advantages to the marginal investor --

equate h° and m0. However, if expectations and thus valuations are
heterogeneous, then those with valuations of options risk that are greater

than the "market's" will tend to purchase bonds and others will favor

mortgages. Thus bonds provide a useful alternative to associations who

believe that the options premium incorporated in the mortgage coupon rate

Is insufficient.

     We may calculate, in a similar manner, the cost to the firm of the

borrowers' ability to cash in existing certificates if the advantages of

doing so outweigh the penalities. Competitive, risk-neutral deposit

markets will equate this cost, c0, to the yield on otherwise comparable

securities without the early withdrawal feature.


    C. Risk Aversion and Portfolio Choice

    The above discussion suggested that SLAs are subject to substantial

upside interest-rate risk. This is no surprise to students of the savings

and loan industry. Even if the options premia built into mortgage coupon

rates and the inflation premium built into interest rates generally had

accurately reflected expectations at the time loans were made, substantial
                                          26

SLA losses would have resulted from actual inflation rates- and interest

rates being much higher than generally expected during the past 15 years.

Moreover, recent volatility in interest rates and the uncertainty regarding

the future has dramatically increased the actuarially_determined price of

options in the SLA portfolio. This results because —-
                                                      based on a'priori

expectations --      the   probability that a given option will be exercised is

increased by interest-rate uncertainty. In the remainder of this section,

we modify our earlier model to allow for this risk and ask how aversion
                                                   investment decision of savings
to this risk might affect the bond/mortgage

and loans.

        The analysis of Section I is altered in that profit is now a

random variable because a number of its determinants are stochastically

determined. In addition, for our current purpose we extend the model to

include liabilities with a maturity greater than one periods although all

liabilities issued at the same point in time are at the same rate. The

proportion of liabilities issued with greater than one-period maturity,

which pay ,     is   denoted by1. The expression for after-tax profit is

 then


  7Y [l_(l-s)]4jM_l4b B_l_[c+(l_V)cL_l+&m+(1- S)b]F-cALI

           m, b and c are all stochastic random variables, F =L+R,
                                                                              of
 and L_1 = B1+M_1+R, where R equals repayments (made at the beginning

 the period). The stochastic behavior of M_1 results from the mortgage
                                                    the refinancing and the call
 comitment and assumability put options and
                                          27

 option.     The stochastic behavior of        results from the early withdrawal

 feature of certificates.

      To determine the implications of a change in interest rates for the

 profitability of an existing portfolio, we calculate the differential of

 the above expression (holding       constant) and divide through by dcJ/

 By definition, R/ôm ='M_j/m. By assumption, interest rates

 on old and new securities are initially equal and all interest rates on

 new securities change by the same amount (dc = dm =        db).    The

 resulting expression is

      d7/dc =      [l_'(l_s)]db/dc,   where


  dv7lb/dc =   -(1-             -                           -
                                                                (-c)L1(/c).
                  Maturity           Mortgage                        Early
                  Imbalance          Options                       Withdrawal

     The first two terms on the right-hand side of the above expression

reflect the maturity imbalance loss or gainJ./ This is the change in profit

on the existing stock of assets financed at the new liability rate and

on that part of the reinvestment of repayments that is financed by old




ii! Technically the expression is not differentiable because the options
     risk of rising interest rates is not symmetric with the options risk
     of falling interest rates. Here we describe the implications of a
     rise or fal   1   separately.

.i./ For a useful discussion of the maturity inbalance problem, see
     Dwight 1. Jaffee, "The Asset/Liability Maturity Mix of S&Ls:
     Problems and Solutions," Change in the Savings and Loan Industry,
     Proceedings of the Second Annual Conference, FHLB of San Francisco,
     1976.
                                    28

deposits. The change in profit is symmetric with respect to rising or

falling interest rates. That is, the loss from a rise in rates [assuming

that R<(l- Z)L_1] equals the gain from a fall in rates of equal magnitude.

     Regarding the third term on the right-hand side, when dm>O,(M..1/èm)

is the increase in the existing mortgage stock from commitments and

assumptions; when dm<O,(ô1_1/èm) is the decrease in the existing

mortgage stock from refinancing. The loss to profits in either event is

simply the product of the change in mortgage and bond revenue per dollar

change in the existing mortgage stock times the change in the stock.

There is no a'prior reason to believe that these two effects are of the

same magnitude for positive and negative rate changes. But it is the

case that after-tax profit will unambiguously decline as a result of

the stochastic behavior of M1 in response to increases or decreases

in interest rates.

     The fourth term reflects the increased cost of refinancing old

deposit certificates at the new deposit rate. The greater the rise in

rate and the response of depositors to this rate, the greater the loss.

This term is only defined for dc>O because there is no gain from falling

interest rates.

     When interest rates rise unexpectedly, SLAs lose on four counts:

the rise in the cost of new liabilities not offset by a rise in earnings

on existing asset holdings, the refinancing of old liabilities at higher

rates, the exercise of outstanding mortgage commitments, and the increase

in assumptions. Thus SLA firms are exposed to substantial risk from
                                       29

unexpectedly rising interest rates. There are immediate remedies to

these sources of potential loss: shorter effective term mortgages

(VRMs and RRMs) and longer term deposits, stiffer penalities for early

withdrawal, and enforcement of due on sale clauses to reduce assumptions.

SLAs have recently taken actions in all •of these areas. In addition to

these direct mechanisms, SLAs may purchase put options -- secondary market

commitments --   to   offset partially the put options they sell. But there

are limits as to how much maturity imbalance and options risk can be reduced

by making changes in mortgage and savings certificate contracts, and the

purchase of commitments is relatively expensive. Another wa,y to reduce

the risk to the total portfolio of rising interest rates is to purchase

relatively shorter-term and/or noricallable corporate securities. That is,

risk-averse SLAs may buy noncallable bonds when b° is slightly less

than m°+p, even after allowance for the tax advantage.i! They may

be willing to accept lower expected profit for improved stability and

less risk of loss from an unexpected secular increase in interest rates.


III. Summary

     The extent to which any investor would purchase corporate debt

securities, as opposed to mortgages, obviously depends on a comparison



!i Another possible reason for investment in bonds is diversification
     against the risk of default. Mortgage default depends on the real
     value of homeowner equity which in turn is related to the rate of
     inflation in house prices. Corporate default depends on earnings
     which in turn depend on the general state of the economy. A mixed
     portfolio of mortgages and bonds is thus somewhat diversified against
     the risks of falling house prices and declining economic activity.
                                      30

of yields on bonds and mortgages. The comparison is manageable in a

world where future interest rates, termination or repayment rates, and

default rates are known with certainty. Coupon rates on equal effective-

maturity par-value bonds and mortgages can be adjusted for known default

losses and for differences in servicing costs and in payment periods.    We

denote these adjusted rates by b and m.    The appropriate investment

strategy is simply to choose the asset with the greater adjusted coupon

rate.

        Of course, there is substantial interest-rate uncertainty, and, as a

result, cash flow uncertainty. Unexpected cash flow outcomes tend to

affect the returns on mortgages adversely relative to those of bond

portfolios. Lower than expected interest rates increase refinancings

and reduce assumptions, thereby producing greater than expected cash

flows to be invested at the unexpectedly low yield. Higher than expected

interest rates increase assumptions and decrease the willingness of

households to move, producing lower than expected cash flows to be reinvested

at unexpectedly high yields. Thus, no matter how interest rates evolve,

the expost difference in holding period returns on mortgages and bonds

will fall short of the difference in adjusted coupon rates.     To compensate

for the likelihood of these adverse changes in mortgage termination rates

and the resultant shortfall in relative expost return, an options

premium must be built into mortgage coupon rates.     We denote the difference

between the individual association's valuation of the annualized premium
                                           31


necessary to make them indifferent between bonds and mortgages that are

otherwise equivalent investments and the market's valuation by (opt).

With uncertainty, the investment rule is buy bonds if b°>m°-Ø(opt).

     While this rule might be appropriate for life insurance companies

and pension funds, it is not correct for savings and loan associations

because they have two special incentives to invest in mortgages. First,

if mortgage bankers can originate and place mortgages in the portfolios of

ultimate investors without losing money, then savings and loans can

surely originate for their own portfolios at a profit. The annualized

yield equivalent of this extra profit is represented by 8(orig). Second,

there are, or can be, tax preferences for marginal investments of savings

and loans in mortgages. The value of these, which depends on the association's

before-tax profits per dollar of assets and percentage of assets already

in mortgages, is represented by(tax). With these adjustments, the

investment strategy for a risk-neutral savings and loan now becomes:

buy bonds if


     b > m-Ø'(opt) +   e(orig)   +   '(tax).

This rule only holds for the investment of "new" funds, i.e., increases in

liabilities plus repayments of assets; if the association is contemplating

the sale of existing mortgages to purchase bonds, then the probably

prohibitive sales costs must be taken into account.

     One further point regarding the bond-mortgage investment choice. In

the 1970s savings and loan associations were subject to enormous upside

interest-rate risk. Unexpected increases in rates raised interest expense
                                    32

faster then interest income because the average maturity of liabilities

was shorter than that of assets. Moreover, the effective maturity of

liabilities would shorten (early withdrawals would occur) and that of

mortgages would lengthen (more mortgages would be assumed and households

would become less mobile). This risk could have been tempered by investment

in noncallable, shorter term corporate debt. The recent increase in

penalties for early withdrawal of deposits and the shift to variable

rate, rollover and equity participation mortgages has reduced this risk,

although the increased volatility of interest rates has mitigated the

reduction. In any event, the above investment rule should be tilted

slightly toward bonds for associations that are averse to this risk.

    The final question is:    if savings and loans follow the appropriate

bond investment rule, will they actually purchase bonds? The answer, of

course, depends upon what mortgage and bond coupon rates are, in fact,

determined in the marketplace. Under present tax law and assuming

homogeneous interest-rate expectations, it appears that relatively profitable

risk-neutral assocations would never wish to purchase bonds and that

less profitable associations would do so only when the demand for mortgage

funds is weak. That is, probably no risk-neutral associations would

have invested in corporate debt in the 1976-79 period had the option been

available. If the demand for mortgage funds is weak, then more profitable

savings and loans will compete away some of the value of the tax preference

by bidding down mortgage rates, and less profitable associations will

find corporate debt to be an attractive alternative. Moreover, noncallable,

shorter term corporate debt would be more attractive to risk-averse
                                    33

associations. If the tax preferences of savings and loans were removed,

then risk-averse associations would likely make significant use of their

authority and all associations would probably allocate significant funds

to tax-exempt securities. Lastly, if interest rate expectations are

heterogeneous, sone associations will bQlieve that the options premium

built into the mortgage coupon rate is insufficient to compensate for

mortgage cash flow uncertainty. These associations will tend to find

bonds to be an attractive alternative to mortgages.
