                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           AN INTEGRATED VIE'iJ OF TESTS OF RATIONALITY,
         MPKET EFFICIENCY ND THE SHORT—RUN NEUTRPJITY
                       OF MONETARY POLICY


                         Andrew B. Abel

                       Frederic S. Mishkin

                      Working Paper No.   726




               NATIONAn BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                           August 1981




We would like to thank an anonymous referee, Steven LeRoy, Thomas
Sargent, Mark Watson, and participants in seminars at the
University of Chicago, the University of California, San Diego,
Harvard University, Universit de Montra1 and the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Research support from the National Science
Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program on Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper 1/726
                                                            August 1981




          An Integrated View of Tests of Rationality, Market Efficiency
                 and the Short—Run Neutrality of Monetary Policy



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper analyzes an important class of models in which expectations

play an important role. Topics included in the analysis are tests of:

(1) rationality of forecasts in either market or survey data, (2) capital

market efficiency, (3) the short—run neutrality of monetary policy and,

(4) Granger causality in macroeconometric models. The common elements

of these tests are highlighted. In particular, cross—equation tests for

rationality or the short—run neutrality of money are shown to be equivalent

to more common regression tests in the literature. Also discussed are the

conditions for identification and the implications for whether hypotheses

are testable.




                                               Andrew Abel
                                               Department of Economics
                                               Harvard University
                                               Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

                                               (617) 495—1869


                                               Frederic S. Mishkin
                                               Department of Economics
                                               University of Chicago
                                               1126 East 59th Street
                                               Chicago, Illinois 60637

                                               (312) 753—4518
                                    I

                               INTRODUCTI ON


      In this paper we develop a framework for analyzing and integrating a

 broad class of models in which expectations play an important role.

 One reason for studying these models is that they have strong implications

 for policy.1 Among the topics included in this analysis are tests of:

 (1) rationality of forecasts in either market or survey data, (2) capital

 market efficiency, (3) the short—run neutrality of monetary policy, i.e.,

 that anticipated monetary policy has no effect on output or employment,

and (4) Granger (1969) causality in macroeconometric models.   In this

paper, we highlight the common elements of these different tests and make

clear the relations among them. We find that these tests can be used for

inference under quite general conditions. We also demonstrate the equivalence

of Granger causality tests and a test of cross—equation restrictions in

a particular model which embodies the short—run neutrality of money.

Finally, we examine the conditions for identification and the implications

for whether various hypotheses are testable.

     The paper is organized to begin with the simplest case and to treat

increasingly complex cases. The simplest case, discussed in Section II,

involves cross—equation tests of rationality when some measure of

expectations is available. In the absence of directly observable expec-

tations, some model of market behavior is needed to make inferences about

expectations. This case is discussed in Section III. Section IV develops

cross—equation tests of the short—run neutrality of money, and Section V

discusses the conditions under which coeffients are identified and

restrictions are testable. A final section contains a summary of

the results.
                                          —2—



                                            II
                              TESTS OF RATIONALITY2


      Rationality of expectations implies that the market's subjective
probability     distribution of any variable is identical to the objective

probability distribution of that variable conditional on available

information. Following the literature, we restrict our attention to

linear models and focus only on the first moments of distributions.

      Let        denote the set of information available at the end of

period t—l, and let                   denote the objective expectation conditional

on          Suppose that          is generated by the following linear model.3


(1)         =
                Z1   1c1 + Z2,_1c2 +


         where Z
                  l,t—l
                          and Z
                                  2,t—1
                                          are vectors of variables known   at   time

         t—l and are thus contained


            is an error term which is assumed to have the property that

                       = 0.
         E(utIt1)

The distinction between Z      and Z       is that Z       includes variables
                         l,t—l       2,t—l           2,t—l
relevant for forecasting X but which are ignored by the econometrician

in conducting tests of rationality. Of course Z21 could be empty. It is

clear from (1) that the objective expectation of X, conditional °n —'                  is

(2)      E(XIi) = Zi,_1ct1 + Z2,_1a2

      Now consider a one—period—ahead forecast            which is some observable

measure of an expectation of X made at time t—l. Rationality of expec—
                                             —3—



  tations requires that the forecast X must equal the objective expectation
 of       conditional on             Thus in the following equation


                 =
  (3)
                     Z1,_ic +   Z2,_1a +
                                             v

 rationality implies that            =
                                         a   a2 =      and v iS identically zero.

 However, in dealing with actual data on expectations,             we allow for a
 nonzero observation error v and use the following weaker definition of

 rationality:


 (4)       E(x —      Xjc1)     =



 This   definition still requires that a1 =
                                                    c and a2 = a,     yet it allows v to be

 non—zero with the restriction that E(vtIt1)

        Observe that (4) implies that the fOrecast error is uncorrelated

with information in                 This implication of rational expectations is the

basis for one test procedure in which            X —   X   is regressed on past information.
The null hypothesis of rationality is rejected whenever the estimated

coefficient          differs significantly from zero in the regression below:



(5)       x—x

where x —   )e   is the least squares projection of X — Xe on Z1, and u

is the coefficient estimated with ordinary least squares (OLS).              (Note
that X and e are n x 1 vectors with X and X, respectively, in row t.

Similarly, Z1 is a matrix of n rows which contains the Vector
                                                                          Z1,_1
row t.) This is the most common test of rationality used to study forward

rates in the foreign exchange market.5
                                                  -.4 -




       The effect of ignoring relevant information in this test is made

 clear by subtracting equation (3) from (1) to obtain' the following equation

 for the forecast error.

              —   x       =
                              Zi..1(ai   —
                                             c)
 (6)                                              + Z2 t_i(a2 —   c)   + u
Recall that rationality implies that                      —   0,       —     =0   and

E(ut —   vIqi)            =   0.   Therefore, under the hypothesis of rationality, the

coefficient w estimated from the OLS regression of X —
                                                                           X   on Z11
(5) will be a consistent estimate of c c and should not be signifi-

candy different from zero. Note that under rationality, w is a consistent

estimate of           —
                          c even if Z2, which is the set of relevant variables
excluded from the regression, is not empty. Thus leaving out relevant

variables from the OLS regression (5) will not affect the rationality

implication that w should not differ significantly from zero.

       Another way of stating the point made above is that the test

described here is a test of rationality no matter what past information

is included in Z1 (or no matter what information is excluded from the

regression equation.)6 That is, plim w can differ from zero only if there

is a violation of rationality. However, it is possible that plim w

could equal zero even in the presence of irrationality. For example,

suppose that          =
                              cL, E(u vI%1)= 0 and Z2 is orthogonal to Z1 , yet                 there

is irrationality because                     c. In this case, plim w = 0.          Therefore,

a failure to reject the null hypothesis, even asymptotically, does not

rule out irrationality.7'8

       Studies that test for the rationality of survey forecasts [Pesando

(1975), Carlson (1977), Nullineaux (1978) and Friedman (1978)] use the

following alternative procedure. Consider the following least squares

regressions
                                               —5—




 (7)
           X=Z1y

 (8)       Xe=
                 z1y*

 where X and e are the linear least squares projections of X and e onto

 Z1, and y and y are the OLS coefficient estimates. As pointed out by

Nodigliani and Shiller (1973), rationality of expectations requires that
       A
 plim y = plim    y*. This implication of rationality becomes clear if we

 suppose that Z2, the set of variables excluded from the regressions in

 (7) and (8), is empty; that is, the regressions in (7) and (8) contain

all information in t—l relevant for forecasting X. In this case, y

and y* are each consistent estimates of                    under the null hypothesis of

rationality, and they should not differ significantly from each other.9

Testing the cross—equation restriction y =                  y*   is equivalent to testing
w = 0 in (5), since
                             is numerically identical to y y*.

       Now suppose that
                             Z2 is not empty so that relevant variables are
excluded from (7) and (8). In this case, the estimates y and y generally

will not be consistent estimates of                  and c, respectively, even if

expectations are rational. However, rationality of expectations still
                  A         A         A   A
implies that plim y = plim y* because y — y* is numerically equal to
u, and plim w = 0.       The equality of plim )' and plim y* reflects the equal

asymptotic bias in the two estimates)0

       This section has analyzed tests of rationality in the presence of

some observable measure of expectations. The general conclusion is that

a rejection of y =      y*   or, equivalently, w =           0, is a rejection of rational
expectations regardless of the completeness of the information set specified

by Z1. The two alternative procedures discussed here are thus tests of

rationality under quite general conditions.
                                  —6—



     In the absence of direct observations on expectations, we must infer

information on expectations from observed market behavior. In the next

section we discuss the use of security price data to test for the

rationality of expectations.
                                     —7—

                                      III

                  TESTS OF RATIONALITY AND MARKET EFFICIENCY


        Tests of rationality in capital markets focus on holding—period

 returns for securities. Let Rt denote the return from holding a particular

 security from t—l to t.     (This return includes both capital gains and

 intermediate cash income.) Rationality of expectations, or equivalently,

 capital market efficiency, implies that the subjective expectation of
                                                                            Rt
 assessed by the market is equal to the objective expectation conditional

 °
 (9)      E(Rq1) = E(Rq1)

where E(RtJ1) is the subjective expectation assessed by the market.

As in section II, a weaker condition is used in empirical applications:


 (10)     E(R —   E(R1)jq1)             0


In order to give (10) empirical content, we must specify a model of market

equilibrium which relates E (RI41)to some subset of past information:


(11)     E(RtI1) =

where       is contained in q1.     The reader is referred to Fama (1976)

for a discussion of various models of market equilibrium used to determine

E(RJ1) in empirical work. Combining (10) and (11), we obtain

(12)     E(yJ1) =      0


where y R —
Tests of (12) are tests of the joint hypothesis that 1) expectations are

rational (market efficiency) and 2) that    the   model of market equilibrium is

correctly specified in measuring
                                   y.
                                             —8—




       Equation (12) above implies that             should be uncorrelated with any

past information in                  It   is the basis for a common test of market

efficiency11 in which y is regressed on past information, and the null

hypothesis that ci.          0 is tested in the equation below:


(13)      y =       Zia      +


where               an 2,—element row vector of information contained in

            = 2.     x 1 vector of coefficients,

           = a disturbance where E(pi) is assumed to equal zero.



This procedure is a test of the joint hypothesis of market efficiency

and the model of market equilibrium, no matter what past information is

included in Z.

       A model which satisfies (12) is


(14)      y(X — X)iB             +


where      = a scalar disturbance with the property E(cki) = 0 ——              thus
                E    is   a serially uncorrelated and uncorrelated with X

            =    the      k—element row vector containing variables relevant to the

                pricing of the security at time t

            =       the k—element row vector of one—period forecasts of X, j,
                      = E(XIt1),
            =       k x 1 vector of coefficients.
                                               —9—


        For expositional convenience, we refer to this model (14) as "the

 efficient markets model." Note, however, that it embodies not only

market efficiency (or, equivalently, rational expectations), but also

a model of market equilibrium. This model stresses that only when new

 information hits the market will y differ from zero. This is equivalent

to the proposition that only unanticipated changes in X can be correlated

with

        The linear model for the k variables in X can be written as


 (15)         =
                      Z1y    +
                                  u
where y =         x   k matrix of coefficients

        u =       k—element row vector of disturbances.


Suppose, for the moment, that E(ulq i = 0, so that an unbiased linear

one—period—ahead forecast for the variables in X is


(16) x =          z1
Substituting (16) into (14) we have:


              =         —
(17)
                  (X        Zt1y*)      + Ct

where y = y*.

        The system     in   (15) and (17) can be stacked into one regression

system with n(k+l) observations, and estimated by non-linear least

squares.1-2   The cross—equation constraints implied by market efficiency

(rationality), y =          y*,   can be tested with a likelihood ratio test and are

analogous to the rationality constraints for the regressions (7) and

(8). Although expectations are not directly observable, we can test
                                                —10—



their rationality by maintaining,with a model of market equilibrium, the

hypothesis that only contemporaneous unanticipated movements in                   are

correlated with y. Any rejection of the constraint y =                 y*   could indicate

a failure of either the rationality of expectations about X or of the

maintained hypothesis. This issue of interpreting tests will be discussed

further in Section V.

        Two questions arise as to the econometric properties of this procedure.

Does the procedure provide a test of market efficiency (rationality) under

the maintained hypothesis, even if                     excludes variables relevant to

forecasting the variables in Xt? Second, what is the relation of this

test to the common test for market efficiency using equation (13)? The

following theorem provides answers to these related questions.


Theorem.       Consider the system of equations


        xt =   zt_lY +
(a)
           =          —                   +
               (X
where X is a k—element row vector, Z1 is an 2—e1ement row vector, y

is a scalar, y and y* are 2, x k parameter matrices, is a k x 1 parameter

vector. Also consider the equation


(b)        y =            +
                              I_It




where      is an 2,   x 1 parameter vector. The quasi—likelihood ratio test of

the null hypothesis y =              y*   in (a) is asymptotically equivalent to a

quasi-F test of the null hypothesis ct = 0 in (b).                (The quasi—likelihood

ratio and quasi—F tests are constructed as if the disturbances, u

and pare i.i.d. normal.)
                                               —11—



 Outline of Proof:13
                                    The key insight in the proof of this theorem is to

 observe that the system (a) can be rewritten as


           xt =            +
                               Ut
 (18)
                       —
           y =    (X       Ziy)3 +       Zt10 +
                                                  St

 where e = (-y —      y*).      The null hypothesis y          y* will be true only if
 o =    0, and this constraint can be tested using the nonlinear least squares

 estimates of (18).             The constraint that y is the same in both equations

 in (18) Is not binding, so we estimate the parameters in (18) by OLS on

each equation. Specifically, the estimate y is obtained by OLS on the

first equation, and             and 0 are obtained from an OLS regression of
                                                                                    y
on X —
           Z1c        and Z1. Since the residuals from the first equation
in (18), X —                   are orthogonal to Z1 by construction, the estimate
of 0 will not be affected if X Z1y is omitted from the list of

regressors when OLS is applied to the second equation in (18).14

Thus the estimate of 0 is numerically identical to, and has the same

distribution as, the OLS estimate of c in (b). Although the test

statistic associated with the null hypothesis c. = 0 may differ in small

samples from the test statistic associated with the null hypotheses

o =    0, these test statistics will be asymptotically equal. 15

REMARKS

       Observe that 0           (y — y*)13 is an j     x 1 vector. Thus the test of
0 = 0 (or, equivalently, c               0) is a test of only .     constraints.   However,
there are 9 •     k   constraints in y =       y*.     Therefore, all of these constraints

are testable only if k = 1.              Even when k >   1,   imposing the constraint
                                      —12--




y =   y*   places only R. binding restrictions on the system in (a).16     This

 issue is discussed in Section V.

       If the contemporaneous correlation of u and      is zero, the OLS

regression of y on u and Z will provide consistent estimates of both

and 0. However, if the contemporaneous correlation of u and          is

unknown, then        is unidentified. Nevertheless, in this case the OLS

estimate of 0 is still consistent and the theorem continues to apply. Since

  is, in general, unidentified, there is an alternative demonstration of

this theorem. The maximized value of the likelihood function is not

affected by an arbritrary choice of 3. Therefore, set         equal to zero,

and observe that we now have a seemingly unrelated system (Zeilner (1962))

in which the right—hand side variables are identical in each equation.

Therefore, the estimates of y and 0 can be obtained from OLS equation—by--

equation.

      Even if the time series model generating X is incorrectly

specified by leaving out relevant available information from Z1 so that

                   0, the procedure described above still provides a test
E(uIt1)
of rationality. This is demonstrated by noting that the

test of y =    y   is asymptotically equivalent to the test of c =   0,
which is clearly a test of (12), regardless of what past information is

included in Z. However, if the model generating         is not correctly

specified, then in general, there is an errors—in--variables problem which

leads to inconsistent estimates of       and y. Nonetheless, any asymptotic

bias in y will be identical to that in y.
                                            —13—


                                           Iv

                     TESTS OF THE SHORT-RUN NEUTRALITY OF MONEY


         Sargent (l976a) discusses tests of a classical macroeconometric model

 which displays the neutrality proposition that anticipated countercyclical

 policy, especially monetary policy, will have no effect on output or unem-

 ployment. Thus, in Sargent's model a constant money growth rule is not

 dominated by any rule with feedback. This
                                                      controversial policy implica—
        17
 tion        is based on the rationality of expectations and a Lucas supply

 function of the form



 (19)        y =     (x   —      +


 where

             is a scalar representing the deviation of output (unemployment) from

             equilibrium output (unemployment).

             is a k—element vector of aggregate demand variables, such as the

             price level or the money supply.

             is a scalar disturbance term with the     property E(cI t1 0 —      —


             hence        is serially uncorrelated.

        This equation has the property of "neutrality," i.e., that only unan-

ticipated changes in            have an effect on y. Note that the supply func-

tion (19) has the same form as the "efficient markets model" in (14). As

in the previous section, some model of equilibrium behavior is required in

order to give the supply function empirical content. The particular model

of equilibrium behavior used in the Lucas supply function is that
                                                                  y, the
deviation of output from its equilibriwn level, is
                                                     —14—




                             L
                =        —
 (20)
                    q j =1 A1q             .,   where       is output at time t.



         Suppose that            is generated by the linear model

                                  Lv
               =
 (21)
                    Z    1y +                    +



where Z1 is an 9.—element row vector of predetermined variables other

               than lagged q.

         y is an 9. x k matrix of coefficients.

           is a k—element row vector of coefficients.


Note that (21) has the same form as the linear model (15) except that in

(21) we distinguish between lagged values of                         and other predetermined

variables. We assume for the moment that E(utI4ti) = 0 and combine (19),

(20) and (21) to obtain the system

                                 L'
(22)       x = z1-           +
                                 .
                                 i=l
                                                 + Ut


                                            .L'
                                                               L
           q   =    (x   —
                             z11*      —

                                           i=1
                                                            + i=1
                                                               .        + Et


with the cross—equation rationality constraints y=y* and ij.=iI, i=l,.                   .




Any   rejection     of these constraints could indicate a violation of the null

hypothesis of rationality,or of the maintained hypothesis of the model of

equilibrium output and the neutrality of anticipated policy.


        SaTgent (l967a) has proposed using Granger (1969) causality tests19

to test the joint hypothesis of
                                                 rationality of expectations, the model of
equilibrium output, and neutrality of
                                                        anticipated policy as embodied in
                                                   —15-




 (22). This joint hypothesis requires that Z1 fails to Granger cause

 Specifically, if OLS is used to estimate the parameters . and a in


 (23)             =    E                 +
                      i=1q:1cl_1             Zia +,

 the      estimate of a should not differ significantly from zero.

          The relationship between tests of the cross—equation constraints in

 (22) and the Granger causality test in (23) is made clear by the following

corollary.

COROLLARY:

          If L' >     L,   then a quasi—likelihood ratio test of the null hypothesis
      *
y=y       in (22) is asymptotically equivalent to a quasi—F test of the null

hypothesis that a0 in (23).

OUTLINE OF PROOF:

          As in the proof of the theorem, the unconstrained system (22) can be

rewritten as

                                   L'
                  =
(24)
                      Zty      +
                                   1=1
                                         iJq1 + u

                                              L'            L
                  =                      —     t_i)3 + E
                      (X
                           —
                               Ztly           E
                                             i1        i=1
                                                                        + Z 18+E
                                                                               i=i
where         =   (_*) and 0. =                       for   i =   1,... ,L'.
Note that since 0. and A. are each coefficients of                                 in (24), the sepa-

rate parameters 0. and A. are not identified for I <                       L   <   L'.   Hence, the

constraints .=for I < L are not testable.2° In order to test the

testable cross—equation restrictions, the system (24) can be estimated by

OLS on each equation, as explained in the proof of the theorem in Section
                                   -46—



 ui.2'    Since the estimated residuals from the first equation will be

 orthogonal to Z1 and        for i=1,...,L', the deletion of this residual

vector from the second equation will not affect the OLS estimates of the

coefficients on Z1 and           Hence, as in the previous proof, the least

squares estimates of a and 00 will be numerically identical, and the test

statistics associated with the null hypotheses a=O and 80=0 will be

asymptotically equal.


REMARKS

     It is important to consider the effects of incorrectly specifying the

list of variables included in Z1. Including irrelevant predetermined

variables in     will not lead to inconsistent parameter estimates but in

general will reduce the power of tests. On the other hand, excluding

relevant variables from       will lead to a breakdown of the assumption

that E(utJti) = 0, and will lead to inconsistent              of y. How-
                                                  estimate:
ever, even in this case any rejection of the constraint y=y in (24) indi-

cates a failure of rationality, the model of equilibrium output, or of

neutrality since a rejection of this constraint indicates that
                                                                 Z1 Gran—
ger causes       As Sargent has shown, rationality of expectations combined

with the neutrality embodied in the supply function (19) implies that no vector

of predetermined variables Z 1——even a vector which excludes relevant pre-

determined variables——can Granger cause

     We have shown that the procedure above provides a test of the joint

hypothesis of rationality, the model of equilibrium output, and neutrality

even if relevant predetermined variables are omitted from   Z1. This indi-
cates that, contrary to a statement by Lucas (1972), tests of neutrality

can be conducted even when there is a change in the policy regime. A
                                      —17—



 change in a policy regime can be incorporated in a linear model by inclu-

 ding an additional set of variables, with dummy variables to indicate the

 relevant regime for any given time.22 Neglecting to take account of a

 change in policy regime is equivalent to omitting the additional set of

 variables from Z1. Thus, even if the variables in Z1 are chosen without

 taking account of the change in policy regime, a rejection of the constraint

 y=y* indicates a failure of the joint hypothesis of rationality, the

model of equilibrium output, and neutrality.


       McCallum (1979) and Nelson (1979) have emphasized the point raised by

Sargent (1973, 1976b) that the Granger causality tests are valid tests of

the neutrality of anticipated policy only if:     (a) lagged values of

do not enter the supply function (19); or (b) the disturbance            in (19) is

serially uncorrelated. That is, if either of these two conditions does not

hold, then it is possible for Z1 to Granger cause y even though antici-

pated policy is neutral.

       The analysis of this paper also demonstrates these points. The corol-

lary above breaks down if there are lagged surprises           in (19) and hence in

(22). Although the contemporaneous residual from the first equation in

(.24) is, by construction, orthogonal to        and            this is not true of

lagged residuals. Thus, the test of y=y will no longer be equivalent to

a Granger—causality test. Therefore, Granger—csa1ity will no longer be

a test of the joint hypothesis of rationality, the model of equilibrium

output and neutrality.

       Now consider the case in which only contemporaneous innovations in

appear in (19) and (22), but c is serially correlated, implying that            is

serially correlated. Here, the corollary holds and the Granger—causality
                                                       *
test   is asymptotically equivalent to the test of y =y    .
                                                               However, since the
                                   —18—



right—hand side of both (22) and (23) includes lagged dependent

variables, the estimates of c' and 0 will no longer be consistent. Thus

both sets of tests are invalid in this case.23
                                         —19—

                                             V

               COEFFICIENT IDENTIFICATION AND HYPOTHESIS TESTING


         In this section we examine estimation and hypothesis testing in a

 broader class of models in which expectations, and especially deviations

 from expectations, are important determinants of behavior.       Since this

 broader class of models contains the models used for tests of market

 efficiency discussed earlier in this paper, as well as models based on the

 work of Barro (1977), the analysis of this section will provide

 a unifying framework for two important branches of the literature.

         Consider the following system of equations:


              =
 (25)
                   ztly +   u

                    N
           y =     • (X. — Zi.y).
                   1=0
                                         +


           where X is a k—element row vector of observations at time t

                   on variables whose surprises are correlated with

                   is a h-element row vector of predetermined variables at time

                   t useful in predicting X,

           y is a h x k matrix of coefficients,

           y is a scalar,

           .1 is   a k x 1 vector of coefficients.



        Observe that the system (25) embodies the exclusion restriction that

Z11 does not enter the second equation of (25) except as it enters the

term representing X.. This exclusion restriction is crucial to identi-

fication and hypothesis testing as discussed later in this section.
                                                —20—



         Note that if X is interpreted as the growth rate of money and if

        is the deviation of output from some natural level, then (25) represents

 the model used by Barro. Alternatively, in the efficient markets model,

     is a vector of variables relevant for
                                                       pricing a security at time t,

     s       —
                 E(RI1)             as defined in Section III, and N = 0.


         The system (25) embodies two sets of constraints.               Rationality of

 expectations is imposed since the coefficient y which appears in the

 equation for X also appears in the equation for y. The system (25)

 exhibits neutrality because the coefficient on                is constrained to be
 zero when X —              is   included as an explanatory variable. Relaxing

the neutrality and rationality constraints, the system (25) becomes


 (26)            =
                     Z1y + u
                     N                                 N

                     i=0
                           (Xe. —   Zi.y*).       +
                                                       i=0
                                                           Z1.y*S.   +

            where y is a h x k matrix of coefficients,

                      S. is a k x 1 vector of coefficients.
                      1


If   all of the coefficients in (26) can be estimated (an issue to be dis-

cussed later in this section), then a comparison of the weighted sums of

squares from (25) and (26) provides a joint test of both the rationality

constraints y =          y*,   and the neutrality constraints &=0, conditional on

the maintained hypothesis of the model of equilibrium output.

        As an alternative to relaxing both the neutrality and rationality

constraints, we can relax only one set of the constraints. For example,

maintaining the hypothesis of rationality but relaxing the assumption of

neutrality, the system (25) becomes
                                                —2 1—




                   =
   (27)
                        Z1y ÷ u
                           N                            N
                   =
                        i=0 (Xe.
                                    —
                                        Zt1.-y) +                     +
                                                       1=0

  Under the maintained hypothesis that
                                                  expectations are formed rationally,
  the null hypothesis of
                         neutrality, i.e., .=0, can be tested by comparing
  the estimated systems (25) and (27). This test is similar to those
                                                                     conducted
  by Barro.

          Rather than maintain the hypothesis of
                                                             rationality of expectations
  and then test for neutrality, one can maintain the hypothesis of
                                                                                 neutrality
 and then test for rationality. To
                                               perform this test, the unconstrained
 system is


               =
 (28)
                   Z1y +        u
                       N

                       1=0
                             (x — Zt1.y*)3       + E



 A comparison of the estimated
                                          systems (25) and (28) provides a test of
 the null hypothesis of
                                 rationality, i.e., y=y*, under the maintained
hypothesis of neutrality. Note that when N= 0, so that only the current

surprise in X appears in the second equation in (28), this test is the

efficient markets test discussed in Section III. In the efficient markets

case, neutrality is a reasonable maintained
                                                            hypothesis since the absence
of neutrality would indicate the
                                            presence of unexploited profit opportu-
nities. Maintaining the hypothesis that unexploited profit
                                                           opportunities
do not exist, the null hypothesis of
                                               rationality can be tested. It must
be noted, however, that a rejection of the null hypothesis that
                                                                               Y=y* may
result from a breakdown of
                                     rationality, neutrality, or the model of market
equilibrjum
                                      —22—



       The      statistic for the joint hypothesis of rationality and neutrality

 can be partitioned into the contribution from each component hypothesis

 by sequentially relaxing the constraints. The order in which these constraints

 are relaxed is arbitrary from a statistical viewpoint. However, some

 a priori economic reasoning may suggest an appropriate sequence for

 relaxing constraints. For example, in testing whether anticipated monetary

 policy affects output, it seems appropriate first to relax 3.0 and test

 neutrality under the maintained hypothesis of rationality. Indeed, this

 test of neutrality is essentially the Barro test. Then, without maintaining

neutrality, the constraint y=y*can be relaxed, and rationality can be

 tested, as in Leiderman (1980) and Mishkin (1982).

      Under the alternative sequence for relaxing constraints, we first

relax the constraint y = y* and test for rationality under the maintained

hypothesis of neutrality. Indeed, in the case in which N0, this is the

test of the efficient markets model discussed in Section III. The next step

in relaxing constraints permits a test of neutrality without maintaining

the hypothesis of rational expectations. Here the test is conducted on

the assumption that the expectations of       in the second equation of the

system (26) are formed with the same set of information, Z1, as the

time.-series model of.Xt in the first equation. Yet if we are not willing

to assume that expectations are rational, there seems to be no reason to

assume that the same set of variables belongs in Z in both equations in (26).

Therefore, it is not clear that this test yields useful information.


IDENTIFICATION

     The various tests discussed above depend on estimation of the para.-

meters i5,   and y* in the unconstrained system (26). More specifically,
                                       —23—



 neutrality requires that the estimate of S. not differ significantly from

 zero, and rationality requires that the estimate of y* not differ signifi-

 cantly from y. These restrictions are testable only if the relevant para-

 meters are identified. If not all of the parameters are identified, then

 only some of the restrictions, or linear combinations of restrictions, are

 testable.

        We outline here a procedure for determining identification by analyzing

 the following interesting special case of systems (25) — (28) where we

 rewrite Z1 as shown below for the. system (26).24


 (29)             M
                              + u
                  1=1


              =
                                           *) +    (1zt_j_jui*j +

          where    is a k—element row vector of variables relevant for

                   determining       kl.
               is a (p+k)—element row vector of variables dated t—i which

               are used in predicting X. It contains the k elements of

                      as well as p other variables; p   0.

               is a scalar.

             and y are (p+k) x k matrices of parameters,

             and . are k x 1 column vectors of parameters.


Note that (29) embodies the following simplifying assumptions:    (a) the

same lag length applies to all variables used to predict X in the first

equation,and (b) in the second equation, the same lag length, N, is used

for both anticipated and unanticipated X. These assumptions, which are
                                                                 —24—



 made for expositional clarity, can be relaxed and the following discussion

 can be generalized in a straightforward manner. Note also that the row
 vector          which is used in the time—series model for predicting

 contains the k—element row vector X., since lagged values of the dependent

 variable are often useful in prediction. In addition, the row vector

 contains p other variables at time t—i, where p 0. We also assume that

 u and      are uncorrelated and that E(u Jc                                                                 =    0.
                                                                                 i =   E(Ec1)                           Finally,

 recall that the rationality restriction is                                  y.= y, i1, .                .       , M,   and the

 neutrality restriction is ó. =                     0,       j       0, .    .      , N.
       The first step in determining identification is to analyze the order

 condition. For example, consider the most unconstrained system (29) in

which y, y,            and S. are the free parameters to be estimated. Observe

that y can be estimated by OLS on the first equation in (29). The

remaining parameters                  ., and 6. must be estimated from the second equation
in (29). The most unconstrained form of this second equation is


                   N                          M+N
            =                         +
(30)
                       _••                          z                +
                                                                         t


                 A                            M                  A
          whereu     .X t—j.—
                   t—J
                                                         .
                                                     t—j—i 1
                                              i=l
            is   a (p+k) x 1 column vector of parameters which is zero25

            if 6.       0, j =    0,      .    . .      , N and y = y.                  I =   1,   .   . .       , N.

Note that for j =      1,   .   . .    , N,       the residual                         can be expressed as
                                                                             -'_
a linear combination of the other right—hand side variables
                                                                                                         Z1, . . . , ZtMN
That is, only the residual at time                           t, , is             not perfectly correlated with

the other right—hand—side variables.                              Hence, the most unconstrained form
of this equation which can be estimated by OLS is
                                                          —25--




                                    M+N
 (31)       yt = u
                       to       +
                                    ,=1t
                                                + S
                                                      t




 Since there are k elements in                    and (M+N) (p+k) elements in the 0'

 coefficients, equation (31) can be used to estimate at most k + (N+N)(p+k)

 parameters. As long as this number of estimable parameters exceeds the

 number of free parameters contained in the 3, 6, and y* coefficients, the

 order condition is satisfied.



        Identification depends on the rank condition as well as the order

condition. The rank condition is particularly important in the identification

of (29) because, in general, it need not be satisfied when the order condition

is satisfied. This failure to satisfy the rank condition becomes clear if

we rewrite (29) as


                       M
(32)
            1 =
                       '
                      1=1
                                    1
                                        +
                                            1




                      M
           k                        k       k
                                        +
          xt =
                      . zt_iyi
                      1=1


             =
                      k N
                      s1 j0
                            {       (x. 3) + '
                                                 N

                                                j=O
                                                      (6     —    )   M

                                                                      i=l
                                                                            zt   —.    *S}


where X ,
       t    y,1               s
                   y.1 , and u are the s
                              t
                                         th
                                            columns of X ,
                                                                            t    y.,
                                                                                  1
                                                                                       y'
                                                                                        1
                                                                                          and u respectively.
                                                                                               t
                  s
The scalars . and 6. are the sth elements of . and 6. respectively.
                                s


       Note that for any particular s, say s, the system will be unchanged

by a doubling of all of the elements of y for all i and a halving of
 S     S                                 1
         o
           for all j. Because of this observational equivalence, the
                                                  —26—


                 S        S
                          0             0
 parameters           3       and   .       are   not identified even when the order

                                                                         S
 condition      is satisfied. A restriction on any element of                or y.   is

 sufficient to identify these parameters. Applying this argument to each

 of the k values of s, it is clear that k restrictions are needed to identify

 all of the parameters in (29). The restrictions will be provided if

 either neutrality (.          0) or rationality (y. =        y)   is treated as a

maintained hypothesis. Thus, only if neither neutrality nor rationality

 is maintained will the rank condition fail to be satisfied in situations

when the order condition is satisfied.

       Tests of hypotheses are conducted by comparing the residual sums

of squares from constrained and unconstrained systems. The number of

restrictions tested (and hence the number of degrees of freedom in the

      statistic) equals the number of identified parameters estimated in

the unconstrained system less the number of identified parameters estimated

in the constrained system. To illustrate this calculation using the

procedures above, consider the test of rationality, under the maintained

hypothesis of neutrality, in the efficient markets case in which N 0.

The last equation in the constrained system (where = 0, y.y) contains

k parameters (the elements of 3), all of which are identified. The last

equation in the unconstrained system (where S = 0) contains k + Mk(p + k)

parameters. However, as explained above, only k + M(p+k) parameters can be

estimated. Only if k=l will all of the parameters in the unconstrained

system be identified. However, even if k>l, there are M(p+k) testable

restrictions. These restrictions are linear combinations of the restrictions
y —        0.    (See footnote 16 for an example.)
                                              —27—



      An alternative test which may be conducted in the efficient markets

 framework (N=O), is a test of the null hypothesis of neutrality under

 the maintained hypothesis of rationality. Recall that the last equation

 of the constrained system              =        = 0)      contains k parameters (the

 elements of ), and observe that the last equation of the unconstrained

 system (y.     y) contains 2k parameters (the elements of               and        In
 both the constrained and unconstrained systems, all of the parameters are

 identified and all k neutrality restrictions are testable.

      A third test in the efficient markets framework is a test of the

joint hypothesis of neutrality and rationality. As in the two tests discussed

 before, all k parameters of the last equation in the constrained system are

identified. In the unconstrained system              the   last equation contains

2k + Mk(p+k) parameters(k elements of ,              k   elements of     and Mk(p+k) elements
of y, i = 1,        .   .   . , M), but, as explained above, only k +    M(p +k) parameters

can be estimated. Therefore, under no circumstances will all of the

parameters of this equation be identified. However, there are M(p+k)

testable restrictions which are linear combinations of the restrictions

y —    =0     and            0.


      The interpretation of the tests above depends on what hypothesis is

maintained. In particular, the test statistic associated with the joint

test of rationality and neutrality is identical to the test statistic for

the test of rationality, under the maintained hypothesis of neutrality. This

follows from the fact that, although the free parameters in the unconstrained

systems are different, the estimated coefficients are identical.               Furthermore,
the constrained systems are the same. Because of the equivalence of the two

tests, one can not determine whether a rejection is due to a violation of

rationality alone or a violation of both rationality and neutrality.
                                      —28—



     Another interesting example arises in tests of policy neutrality under

the maintained hypothesis of rationality as in Barro (1977, 1978). In these

models it is assumed that the deviation of current output from its natural

level is affected only by the current and N lagged surprises in a single

policy variable (i.e., k=l and N >     0).   In order to obtain identification

of the coefficients on surprises in the policy variable, these studies

implicitly place restrictions on the covariances of        with both u1 and

with lagged disturbances. There are two alternative conditions which are

sufficient for identification of the c5 coefficients, i.e., the coefficients

on anticipated policy. One condition, discussed and used by Barro (1977,11978,

1.979), Leiderman (1980), and Mishkin (11982), is the exclusion restriction p>1.

That is, the time series model for the policy variable X contains at least

one variable which is not directly included in the output equation. The

output equation in the constrained system (where c5. = 0 and y. =   y)
contains N+l parameters (,        •           and in the unconstrained system

(where y. =   y)   it contains 2(N+l) parameters                  and

              SN). In each of these systems, all of the parameters are identified

because the number of free parameters is less than the number of estimable

parameters,l + (M+N)(p+l). Therefore all of the N+l neutrality restrictions

are testable.

     The alternative sufficient condition for identification is M>N;

that is, the number of lags in the time series model for the policy variable

exceeds the number of lagged surprises in the output equation. Although this

condition does formally lead to identification, it requires strong a priori

knowledge of lag lengths. Without this prior knowledge we are faced with

the observational equivalence problem raised by Sargent (l976b).
                                   —29—



     For identification of S. it is necessary that at least one of the

two conditions above holds. One recent piece of research where this does

not occur is in Grossman (1979). His specification of the time—series

equation describing his policy variable (nominal GNP growth) does not include

any variable other than lagged dependent variables. In addition, the

number of lags in the output equation exceeds that in the time—series

equation for the policy variable. Therefore, the CS coefficients in his

model are not identified, with the result that not all the neutrality

constraints can be tested.
                                     —30--




                                   VI

                       SUNMARY AND CONCLUSIONS


      The testing framework in this paper facilitates analysis and inte-

 gration of a wide range of issues in testing rationality, capital market

 efficiency, and the short—run neutrality of monetary policy. The main

points of this analysis are summarized below.

1. Given observations on expectations of a variable, there are two

alternative procedures for testing rationality of these expectations.

One procedure tests for correlation between the forecast error and past

information. The other procedure tests the cross—equation restriction

that the relation of the forecast to past information is the same as the

relation of the realization to past information. These two procedures

are equivalent. Furthermore, these procedures provide tests of rational-

ity regardless of what past information is used.

2. In the absence of direct observations on expectations, we can test

rationality (market efficiency) by testing cross—equation restrictions

similar to those used in rationality tests involving direct observations

on expectations. The cross—equation test of the joint hypothesis of mar-

ket efficiency and the model of market equilibrium is asymptotically

equivalent to the common test in which the deviation of the return from

the equilibrium return is regressed on past information. Since the com-

mon test procedure is a test of market efficiency and the model of mar-

ket equilibrium even if some relevant past information is ignored, the

cross—equation procedure also has this property.

3. Granger causality tests for the short—run neutrality of monetary
                                     —31—




policy are asymptotically equivalent to tests of cross—equation restric-

tions in a model in which only contemporaneous surprises in monetary policy

affect unemployment or output. Since these Granger causality tests are

tests of the joint hypothesis of rationality, neutrality, and the model of

equilibrium output, even if relevant past information is ignored, the

cross—equation procedure is also a test of this joint hypothesis. Thus,

even if the policy regime changes, and the change is ignored, we still are

able to test the joint hypothesis.

4. If lagged surprises in monetary policy affect output and unemployment,

then the Granger causality test and the cross—equation test are no longer

asymptotically equivalent. If the disturbance term in the output equation

is serially correlated, then the two procedures are asymptotically equiva-

lent; however, they are no longer tests of short—run neutrality.

5. There is a straightforward procedure for determining whether coeff i—

dents are identified and whether hypotheses are testable. A particular

application of this procedure shows why all of the neutrality restrictions

are testable in Barro's (1977, 1978) model, but not in J. GrossmanTs

(1979) model.
                                         —32—



                                    FOOTNOTES


 1.   For example, see Sargent and Wallace (1975), Lucas (1976), Poole

       (1976) and Mishkin (1978).

2.    Many of the results in this section are not new. Yet the exposition

      here sets the stage for the later sections which do contain new

      results.

3.    In this paper we use the convention that the subscript t indicates

      that a variable is realized at the end of period t. For a variable

      which describes a security's one—period return, the subscript t

      indicates that the return occurs between the end of period t—1 and

      the end of period t.

4.    If v is identically zero, then X is a minimum variance unbiased

      forecast of X. Replacing the restriction that v be identically zero

      with the restriction that E(vtJ4 l = 0 will remove the minimum

      variance property of X   ,   but   not the unbiasedness conditional on

5.    See the survey in Levich (1979).

6.    Recall that the information in Z1         must have been available to

      the market at time t—1 since we are assuming that Z1,_1 is contained




7.    In addition, the power of the test for w = 0 could be low because

      the reported standard errors of w, which is an estimate of       ct, —

      could   be overstated.

8.    In this case, the probability of Type II error does not go to zero

      as the sample size goes to infinity.

9.    One way to test for the significance of       —    is   to stack (7)

      and (8) into one regression and perform a Chow test for the equality of
                                          —33--




     coefficients. (See Pesando (1975)). However, if, as is likely, the

     variance of residuals in (7) differs from the variance of residuals

     in (8), a correction must be made for this heteroscedasticity. See

     Mullineaux (1978).


10. In this case, plim y =
                                  a1   + (z Z1) ZZ2a2 and plim
           =
               a   + (z1 Z1) Z Zc           Since       =   and a2 =
                                                                       a   under

     rationality, the asymptotic bias is identical for y and y*.

11. See Fama (1976).

12. Systems of this type have been estimated in Mishkin (198la,b).

13. Abel and Mishkin (1980) contain a more detailed proof and discussion

     of identification. This paper also shows that if appropriate corrections

    for degrees of freedom are made, tests using (a) versus (b) are not

    only asymptotically equivalent, but are equivalent in finite samples as

    well.

14. Observe that the second equation in (18) contains a model of market

    equilibrium and can be rewritten as

     (*)
                   Rt
                              + (X —
                                        x)+ z1e     +
    The proof outlined above treats                 as known. If it were unknown

    and were assumed to be a linear function of past variables W1, then

    W1 must also be included as explanatory variables in the time series

    model for X. This will preserve the orthogonality of the residuals

    in the equations for         with the other right hand side variables in

    equation (*),       thereby allowing the proof of the theorem to proceed as
    in the text. This issue is discussed further in the proof of the

    corollary in section IV. Of course, if the coefficients of                     in
                                                —34—



     the model of market equilibrium are estimated, then we cannot test

     the rationality restriction that y is uncorrelated with W1. The

     question of testability of such restrictions is discussed in section V.

15. Even if the disturbances are not normal, the quasi—likelihood ratio

     test can be used for valid inference under quite general conditions.

     See Kohn (1979).

16. Consider the case in which              =   k   =     2.        The system of equations can be
    written as:


    xlt =
             Yllzl,_l   + 121z2,t_l +
                                            ult

    X2 Yi2Zi,_1 +                 —l +
         llt + 2t -                    + Yi2)zi,_1 —
                                                                             211 +    12 2)Z21 +
    The four parameters
                              y.. can be estimated from the first two equations.
    If Cov(c ,u   )   is   known to be zero, we can estimate

    (y11 +              and            + y) from the third equation. Since

    we cannot separately estimate the four elements y*, we cannot separately

    test the four restrictions y.. =
                                       13
                                                    y.*..          However, we can test 2      2 linear
                                                     13

    combinations of the rationality restrictions:

    (y11 —            + 12 —                    0   for 1=1 and 2. If we do not know

   the covariances of E and        uit, then              t3       and       are not identified.
                              t                                1         2

   However, we can still test whether the two linear
                                                                                 combinations above are
   equal to zero. To see this, rewrite the third
                                                                              equation as

      =[(i11—y)81 +                                 Z1,_1 + 2l2l +
         +            + u2 ÷      £t

   Observe that the coefficients of Z                              and Z         in the rewritten
                                                    l,t-.l               2,t—l
                                       —35—




      equation are the testable linear combinations of rationality restrictions.

17. See Modigliani (1977).

18. The model of equilibrium output provides the exclusion restriction

      that Z1 does not enter the second equation of (22) except as it is

      contained in e. This restriction leads to identification in the system.

      See section V.

19. The use of the word 'causality" in describing the Cranger (1969) test

      is somewhat unfortunate, for it has led to much confusion in the

      literature. It is really a test of predictive content and not of

      economic causation. See Zeilner (1979) for a discussion of this point.

20. As indicated in footnote 14 and Section V, since we must estimate the

      coefficients of q1(i =       1,... ,L)   in the model of equilibrium output,

      we do not obtain testable restrictions on the estimates of iJ. and

      for i =   1,... ,L.   The constraints O=O, and hence       =     can be

      obtained only if we impose the identifying restriction that the lag

      length L in (20) is shorter than the lag length L' in (21). This

      appears to be a rather strong assumption to impose on the basis of

      a priori knowledge, and one should be cautious in interpreting

      results based on estimates of 0. in this case.
                                     1

21.   Of course, OLS cannot be directly applied to the second equation of (24)

      as it is written, since the variables            appear twice on the

      right—hand side. This equation must he rewritten to eliminate the

      perfect colinearity of right—hand variables; then OLS may be used.

22. If there are two policy regimesin the sample period 1 to T, then

      we can write
                                              —36—




                                            for t = 1 to T1
     X =      Z     1y1 + u1
          =              +                  for t =         + 1 to T
                             u1                       T1

     which can be rewritten as:

          =
              Z1y + Z1 + u1                 for t =   .1   to T

    where

              (    0
                             fort=ltoT1
      t   1
              C
                   Z1        for t = T1 + 1
      =           - 11

23. If (19) is quasi—differenced to obtain a specification with a serially

     uncorrelated disturbance, the new specification will contain current

     and lagged residuals from the first equation in (24). Hence, the

    Granger causality test will not be a true test of the joint hypothesis

    of rationality, the model of equilibrium output, and neutrality, as

    explained in the paragraph above.

24. We assume that           variables   are measured as deviations from sample means

    so that no constant term appears in any equation.

25. Specifically, e =                      {(y.—y)f3. + yó.} ,         liM,   and O<j<N.
                                   1+J =
                                  —37—




                              REFERENCES



Abel, A. and Mishkin, F. S. (1980), On the Econometric Testing of Rational-

      ity and Market Efficiency, University of Chicago, June.

Barro, R. J. (1977), Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the

     United States, American Economic Review 67, No. 2, March: 101—115.

_________ (1978), Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level in the
     United States, Journal of Political Economy 86, August: 549—580.

_________ (1979), Developments in the Equilibrium Approach to Business
     Cycles, University of Rochester and the National Bureau of Economic

     Research, July.

Carlson, J. A. (1977), A Study of Price Forecasts, Annals of Economic and

     Social Measurement 6, Winter: 27—56.

Fama, E. F. (1976), Foundations of Finance, Basic Books.

Friedman, B. N. (1980), Survey Evidence on the 'Rationality' of Interest

     Rate Expectations, Journal of Monetary Economics 6, October: 453—

     466.

Granger, C. W. J. (1969), Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric

     Models and Cross—Spectral Methods, Econometrica 37, July: 424—438.

Grossman, J. (1979), Nominal Demand Policy and Short—Run Fluctuations in

     Unemployment and Prices in the United States, Journal of Political

     Economy 87, October: 1063—85.

Kohn, R. (1979), Asymptotic Estimation and Hypothesis Testing Results for

     Vector Linear Time Series Models, Econometrica 47, July: 1005—30.

Leiderman, L. (1980), Macroeconometric Testing of the Rational Expecta-

     tions and Structural Neutrality Hypothesis for the United States,

    Journal of Monetary Economics 6, January: 69—82.
                                      —38—



 Levich, R. (1979), On the Efficiency of Markets for Foreign Exchange, in R.

      Dornbusch and J. A. Frenkel, eds., International Economic Policy,

      Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins University Press.

 Lucas, R. E., Jr. (1972), Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothe-

      sis, in 0. Eckstein, ed., The Econometrics of Price Determination,

      Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: 5—15.

 _________ (1976), Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique, in

      Brunner and Meltzer, eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets,

      Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 1,

      Amsterdam, North—Holland: 19—46.

McCallum, B. T. (1979), On the Observational Inequivalence of Classical

      and Keynesian Models, Journal of Political Economy, 87, April: 395—

     402.

Mishkin, F. 5. (1978), Efficient—Markets Theory: Implications for Monetary

     Policy, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 3: 707—752.

_________ (198la), Monetary Policy and Long—Term Interest Rates: an Eff i—

     cient Markets Approach, Journal of Monetary Economics 7, January: 29—

     56.


           —   (1981b), Are Market Forecasts Rational?, American Economic Review
     71, June: 295—306.

_________ (1982),      Does Anticipated Monetary Policy Matter? An Econo-

     metric Investigation, forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy.



Modigliani, F. (1977), The Monetarist Controversy or, Should We Foresake

     Stabilization Policies?, American Economic Review 67, March: 1—19.

Modigliani, F. and Shiller, R. J. (1973), Inflation, Rational Expectations
                                  —39—




      and the Term Structure of Interest Rates, Economica 40, February:

      12—43.

 Mullineaux, D. J. (1978), On Testing for Rationality: Another Look at the

      Livingston Price Expectations Data, Journal of Political Economy 86,

      April: 329—336.

 Nelson, C. R. (1979), Granger Causality and the Natural Rate Hypothesis,

      Journal of Political Economy 87, April: 390—394.

 Pesando, J. E. (1975), A Note on the Rationality of the Livingston Price

      Expectations, Journal of Political Economy 83, August: 849—58.

Poole, W (1976),    Rational Expectations in the Macro Model, Brookings

     Papers on Economic Activity, 2:     463—505.

Sargent, T. J. (1973), Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest,

     and the Natural Rate of Unemployment, Brookings Papers on Economic

     Activity, 2.

__________ (1976a), A Classical Macroeconometric Model for the United

     States, Journal of Political Economy 84, April: 207—37.

_________ (1976b), The Observational Equivalence of Natural and Unnatural

     Rate Theories of Macroeconomics, Journal of Political Economy 84,

     June: 631—640.

Sargent, T. J. and Wallace, N. (1975), Rational Expectations, the Optimal

     Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule, Journal of

     Political Economy 83, April: 241—54.

Zeliner, A. (1962), An Efficient Method of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated

    Regressions and Tests for Aggregation Bias, Journal of the American

    Statistical Association 57: 348—368.
                                 —40—




_________ (1979), Causality and Econometrics, in K. Brunner and A. H.

     Meltzer, eds., Three Aspects of Policy and Policy Making: Knowledge,

     Data and Institutions, Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series, Volume

     10, Amsterdam, North—Holland: 9—54.
