                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             NATIONAL SAVINGS, ECONOMIC WELFARE, AND THE
                        STRUCTURE OF TAXATION


                         Alan J. Auerbach
                       Laurence J. Kotlikoff

                       Working Paper No. 129




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge MA 02138

                             August 1981




This paper was presented at the NBER Conference on Behavioral
Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis on January 25—21, 1981,
in Palm Beach. We are grateful to Jon Skinner, Christophe Chamley,
and Lawrence Summers for helpful comments, to Maxim Engers, David
Reitman, Jon Skinner and Thomas Seal for excellent research
assistance, and to the NBER for financial support. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Taxation
and project in Tax Simulation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Re search.
                                               NBER Working Paper #729
                                                            August 1981



                     National Savings, Economic Welfare, and
                            the Structure of Taxation



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper develops a perfect foresight general equilibrium simulation

model of life cycle savings that may be used to investigate the potential

impact of a wide range of government policies on national savings and

economic welfare. The model can provide quantitative answers to a number

of long—standing questions concerning the government's influence on capital

formation. These include the degree of crowding out of private investment

by debt financed increases in government expenditure, the differential

effect on consumption of temporary versus more permanent tax cuts, the

announcement effects of future changes in tax and expenditure policy, and

the response to structural changes in the tax system, including both the

choice of the tax base and the degree of progressivity.

     The model tracks the values of all economic variables along the transi-

tion path from the initial steady state growth path to the new steady state

growth path. Hence, it can be used to compute the exact welfare gains or

losses for each age cohort associated with tax reform proposals.




Alan J. Anerbach                            Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics                     Department of Economics
Harvard University                          Yale University
Cambridge, Mass. 02138                      New Haven, Conn. 06520
(617) 495—4934                                 (203) 436—1937
                              NBER CONFERENCE PAPER SERIES
                         Papers Available from the Conference on
                        SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX POLICY ANALYSIS
                                   Palm Beach, Florida
                                    January 25—27, 1981
 Conference
  Paper
     No.

  WP 497      "Alternative Tax Treatments of the Family: Simulation Methodolo,r
              and Results," by Daniel Feenberg and Harvey S. Rosen
              "Stochastic Problems in the Simulation of Labor Supply," by Jerry Hausman
              "Alternatives to the Current Maximum Tax on Earned Income," by
              Lawrence B. Lindsey
              "The Distribution of Gains and Losses from Changes in the Tax
              Treatment of Housing," by Mervyn    King
 WP 682       "Simulating   Nonlinear Tax Rules
                                              and Nonstandard Behavior: An
              Application to the Tax Treatment of Charitable Contributions,"
              by Martin Feldstein and Lawrence B. Lindsey

              "Issues   in the Taxation of Foreign Source Income," by Daniel Frisch
 WP 583       "Modeling Alternative Solutions to the Long—Run Social Security
              Funding Problem," by Michael Boskin, Marcy Avrin, and Kenneth Cone

              "Domestic Tax Policy and the Foreign Sector: The Importance of
              Alternative Foreign Sector Formulations to Results from a General
              Equilibrium Tax Analysis Model," by Lawrence Goulder, John Shoven,
              and John Whalley

 WP 673       "A Reexamination of Tax Distortions in General Equilibrium Models,"
              by Don Fullerton and Roger Gordon

              "A General Equilibrium Model of Taxation with Endogenous Financial
              Behavior," by Joel Slemrod
 WP 681       "Alternative Tax   Rules and Personal Savings Incentives: Microecononiic
              Data   and Behavioral Simulations," by Martin Feldstein and Daniel Feeriberg

           "National Savings, Economic Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation,"
           by Alan Auerbach and Laurence Kotlikoff

              "Tax Reform and Corporate Investment: A     Micro—Econometric Simulation
           Study," by Michael Salinger and Lawrence Summers
It is expected that the papers resulting from this conference will be published
in a volume edited by Martin Feldstein.

Copies of these conference papers may be obtained by sending $1.50 per copy to
Conference Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138.
Please make checks payable to National Bureau of Economic Research.  Advance
payment is required on orders totaling less than $10.00
                          List of Participants
                SIMULATION METHODS IN TAX POLICY ANALYSIS

                        The   Breakers,   Palm Beach

                           January 25—27, 1981
Name                                            Affiliation
Henry J. Aaron                     The Brookings Institution
Alan J. Auerbach                   Harvard University
Martin J. Bailey                   University of Maryland
Michael J. Poskin                  Stanford University
Daniel R. Feenberg                 National Bureau of' Economic Research
Martin Feldstein                   Harvard University and NBER
Daniel J. Frisch                   University of Washington
Don Fullerton                      Princeton University
Harvey Galper                      U.S. Department of the Treasury
Roger H. Gordon                    Bell Laboratories
Larence H. Goulder                 Stanford University
David G. Hartman                   Harvard University
Jerry A. Hausman                   Massachusetts Institute    of Technolor
James J. Heckman                   Unversity of Chicago
Patric Hendershott                 Purdue University
Thomas 0. Horst                    U.S. Department of the 11'reasury
Mervyn A. King                     University of Birmingham England
Laurence J. Kotlikoff              Yale University
Lawrence B. Lindsey                Harvard University
Charles E. McLure, Jr.             National Bureau of Economic Iesearch
Peter Nieszkowskj                  University of Houston
Joseph J. Minarik                  The Brookings Institution
Richard A. Musgrave                Harvard University & the University
                                     of California at Santa Cruz
Joseph A. Pechman                  The Brookings Institution
Michael Salinger                   Massachusetts Institute of Pechnolor
Robert J. Shiller                  University of Pennsylvania
John B. Shoven                     Stanford University
Joel Slexnrod                      University of Minnesota
Joseph E. Stiglitz                 Princeton University
Lawrence H. Surnniers              Massachusetts Institute of Technology
John Whalley                       University of Western Ontario
David Wise                         Harvard University
 National Savings, Economic Welfare, and the Structure of Taxation*

                          Alan J. Auerbach
                    Harvard University and NBER

                                 and

                       Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                      Yale University and NBER


     In the course of the last century, the U.S. rate of net national

savings as conventionally defined declined dramatically from over 20% in

the 1880's to less than 8% in the 1970's. Over this same period, govern—

ment expenditure rose from 7% to 22% of GNP, the size of federal debt

measured at book value exciuding social secqrity has varied enormously

from under 10% to over 90% of CNP in particular years, and the level and

structure of taxes changed significantly.   While economic theory provides

qualitative predictions of the effects of these changes in government

policy on national savings, the quantitati ye importance of these changes

is little understood. This paper develops a perfect foresight general

equilibrium simulation mode 1 of life cycle savings that may be used to

investigate the potential impact of a wide range of government policies

on national savings and economic welfare.   While the strict life cycle

model of savings has been questioned at both the theoretical (Barro, 1974)

and empirical levels (Kotlikoff and Summers, 1981), the strict (no bequests)

life cycle model provides an important benchmark to consider the range

of savings and welfare responses to government policy in general and

deficit policy in particular.


     *
      We are grateful to Jon Skinner, Christophe Chamley, and Lawrence
Summers for helpful comments, to Maxim Engers, David Reitman, Jon Skinner
and Thomas Seal for excellent research assistance, and to the NBER for
financial support. This paper will be presented at the NBER Conference on
Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis, January 1981.
                                         —2—


       The simulation model can provide quantitative answers to a number of

 long—standing questions concerning the government's influence on capital

 formation. These include the degree of crowding out of private investment by

debt financed increases in government expenditure, the differential effect on

 consumption of temporary versus more permanent tax cuts, the announcement

effecis of future changes in tax and expenditure policy, and the response to

structural changes in the tax system, including both the choice of the tax

base and the degree of progressivity. The model tracks the values of all

economic variables along the transition path from the initial steady state

growth path to the new steady state growth path. Hence, the model can be used

to compute the exact welfare gains or losses for each age cohort associated

with tax reform proposals. Finally, the simulation experiments can usefully

instruct the specification of time series consumption regression models that

purport to estimate how government policy alters national savings.

     This paper describes the technical structure of the simulation model and

the solution algorithm used to compute perfect foresight life cycle growth

paths. Next, four examples of potential applications of the model are briefly

examined. These include an analysis of the welfare costs of capital income

taxation, the incidence of the progressive income tax, the effect of fiscal

policy on national savings and the savings response of the private sector to

early announcements of future tax policy changes.

     The   principal   findings from these applications of the model are:

       (1) The excess burden associated with the taxation of capital income

provides some limited scope for improving the welfare of all current and

future cohorts when lump sum taxes and transfers are available. However,

given that lump sum taxes and transfers are not available policy tools, "tax
                                         —3—


 reform" proposals are likely to significantly reduce the welfare of some

 cohorts and significantly raise the welfare of others unless annual tax rates

 and their associated deficit levels are chosen with extreme care.

         (2) The inter—cohort allocation     of the tax burden of government

expenditure is a significantly more important determinant of national savings

than is the structure of taxation.

         (3) The long—run effect on the capital output ratio of switching from

 a progressive to a proportional income tax with no change in the stock of

 government debt is roughly 13 percent.

         (4) Short—run crowding out of private investment by balanced budget increases

in government expenditure is on the order of 50 cents per dollar, while long—run

 crowding Out IS 20 cents per dollar of government expenditure.

         (5) Temporary as well as more permanent tax cuts can lead to increases

 rather than decreases in national savings in the first few years following

 the enactment of the tax cut. This depends both on which taxes are cut and

 which taxes are subsequently raised to finance interest payments on the associa-

 ted deficit.

         (6) Early announcement of future tax policy changes can significantly

affect   the national   savings rate in periods prior to implementation of the legislation.

     The welfare costs of capital income taxation, the effects of government

deficit policy on capital formation, and the long run incidence of alternative

tax instruments are the focus of a growing body of economic literature.

While understanding of these issues has been greatly enhanced in recent

years, the literature remains seriously deficient with respect to a number

of theoretical and empirical concerns. The next Section of this paper pro-

vides a selected and brief review of this literature and points out those
                                     —4—


deficiencies that can be addressed with the model developed here. Section

III develops life cycle optimization conditions for both proportional and

progressive wage, interest income, and consumption tax structures. The

simulation methodology is described in this section as well. Section IV

examines the welfare costs of capital income taxation distinguishing pure

efficiency issues associated with the structure of taxation from the issue

of inter—cohort redistribution. Section V discusses the effect of progressive

taxation on national savings and describes the economic transition from a

progressive income tax to a progressive consumption tax. Section VI inves-

tigates the long and short run savings impact of alternative government

fiscal policies including temporary and more permanent tax cuts, changes in

the level of government expenditure, and early announcements of future changes

in tax policy. Section VII summarizes the paper and suggests areas for

future research.
                                      —5—


 II. Selected Literature Review


       The long run welfare implications of deficit policy and the choice of the tax

 base have been the focus of numerous recent articles (Feldstein (1974), Boskin (1978),

 Auerbach (1979), Kotlikoff (1979), Summers (1979) and Bradford (1980)). These

 analyses have emphasized the welfare of cohorts living in the new steady

 state that results from alterations in government policy; little attention

 has been paid to the welfare of generations alive during the transition to

 the new steady state. This long run focus has obscured the true scope for

 pareto efficient tax reform; to the unwary reader it may also convey the

 incorrect impression that deficit policy by itself is inefficient, rather

 than simply redistributive.        As this paper demonstrates, changes in

government tax and expenditure policies may entail significant redistribution

between cohorts alive today and in the indefinite future. The incidence of

these policies can only be understood by examining changes in the welfare of

all cohorts, transition cohorts as well as cohorts living in the distant

future when the economy converges to a new steady State. The pure efficiency

gains from "tax reform" can not be isolated by looking at changes in the

welfare of only a selected group of cohorts, since welfare changes may reflect

redistribution from other cohorts as opposed to the elimination of excess

burdens in the tax system.

     Summers' stimulating study represents the sole attempt to

explicitly examine the welfare of transition cohorts. His

 simulation analys:is suggested that proportional wage and consumption taxation

 can have markedly different long run impacts despite the fact that the

 long run structure of these two tax systems are identical. Summers demon-

 strated that the requirement that the governmentts budget be balanced at each
                                    —6—


point in time implied a quite different inter—cohort distribution of the tax

burden of financing government expenditure under the wage versus the consump-

tion tax. While the long run tax structures are identical under the two tax

systems, the actual long run tax rates are not.

      Summers' analysis, while suggestive of many of the findings presented

here, is based on the assumption of myopic rather than rational expectations;

the transition path of myopic life cycle economies with respect to the size

of the capital stock and the level of utility is likely to differ significantly

from the perfect foresight rational expectations paths analyzed here. In

general, myopic expectation paths will exhibit too rapid convergence to the

new steady state since future general equilibrium changes in gross wage rates

and rates of return are not taken into account in today's consumption deci-

sions; these future expected general equilibrium changes tend to dampen

initial behavioral responses to exogenous changes in government policy

parameters.

      In addition to explicit steady state modeling, there have been a

number of recent calculations of the efficiency costs of capital income taxa-

tion (Feldstein 1978, Boskin 1978, Green and Sheshinski 1979, and King 1980).

While pointing out a number of the key determinants of the potential ineffi-

ciencies associated with the taxation of capital income, these analyses are

deficient in four respects
                                    —7—



      (1) the calculations are partial equilibrium, assuming that gross factor

returns are not affected by compensated changes in the structure of taxation;

this may be a convenient expositional device, but gives incorrect estimates

of excess burden.

      (2) very simple models of life—cycle behavior are used, in which indi-

viduals live and consume for two periods, working in the first period only.

Once again, this simplification may be useful for some purposes, but is cer-

tainly a poor description of actual life—cycle behavior. One problem is

that the first—period labor supply assumption implies that changes in the

interest rate have no impact on the present value of resources. Summers

(1979) found that the size of the uncompensated elasticity of savings with

respect to the interest rate depends critically on the magnitude of future

labor earnings. The compensated elasticity of consumption is, presumably, also

quite sensitive to the inclusion of future labor earnings.

    (3) these "triangle' calculations ignore the fact that any actual transition

from one tax system to another must begin when some individuals are part way

through life. While these calculations make some sense under the assumption

that cohort specific tax schedules could be introduced in switching from one tax

regime to another, they make little sense under the realistic assumption that

cohort specific tax instruments are not available, The scope for pareto

efficient tax reform may be greatly reduced when the set of alternative tax

instruments is restricted to realistic, non—cohort specific tax schedules.
                                        —8—


          (4) these analyses study transitions between systems of proportional

 taxation, while both current and prospective tax systems are in fact progressive.

 It is not clear that a switch from a progressive income tax to a progressive

 tax on annual consumption would improve efficiency, even if such were the case

 for a switch from a proportional income tax to a proportional consumption

tax. If individual consumption profiles rise with age, a progressive consuxnp—

tion tax implies rising marginal rates of tax on future relative to current consumption,

 thu3   mimicking a tax on capital income. Moreover, if the progressivity of each tax is

chosen according to a desire to maintain a certain degree of        equality in

 society, tax rates may be substantially more progressive under an annual

consumption tax than under an income tax.


         Each of these deficiencies may have an important effect on the measure-

ment of the potential gains to society in switching from the current tax

system to one that fully exempts capital income from taxation.

         Empirical investigations of the effects of government policy on capital

formation have relied primarily on time series regression models. Feldstein's

(1974) and Barro's (1977) analyses of the effects of social security on

savings and Boskin's (1978) estimation of the "interest elasticity of

saving" provide examples of standard time series procedures. Particular

variables over which the government has some control such as the level of

social security benefits or the level of the current net rate of return are

regressed on aggregate consumption. In addition to social security variables

and the net interest rate, the candidates for "exogeneous" variables have
                                    —9—


included current disposable income, the stock of private wealth the the

level of the government deficit, and the level of government expenditure.

    As tests of the effects of government policy on savings in a life cycle

model these regressions are subject to a number of criticisms.

    (1) The theoretical coefficients of the variables included in these

         regressions are functions not only of preferences, but also of

         current and future values of capital income and consumption tax

         rates as well as current and future gross r.ates of return. Hence,

         even if government policy remains constant over the period of esti-

         mation the coefficients can not be expected to remain stable since

         values of the gross rate of return as well as tax rates will vary

         over time as the economy proceeds along its general equilibrium

         growth path towards a steady state.

    (2) Since the coefficients incorporate current and future tax rates as

         well as underlying intertemporal consumption preferences, the esti-

         mated coefficients can not be used to analyze changes in government

         policy that will necessarily alter the time path of future tax

         rates and gross rates of return. This is the Lucas critique and

         is particularly applicable to Boskin's (1978) study which contem-

         plates switching from our income tax regieme to a completely dif-

         ferent tax regieme. namely a consumption tax.

    (3) Total consumption is the aggregate of consumption of cohorts of

         different ages. Since in a life cycle model the marginal propensity

         of cohorts to consume out of their total net future resources

         differs by age, the coefficients in the aggregate consumption

         regression will be unstable if the distribution of future resources

         changes over time. This is clearly the case for the private net
                                 — 10 —




    worth   variable in the social security regressions.

(4) The regressions use proxy   variables   such as disposable income

    instead of the present value of net human     wealth   in the actual

    estimation. Since disposable income is correlated with each of

    the other variables in the regressions this errors in variables

    problem is likely to impart bias in each coefficient of the

    regression.

(5) Despite the fact that some variables included in the regression do

    not affect aggregate consumption linearly, linearity is forced on

    the data. Each of these critiques can be explored with the simula-

    tion model developed here. We intend to simu1ate particular policy

    alternatives and, thereby, produce "simulated" data. This data

    will then be used in regressions following the specifications found

    in the literature. The estimated coefficients will provide an indi-

    cation of what economic theory actually predicts about these coef—

    ficients in a truly controlled experiment. For example, the esti-

    mated coefficients on social security wealth obtained from these

    regressions might well prove to be negative, while the data was

    obtained from a model in which social security dramatically lowers

    the capital stock.
                                     —11—



III. The Model and Its Solution


      We model the evolution over time of an economy composed of government,

household and production sectors. The household sector is, at any given time,

made up of fifty—five overlapping generations of individuals. Each person

lives for fifty—five years, supplying labor inelastically for the first forty—
                                                    2
five of these years and then entering retirement.       Members of a given genera-

tion may differ in their endowments of human capital, but are assumed

to be identical in all other respects. To reflect observed wage profiles, the human

capital endowment of each individual grows at a fixed rate, h. The population

as a whole grows at rate n.

      As stated above, each household is a self—contained unit, engaging in

life—cycle consumption behavior with no bequests. Because labor is supplied

inelastically, the labor—leisure choice is not considered. We assume the

lifetime utility of each household takes the form:



           u(C) =
                    1_(t cY
                    2
                                                             y>0, l

                                                                                 (1)

                                     log c


where C is the household's consumption at the end of its      th   year, and p

and 'y are, respectively, taste parameters characterizing its pure rate of time

preference (degree of "impatience") and the inverse of the partial elasticity

of substitution between any two years' consumption. A large value of p indi-

cates that the individual will consume a greater fraction of lifetime resour-

ces in the early years of life and would lead to a lower aggregate rate of

savings. A large value of y indicates a strong desire to smooth consumption
                                                    — 12




 in different periods. In the extreme, when y equals infinity, the household

 possesses Leontief indifference curves, and there is no substitution effect

 on consumption behavior.

            The individual maximizes lifetime utility (1) subject to a budget con—

 straint, the exact specification of which depends on the particular tax

 system in force. For a progressive income tax, the individual's lifetime

budget constraint is:


        55

        t=l s=2
                  [F (l+r(l-                        )w        I
                                                           t=l s=2
                                                                  i (l+r(l_ ))]c           (2)




where r and w are the gross payments to capital and labor at the end of

year t,           is the labor supplied in year t, and               is the average tax rate

on income faced by the household in year t.

        By constructing a Lagrangean from expressions (1) and (2), and differen-

tiating with respect to each C, we obtain the first order conditions:


        (l+p)_tc_Y A[it(l+r(l_T))jO                                          Vt            (3)



where A is the Lagrange multiplier of the lifetime budget constraint,


                   55         l+r (l—T          )
                                 S
        e     =     -     I
                                           'S
                                                                                          (4)
                  s=t+l       l-I-r (l—T        )
                                 S



and          is the i4al income tax rate in year t. To understand these first—
      Tyt
order conditions, consider first the proportional tax case, where marginal

and average tax rates are the same. In this case, 0 1, and (3) dictates

that the marginal utility of consumption in year t should equal the marginal

utility of lifetime resources, A, times the implicit price of a dollar of
                                                            —13—



year t consumption in year one dollars. With progressive taxes,                                   is less than

one     and represents a reduction in the implicit price of year t consumption.

This additional term reflects the fact that an increase in consumption in

year t will reduce income from assets in all future years and thus reduce

all future average tax rates.

        Combination of condition (3) for successive values of t                             implies:

                    l+r    (l—T )      .
        C=                          ) c1
This   "transition equation" indicates how preferences and the tax structure

interact to determine the shape of life cycle consumption patterns. First,

note that as 'r        grows,      time preference and tax factors play a smaller role in

determining the ratio of C to Cti; at y=, C C1 regardless of other

parameter values. For finite values of y,                          the rate of consumption growth
increases with an increase in the net interest rate, and decreases with an
increase         in the rate of pure time preference.

       It    is important to remember that equation (5) determines only the
shape of the consumption growth path, not its level. To obtain the latter,
we apply (5) recursively t.o relate C to C1 for all t,                               then substitute the
resulting expression for C into the budget constraint (2) to obtain the
following expression for C1 in terms of lifetime resources:

                          55
            C1
                 = x
                    t=l s=2    F      (l+rS (l-T
                                                   ys
                                                        )   }_l   (l-TYt)   w
                                                                                tt                     (6)
                                                                - 14    -


                                          t —1
where
                     55               ()           t                                       t

        x tl (1+p)                               s2 (1+rs(1_ys))]'[fl (1+r5(1_T5))]'}'

is the proportion of lifetime resources consumed in the first year.

        For a progressive consumption tax, the budget constraint corresponding

to (2) is:



                                                                             1
             [       (i+r    )]1w                      [        (1+r    )]       (1+   C   )c                         (2')
        t=1 s2                                     t=i s=2


where            is the average tax rate on consumption in year t. The conditions

corresponding to (5) and (6) are


             =    [(t)
                     1+r
                                (
                                    1+r
                                          :t_1)]1      C1




                                                                                                               -
and

             =   x          [
                                     (i+r)i1wtt
                                                                                                                      (61)
        c1
                      t1 s=2
                                1                                                 --k-
where   x = {(1+T )Y                       (1+p)            [         (i+rS )]                 (i+ Ct)(1+T Ct )   }
         c       ci
                                     t1                         s=2


(t is the                            tax rate on consumption in year t.) A comparison

of (5) and (5'), indicates                         that, in its influence on the consumption path,

a progressive consumption tax with marginal rates increasing over time has a

similar influence on the shape of the consumption path as a progressive income

tax.    if the progressive consumption tax is levied on annual rather than life-

time consumption then                         is a function of C. From (5') it is clear that

Tt ctl as r                         p. Hence, the steeper the growth of. consumption in the

aoseuce of taxes the greater will be the relative taxation of future consump—

Lion under an annual progressive consumption tax.
                                     —15—



      Explicit presentation of the optimizing behavior of households under

other tax systems is omitted since the derivation of these results follows

in a straight—forward manner from those just presented.

      The economy's single production sector is characterized by the Cobb—

Douglas production function:


              =
                  E((l+g)tL)l                                               (7)


where Y, Kt and L are output, capital and labor at time t, A is a scaling

constant, g is an exogenous productivity growth rate, and c is the capital

share of output, assumed throughout the paper to equal .25. Lt is simply

equal to the sum of labor endowments of all individuals in the work force.

   is generated by a recursive equation that dictates that the change in the

capital stock equals private plus public savings. Competitive behavior on

the part of producers insures that the gross factor returns r and w are

equated to the marginal products of capital and labor at time t:


           r =    rA(K/(l+g)tL)U                                           (8a)



           w = (l_E)A(l+g)t(K/(l+g)tL)C                                    (Bb)




The assumption that the return to capital equals its marginal product implies.

that the market value of capital goods always equal their reproduction cost;

i.e.. adjustment of capital to desired levels is instantaneous.

      The government in our model needs to finance a stream of consumption

expenditures, labeled C, that grows at the sane rate as population plus

productivity. For simplicity, the impact of governr.lent expenditures on

individual utility is not considered in the analysis. Aside from various

taxes, the government has at its disposal one—period debt which is a perfect
                                           — 16 —




 substitute    for capital in household portfolios. This enables the government

 to save (run surplusses) and dissave (run deficits) without investing

directly. If Ag is defined as the value of government's assets (taking a

negative value if there is a national debt), government tax revenue at the

end of period t is:


                  T                        + TtCt


where         and Tt are the aggregate average tax rates on income and consl.nnp—
        Tyt
tion, respectively, calculated as weighted averages of individual average

tax rates. Given the government's ability to issue and retire debt, its

budget constraint relates the present value of its expenditures to the

present value of its tax receipts plus the value of its initial assets:

                                      —1            t
                                                                 —1
          Ag0 +         [   ii   (l+r)] Rt =            (l+r)]             (10)
                      t0 s0                                           Gt
                                               t0 s0

(Note that G corresponds to a different concept from that reported in the

National Income Accounts, which includes government purchase of capital

goods.)

    The solution method used to compute the perfect foresight general equil—

ibriuin path of the economy depends on the type of policy change being examined.

In general, one may distinguish two cases. In the first, the ultimate char-

acteristics of the economy are known, and the final steady state to which the

economy converges after the policy change is enacted may be described without

reference to the economy's transition path. An example of such a policy

change is the replacement of a system of income taxation with a tax on con—

sumption, subject to year by year budget balance. The configuration of taxes
                                       —17—


and the government debt jfl   the final steady state is known here. Thus, it
is possible to solve for the final steady state, and then use our knowledge

of the initial and final steady states to solve for the economy's transition

path.

    The second class of problems is one where a policy involves specific

actions during the transition, and the final steady state cannot be identi-

fied independently from the actual transition path. For example, under a policy

which specifies a ten year cut in income taxes, compensated for by concurrent

increases in the national debt, with the debt per capita held constant there-

after and a new constant rate of income tax ultimately established, it is

impossible to solve for this new rate without also knowing the level of per

capita debt which is established in the transition. Here, it is necessary

to solve for the final steady state and transition path simultaneously.

    The actual solution for the economy's behavior over time always begins

with a characterization of the initial steady state, given initial tax

structure and government debt. We assume that individuals of different gen-

erations alive during this steady state correctly perceive the tax schedule

and factor prices they will face over time, and behave optimally with respect

to these conditions. We utilize a Gauss—Seidel iteration technique to

solve for this equilibrium, starting with an initial guess of the capital—

labor ratio (K/L), deriving from each iteration a new estimate used to

update our guess, and continuing the procedure until a fixed point is

reached. Given the method of deriving new estimates of K/L, such a fixed

point corresponds to a steady—state equilibrium.

    The iteration step is slightly different for each type of tax system,

but the following description of how it proceeds for a progressive income
                                       — 18 —



tax   should be instructive. (In this example, we assume each generation is

composed of one representative individual. In the actual simulations, we

sometimes allow cohorts to have heterogeneous members.) A schematic

representation is provided in Figure 1. In the first stage, a guess is made

of the capital—labor ratio (equivalent to a guess of the capital stock,

since labor supply is fixed). Given the marginal productivity equations (8a)

and (8b), this yields values for the wage w and interest rate r. Combining

these values with initial guesses for the paths of marginal and average tax

rates over the life—cycle, we apply equations (3) and (6) to obtain the life—

cycle consumption plan of the representative individual, C. From the defi-

nition of savings, this yields the age—asset profile, A, which may be

aggregated (subtracting any national debt assumed to exist) to provide a

new value of the capital stock and capital—labor ratio. The age asset

profile, along with the estimates of w and r, also provides a solution for

the age—income profile, which, in turn, dictates the general level at which

taxes must be set (typically one parameter is varied in the tax function)

to satisfy the government budget constraint and hence the new values of

marginal and average tax rates faced over the life—cycle, T and T, res-

pectively. When the initial and final values of K/L and the tax rates are

the same, this implies that the steady state has been reached.

      Solution for the final steady state, when this may be done separately

(the first case discussed above) proceeds in a similar manner. In such a

case, the transition is solved for in the following way. We assume the

transition Lo the new steady State takes 150 years,      then solve simultan-

eously for equilibrium in each of the 150 years of the transition period

under the assumption that everyone believes that after year 150 the new
                                                   Figure 1

                                             Iteration Procedure:

                                           Progressive Income Tax




               Production   I
                                                                                    I
                                      Life—Cycle              Savings                                                    I

               Function                                       Definition
                         j                         '    c                      A        Aggregation
    H_K/L                                                                  .                                   K/L
                                                                                    I
                                w,rJu10r            ___                    I                          II                         i

                                                                               Income
                                                                                                      i
                                                                               Definition                                        I




           —                                                                            Revenue
      T   ,T                      )                                                     Constraint                   !       '
                                                                                                           T  ,T
I
                                                                                                           —y
                                                                                                               -y__
                                                                                                                             I
L__j
                                       — 20 —




steady state will obtain. This solution method is necessary because each
household is assumed to take the path of future prices into account in

determining its behavior. Hence, the equilibrium that results in later

years will affect the equilibrium in earlier years. Specifically, we

assume that individuals born after the transition begins know the transition

path immediately, and that those born before the beginning of the transition

behaved up to the time of the change in government policy as if the old

steady state would continue forever. At the time of the announcement of a

new policy to be instituted either immediately or in the near future, exis-

ting cohorts are "born again"; they behave like members of the new genera-

tion except that their horizon is less than fifty—five years, and they

possess initial assets as a result of prior accumulation. An iteration

technique is used again, but here we must begin with a vector of capital

stocks (one value for each year) and two matrices of tax rates (two vectors

for each year). Further, we cannot simply solve for the behavior of a

representative cohort, but rather must calculate the behavior of each cohort

alive during the transition. This procedure, while conceptually no more

difficult than that used to find the steady states, requires considerably

more computation, As the ultimate paths converge to the final steady state

well before year 150, the assumption about conditions after year 150 does

not influence our results.

    when the final steady state may not be calculated independently from the

transition path, the two stages are combined. Rather than calculate the final

steady state, we simply calculate an 'augmented" transition path lasting

205 years, where the final 55 years are constrained to have the character-

istics of a steady state.
                                     — 21—




IV. The Welfare Costs of Capital Incor.ie Taxation


      The ultimate impact on the economy of a change in government policy

depends on three key factors. First, the inter—cohort allocation of the total

tax burden of financing government expenditures will determine the level of

tax rates and have important income effects on the consumption of particular

cohorts. Second, the tax structure (choice of tax base) offers the vector

of prices each generation faces, and third, preferences determine each house-

hold's response to a change in incentives. In the case of heterogeneous

population, the intra—generational distribution of the tax burden may also be

an important determinant of the growth path of the economy.

      Typically, the impact of tax policy has been studied most closely in

partial equilibrium, static models in which the welfare of a representative

individual is evaluated under alternative tax regimes. As discussed above,

this approach does not permit a study of the inefficiency involved during the

transition from one steady state to another, nor does it tell us about the

intergenerational transfers that may accmpany the transition. For such

issues to be studied, one must use a model in which overlapping generations

exist and the change in tax regime is not considered as an exercise in compara-

tive statics but rather as an explicit policy change that evolves over time.

      The classic study of the static type just discussed is that of Feldstein

(1978), who examines the welfare gain from switching to a consumption tax

or a tax on labor income alone from one on labor and interest income. As

Feldstein points out, the choice between taxing labor income or consumption

at a constant rate sufficient to produce an equal present—value revenue yield

has no effect on the path of individual behavior. Thus, if government uses
                                      — 22—




 debt finance to undo any differences in the timing of tax collections, there

 is no difference in national savings, either, since both private and public

 consumption are identical under the two systems. All that differs is the

 distribution of savings between the household and government sectors, with

 the government saving more under a wage tax because of the earlier receipt of

 tax revenues.

       When there is only one generation under study, it is impossible to

imagine a change in individual lifetime tax burden without a concommitant

change in government expenditures. However, once several generations are

considered simultaneously, it is possible to allow tax burdens to be shifted

across generations as the structure of taxation changes. For example, a

switch from wage taxation to consumption taxation which requires not equal

present value yield per generation but rather year by year budget balance

will change the tax burden of each generation in the transition to the new

long—run steady state, To see why this is so, consider a simple model in

which there is no growth in population or government expenditures and each

individual lives for two periods, working only in the first and consuming

only in the second. In the long run, if there is no government debt or

deficit, the tax paid on consumption by each individual in his second year

must equal the amount which would be paid in the first year under a wage

tax. As long as the interest rate is positive, this involves a lower present

value of taxes and, because relative prices are the same under the two

systems, a gain in long—run utility. This result carries through to a more

general model, with individuals living, working and consuming for several

years, as long as wages occur earlier in life, on average, than does consump-

tion. Thus, Summers (1979) found that, holding government revenue per year
                                    — 23—




fixed, steady state utility is substantially higher under a consumption tax

than under a wage tax.

      But this gain is not due to increased efficiency, since by such a

criterion the two systems are equal (and completely nondistortionary with

fixed labor supply). What is occurring is a transfer from transitional

generations to those in the steady state. In the simple example used above,

all generations would be better off if there were an immediate switch to a

consumption tax, except the first, which would pay its taxes twice and there—

f ore be worse off. As long as the economy is not on a path which is "dynami-

cally inefficient" in the sense that conducting such a chain transfer in

reverse would make all generations better off (as would be true if the growth

rate of annual tax revenues exceeded the interest rate) such steady state

differences do not provide a fair comparison, because implicit in them is an

intergenerational realignment of the tax burden.

      One could respond to this problem by requiring that government debt

policy be used to neutralize any such intergenerational transfers, but this

may still fall short of equating the effect of consumption and wage taxation

on all generations. Consider again a simple example with individuals laboring

in their first period and consuming in their second, and suppose the economy

initially faces a wage tax. A complete neutralization of a switch to a con-

sumption tax would require an exemption of the first generation from consumption

taxation (they've already paid the wage tax under the old system) with revenues

in that year being paid for by deficit finance. Thereafter, each period's

consumption tax receipts would redeem the previous period's debt.

      However, if, for example, we extended the model to allow individuals to

consume in both periods, this policy would no longer suffice, for exempting
                                     — 24—

the older generation from consumption taxes would exempt the younger generation's

first—period consumption as well. Thus, a complete separation of tax structure

from intergenerational transfers would appear to require not only an unconstrained

use of debt policy, but the ability to assess age—specific tax rates as well. In

the absence of such instruments, it may be impossible to go from one tax system to

an "equivalent" one without having real effects on the welfare of individuals in

the transition.

    Constraints on the set of tax instruments limit our ability not only to move

between structurally equivalent tax systems without changing the distribution of

cohort welfare, but also to move    to a—priori less distortionary tax structures

in a pareto—efficient manner. Indeed, use of the limited set of tax instruments

may, themselves, generate distortions along the transition path. One example here is

 transition to a consumption tax, to the extent that annual consumption tax rates

change during the transition. These tax rate changes will introduce distortions in

the intertemporal consumption choice of affected cohorts. In such a case, it would

be possible to improve the welfare of all generations, but it is not obvious what

the appropriate government policy is to accomplish this, given the limitation on

generation—specific tax rates. In this case, requiring that the present value of

taxes be unaffected by the change in tax structure does not provide a guide to

choosing a pareto efficient tax transaction since interest rates will be changing

over the transition and there is no "correct" interest rate to use in the present

value calculations.

    We turn now to the results of some simple simulations to demonstrate some of

the points just made.

    In the following example, we consider the transition paths of an economy that

starts at an initial steady state with a proportional wage tax of .2 and a pro-

portional interest income tax of .4 and switches to either a pure consumption tax

or a pure wage tax. The government's budget is assumed to be balanced each year,

hence annual revenues are the same in both transitions. Individual utility para-

meters p and y are set at .02 and 1, respectively.
                                       — 25—


Population grows at rate n.O1, while individual human      capital   is

assumed to grow at an annual rate of h.007.        In addition, we assume a

constant productivity growth rate of g.02. The tax rates on capital and

labor and the parameters n, h and g are chosen to accord with empirically

observed magnitudes, while p and •   provide   reasonable results for the age—

consumption profile and capital—output ratio in the initial steady state.

Nevertheless, the results should be seen as illustrative and specific magni-

tudes viewed with some care.

      Some steady—state results of the simulation are summarized in Table 1.

From a capital—ouptut ratio of 2.92 and a savings rate of 10% under the income

tax, the economy goes to a moderately higher value of each under a wage tax

(3.97 and 13.5% respectively) but the shift to a consumption tax goes much

further: the capital—output ratio is more than double under a consumption

tax. It appears from these results that the change in efficiency of a tax

structure may be less important in determining the characteristics of the

ultimate steady state than the coincident intergenerational transfers. To

see the effect of such transfers, consider Figure 2, which presents the

change in welfare for each generation between each of the two new systems and

the status quo in which the income tax is kept in place. The welfare change

is measured by the percentage increase or decrease in the vector of household

consumption chosen under the initial tax system necessary to reach the level

of utility attained under the new tax system. VC represents the gain in

welfare under a consumption tax, and VW the gain under a wage tax. The

horizontal axis indexes the individual generations, with generation one

being born at the beginning of the period in which the changes are enacted.

As is clear from the graph, though steady state welfare is improved under

each tax change, there are losinggenerations along the way. Moreover, the
                            — 26 —




                          Table    1




   Income, Wage and Consumption Taxes: Steady States

                         (p=.02, y=l)


                                        Tax System

                           Income          Wage      Consumption

capital—output ratio       2.92             1____    7.16

gross interest rate         .086            .063     .035

aggregate savings rate      .100            .135     .244

tax rate                    .40/.20         .30      .32
                                           Figure   2




                    C-
                         NELFRE FHTH                              I4HE   r:.:E
I
1) C:



i.jI.             •Lj
— — — — —   -

                 .15



                 .10
                                                                                         N.)




                 .135


                                 — — — —   -.                                       a
                            Sr                                            — — — —
                   0
                                                        '4
                                                             /
                —,cj
                   —55           —:35       —15              05            25       45
                                     — 28 —


identity   of such generations, as well as the size of the ultimate steady—state

welfare gain, is very different under the two regimes.

    For a switch to wage taxation, retired generations, as well as those soon to

retire, gain because the bulk of their remaining income and tax liability under

the income tax would be in the form of interest income and taxes on such income.

Individuals born soon before or soon after the tax change are hurt. To under-

stand why, it helps to consider the path of capital stock growth under the wage

tax, relative to the baseline economy, depicted in Figure 3 as KW.   (The corres-

ponding path for the consumption tax is labeled KC.) Note that while the capital

stock is eventually fifty percent larger, this higher level is not reached for

several years. Thus, while the added capital will lead to an increase in real

wages eventually, this rise will not occur immediately. Moreover, as the revenue

lost from removing the interest income tax must be made up by an increase in the

wage tax, net real wages decline substantially in early transition years.

    The move to a consumption tax has very different effects. All generations

older than twenty at the time of enactment lose, because they have paid labor

income taxes when young and will now have to pay consumption taxes when old. The

maximum loss of about 2.5 percent of lifetime resources for individuals aged 45

at the time of enactment represents a very large loss during this cohort's

remaining years——consumption taxes are on the order of 40 percent in the earliest

transition years, more than doubling the tax liability for such individuals rela-

tive to the old system. These losses are greater in total than those under a

wage tax, but so are the eventual gains for succeeding generations. The implicit

transfers from tile old allow generations born as soon as five years into the

transition to enjoy a twelve percent increase in real wealth, with an ultimate

steady—state increase of twenty—two percent.

    A response to these findings conceroing welfare changes under a consump-

tion tax might be to accept the prospect that some generations will lose and

that for any plausible discount rate applied to the gains of succeeding
                                       Figure   3




                      C:i-F   I TL   FCiF   N;E     HHI:I   CCI.IUt•FT r   r:::Es
T




— — — — —   —




                2 5




                2.0



                                            — —                                    — — —


                              /
                i.e
                      0                             40             50         0•
                                            — 30—




 generations, the social gain must be quite positive. This is the argument

 made by Summers (1979). On the other hand, such an approach would also

 appear to favor a consumption tax over a wage tax, judging by the welfare

 comparison in Figure 2 * so it is questionable what role, if any, is being

 played by pure efficiency gains.

      Following Phelps and Riley (1978), another way of attacking this problem

 is to require that other measures accompany the tax change to insure that no

 generation be harmed. Without lump—sum transfers, such a policy probably

 requires a combination of deficit policy and the use of wage as well as

 consumption taxes. In Figure 4 ,   the   welfare path of one such policy, labelled

VPARETO, is presented, along with the paths VC and .TW from Figure 2. Figure

 5 presents the corresponding capital growth paths. The policy depicted

 involves starting with a wage tax of twenty—three percent and a consumption

 tax of nine percent, gradually lowering the wage tax over fifty years to

 fifteen percent while raising the consumption tax to eighteen percent, and

 running deficits over the same period. The welfare path resembles that of a

 wage tax, except that generations older than twenty at the time of enactment

 gain less and all other generations do better. The use of deficit policy

 and wage taxation causes the capital stock to reach a value well below that

 attained under a pure consumption tax.

     Although this "Pareto path" is not unique, it demonstrates two important

 results. First, even without a full complement of instruments at the disposal

 of government, the long run efficiency gains of exempting capital income from

 taxation are large enough to allow all generations to benefit. Of equal

 importance, the ultimate steady state gain is only about one—third the gain

 under a pure consumption tax. Thus, one may loosely attribute about
                                                Figure   4



                              -Ic-
                                      FPETO   EUPERIOF: NELFF:E          FTH
1



'.) 1_,.I                    .20
— — — — —               *
ItFFETii
••S         SSSSSS S   ••
BEL I HE
                        a


                             .18

                                                                                                                      a—
                                                                                                               —a..
                                                                                                         *a—
                             .05                                                                    'a
                                                                                           C
                                                                                               a
                                                                                       a
                                                                                    aa
                                               s-u ——                          aa                  — — —
                                                              •t.   S__———a
                               0



                            —.05
                                —55      —35            —15              05                    25                     4
                           — 32—




                   S
                                               I          Q
                   S                           I
                                               I

-J
                   S
                   I                           I
CL
                   I                           I          CO

CL                 I
0
I-I
                       S                       I
                       I
CL                                             I
w                       I
LL
1                        I                     I
'-I.'
                                                          '0
0                            S
                             S
                                 IS            I
Ui
LL                                             I
LL                                             I
CL
LU                                        I    I
0
                                               'I




F-
                                                          N
-J
cE
                                                    4%•
F—

EL
:1


     Ii •1   U•)

     1')     N                        N       -.4
                                   — 33 —



two—thirds of the long—run welfare gain of switching to a consumption tax

to coincident intergenerational transfers, and the remainder to tax efficiency.

As this result is for a model with fixed labor supply, it is if anything an

overstatement of the real efficiency gains to be had under such a change In

tax regime.
                                      — 34—




V.   Progressive Taxation


     The previous section of the paper focused on the transition

 from a system of proportional income taxation to alternative

systems of proportional taxation. In reality, the U.S. tax system is pro-

gressive (at least as measured by statutory tax rates) and it is likely that

any new tax system would possess this characteristic as well.

     In considering the additional influence of tax progressivity, we alter

our existing model in a number of ways. To facilitate the more complicated

simulations necessary we ignore growth of human capital or productivity.

(These parameters were found to have minor effects on the nature of transi-

tions under proportional taxation). As progressive taxes exist in part to

mitigate the inequality of resource distribution in society, it is important

to allow for the existence of heterogeneous individuals. This is accommodated

in a simple manner, by assuming that each cohort has three representative

individuals, with equal tastes but unequal incomes. Letting the median indi-

vidual have an annual labor endowment of 1.0, the poor household is assumed

to possess an endowment of 0.5, and the wealthy one an endowment of 1.5.

Our final change is in the tax system itself. We replace the different

systems of proportional taxation with two—parameter progressive taxes; that

is, if z is the relevant tax base, we choose two parameters, labelled      and

B, and set the marginal tax rate equal to a+Bz for all values of z.   It

follows that the corresponding average tax rate is n+Bz. Setting B=O amounts

to proportional taxation. Highly progressive tax systems are represented by

low values of c and high values of B. For the simulations of this section,

the parameters from the basic proportional tax simulations above are maintained
                                      — 35_




(y=1, p=.02, n=.O1);   and B are set equal to .12 and .14 respectively for

the progressive income tax. These values of    and B were obtained from a

least squares regression of the marginal tax rates contained in the U.S. tax

code, with income normalized to correspond to the levels in our simulations.

     Table 2 gives the marginal and average tax rates which result in the

steady state under progressive income taxation. For the poor person, marginal

tax rates rise from .19 to .24, then dropping to .17 upon retirement and to

.13 in the last year of life. The corresponding values for the median and

wealthy households are (.26, .34, .20, .13) and (.33, .43, .22, .13) respec-

tively. This tax structure would be expected to reduce the inequality in

society, but changing marginal rates might cause inefficiencies in excess of

the tax wedges introduced by equal—revenue proportional taxes. These two pro-

positions are verified by examining the results of a switch from progressive

to proportional income taxation. The poor in the long run have their real

wealth (as measured above) reduced by 3.00%; the rich gain in wealth by 6.37%,

and the median group is virtually unaffected (their wealth loss is 0.45%).

This may very well represent a large loss in social welfare, taking distribu-

tion into account. However, it is clearly a gain in efficiency, since the

proportional wealth gain of the rich is calculated on a much larger base than

the proportional loss of the poor. This is corroborated by the fact that

the long—run capital stock under progressive income taxation is 11% lower

than under proportional income taxation.

     Turning next to consider a switch from progressive income to progressive

consumption taxes, we may ask two additional questions. First, how progres-

sive does the consumption tax have to be to maintain the same degree of

wealth inequality, measured by the Lorenz curve, as exists under a progressive
                                        — 36 —

                                      Table    2

         Simulated Tax Rates Under Progressive Income Taxation

                     Poor                Median               Wealthy
Age          MTR             ATR     MTR           ATR      MTR      ATR
     1       0,190          0.133      0.260       0.190     0.330      0.225
     2       0,191          0.156      0.262       0.191     0.333      0.226
     3       0.193          0.156      0.264       0.192    0.333       0.228
     4       0.194          0.132      0.267       0.193    0.338       0.229
     5       0.195          0.158      0.269       0,194    0.341       0.230
     6       0.196          0,138     0.271        0.195    0.344       0.232
     7       0.198          0.159      0.273       0.197    0.346       0.233
     0       0.199          0.160     0.273        0.1Si    0.349       0.234
     9       0.200          0.160     0.277        0.199    0.332       0.236
 10          0.202          0.161     0.280        0.200    0.334       0.237
 11          0.203          0,162     0.282        0.201    0.332       0.238
 12          0.204          0.162     0.234        0.202    0.360       0.240
 13          0.206          0.163     0.286        0.203    0.362       0.241
 14          0.207          0.164     0.288        0.204    0.365       0.242
 15          0.208          0.164     0.291        0.205    0.367       0,244
 16          0.210          0.165     0.293        0.206    0.370       0.?45
 17          0.211          0.166     0,295        0.207    0.372       0.246
 18          0.212          0.166     0.297        0.208    0.373       0.247
 19          0.214          0.167     0.299        0.209    0.377       0.249
20           0.215          0.168     0.301        0.211    0.380       0.250
21           0.216          0.168     0,303        0.212    0.382       0.251
22           0.218          0.169     0.305        0,213    0.385       0.252
23           0.219          0.169     0.307        0.214    0.387       0.254
24           0.220          0.170     0.309        0.213    0.339       0.255
25           0.271          0.171     0.311        0.215    0.392       0.256
26           0.223          0.171     0.313        0.216    0.394     0,257
27           0.224          0.172     0.315        0.217    0.394     0.258
28           0.225          0.122     0.317        0.218    0.398     0.259
29          0.226           0.1/3     0.318        0.219    0.401     0.260
30           0.227          0.174     0.320        0,220    0.403     0.261
31           0.228          0.174    0.322         0.221    0.403     0.262
32           0.229          0.173     0.323        0.222    0.407     0.263
33          0.230           0.175     0.325        0.222    0.409     0.264
34          0.231           0.173    0,326         0.223    0.411    0.265
35          0.232           0.116    0.328         0.224    0.412     0.266
36          0.233           0.176    0.329         0,225    0.414    0.267
37          0.233           0.127    0.330         0.225    0.414    0.263
38.         0.234           0.177    0.332          0.226   0.413    0.269
39          0.235           0.177    0.333         0,226    0.419    0.270
40          0.235           0.178    0.334         0.227    0.421    0.270
41          0.236           0.178    0.335         0.221    0.422    0.271
42          0,236           0.178    0.335         0.228    0.424    0.272
43          0.236           0.178    0,336         0.228    0.425    0.272
44          0.237           0.178    0,331         0.228    0.424    0,273
45          0.23/           0.178    0.337         0.229    0.421    0.274
46          0.167           0.143    0.198         0.159    0.219    0.170
47          0.164           0.142    0.193         0.156    0.212    0.166
48          0.160           0.140    0.18/         0.133    0.205    0.162
49          0.156           0.138    0.181         0.150    0.19/    0.158
50          0.152           0.136    0.1/4         0.141    0.188    0.154
51          0.148           0.134    0.166         0.143    0.119    0.149
52          0.113           0.132    0.158         0.139    0,16U    0.144
53          0.138           0,129    0,150         0.133    0.131    0.139
54          0.132           0,126    0.140         0.130    0.146    0.133
55          fl,1'A          ñ irni                 ,'.,.
                                       — 37—




 income tax. Second, how is the change in steady—state utility and capital

 intensity between the two systems affected by the introduction of progressivity.

      In answer to our first question, we find that the values of a and    which

must be applied under a consumption tax to provide an identical Lorenz curve in the

 lon run to that of the income tax are . 104 and . 432, re3ective1y. These translate

 into the marginal and average tax rates listed in Table 3. As consumption

profiles rise over time, so do the tax rates of all three groups. The

marginal tax rates applied to the poor person's consumption range between .30

and .34. As these rates are fractions of consumption, it is helpful in com-

paring them to income tax rates to translate them into fractions of resources

used for consumption (consumption plus taxes paid on such consumption). The

corresponding values are .23 and .25, respectively. For median income house-

holds, the range is .48 to .54 (.32 to .35, gross); for wealthy individuals,

the range is .63 to .71 (.39 to .42, gross). Interestingly,   the top (gross)

marginal tax rates for the three groups are almost identical to the top rates

for each under an income tax (.25, .35 and .42 versus .24, .34 and .43).

     In comparison to the change in capital stock under proportional taxes, a

switch to consumption taxes under progressive taxation leads to a lower capital

stock increase, with the capital stock going up by a factor of 3.06 in the

current simulation relative to the 3.32 found above under proportional taxes.

Similarly, the welfare gain is smaller. Each group in the steady state

obtains a 16% increase in real wealth, relative to the 22% gain under propor-

tional taxes. These differences result because as emphasized above under

progressive consumption taxes there remains an intertemporal distortion in

the choice of consumption. With consumption rising over time, each household's

net rate of return is less than the gross interest rate. Our results suggest
                                  — 38—
                                Table     3

Simulated Tax Rates Under Progressive Consumption Taxation

                 Poor                   Median          Wealthy

    1    0.302          0.203     0.475       0.289   0,629   0.366
    2    0.303          0.203     0.476       0.290   0.630   0.367
    3    0.303          0.204     0.4/1       0.290   0.632   0.368
    4    0.304          0.104     0.4/U       0.291   0.633   0.36?
    5    0.305          0.204     0.479       0.292   0.635   0.369
    6    0.305          0.205     0.480       0.292   0.636   0.370
    7    0.306          0.205     0.401       0.293   0.638   0.371
    8    0.307          0.205     0.48?       0.293   0.639   0.372
    9    0.307          0.206     0.483       0.294   0.641   0.372
   10    0.308          0.206     0.481       0.294   0.642   0.373
   11    0.309          0,206     0.486       0.295   0,644   0.374
   12    0.309          0.207     0.487       0.295   0.645   0.375
   13    0.310          0.207     0.488       0.296   0.64/   0.375
   14    0.311          0.207     0.489       0.297   0.648   0.376
   15    0.311          0.208     0.490       0.29?   0.650   0.377
   16    0.312          0.208     0.491       0.298   0.651   0.378
   17    0.313          0.208     0.492       0.298   0.653   0.376
   18    0.313          0.709     0.493       0.299   0.654   0.379
   19    0.314          0.209     0.495       0.299   0.656   0.380
   20    0.315          0,209     0.496       0.300   0.63/   0.381
   21    0.315          0.210     0.491       0.301   0.659   0.381
   22    0+316          0.210     0.498       0.301   0.660   0.382
   23    0.317          0.210     0.499       0.302   0.662   0.383
   24    0.317          0.711     0.500       0.302   0.663   0.384
   25    0.318          0.211     0.502       0,303   0.665   0.385
  26     0,319          0.211     0,503       0.303   0.66)   0.385
  2?     0.319          0.212     0,504       0.304   0.660   0.386
  28     0.320          0.212     0.505       0.305   0.670   0.387
  29     0.321          0.212     0.506       0.305   0.6/1   0.388
  30     0.321          0.213     0.50/       0.306   0.6/3   0.388
  31     0.322          0.213     0,509       0.306   0.674   0.389
  32     0.323          0:213     0.510       0.307   0.676   0.390
  33     0.323          0,214     0.511       0.307   0.6)7   0.391
  34     0.324          0.214     0.512       0.300   0.6)9   0.392
  35     0.325          0.214     0.513       0.309   0.681   0.392
  36     0.326          0.215     0.514       0.309   0.68!   0.393
  37     0.326          0.215     0.516       0.310   0.684   0.394
  38     0.327          0.216     0.51?       0.310   0.665   0.395
  39     0.328          0.216     0.516       0.311   0.68/   0.396
  40     0.318          0.216     0.519       0.312   0.689   0.396
  41     0.329          0.717     0.520       0,312   0.690   0.397
  42     0.330          0,217     0.522       0.313   0.692   0.398
  43     0.330          0.21/     0,523       0.313   0.693   0.397
  44     0.331          0.218     0.524       0.314   0.695   0.400
  45     0.332          0.218     0.525       0.315   0,697   0.400
  46     0.333          0.218     0.527       0.315   0.698   0,401
  47     0.333          0.219     0.528       0.316   0.700   0.402
  48     0,334          0.219     0.529       0.31?   0,70)   0.403
  49     0.335          0.219     0.530       0.317   0.703   0.404
  50     0.335          0.220     0.531       0.310   0.705   0.404
  51     0,336          0.220     0.533       0,318   0./06   0.405
  52     0.337          0.221     0.534       0.319   0.708   0.406
  53     0.338          0.221     0.535       0.320   0.710   0.407
  54     0.338          0.221     0.536       0.320   0.711   0.408
  ¶35    0.339          0.222     0.538       0.321   0.71%   0.409
                                        — 39 —




that   efficiency gains of a switch may still be possible, even with the

requirement that no generation be harmed, but the scope for such gains is

clearly reduced by the need for tax progressivity to address the important

problem of societal inequality.
                                       — 40   —




VI.    The Effects of Tax Cuts, Government Expenditure, and Policy Announcements

       on Capital Formation.


      In this section, we consider the general equilibrium effects of selected

fiscal policies, and also examine how a switch from income taxation to the

taxation of either consumption or wages would be affected by a prior

announcement of such a policy.

      By assumption, the government is rational and recognizes that its tax

rate and expenditure paths will affect the economy's path of labor earnings,

interest income, and consumption. Hence, changes in announced tax rates and

expenditure levels must satisfy the government budget constraint (9) consis-

tent with the general equilibrium changes in income and consumption such

government policy choices induce.

      This suggests the following important points about government policy:

       Temporary   or permanent increases in government expenditures
necessitate changes in     the path of tax   rates. The choice of which tax
rates to increase and when to increase those tax rates will determine
the short run and long run impact of increases in government expenditure
on national savings.
                                      - 41   -



       Temporary cuts in tax rates holding expenditures constant must be
                                                  4
made up by increases in tax rates in the future.      Again the timing and

choice of future tax rate increases will influence the economic reaction

to temporary tax cuts.

       Balanced budget changes in the choice of tax bases will require

annual adjustments in tax rates until the economy converges to a new

steady state. These annual tax changes during the transition are likely

to be both inefficient in the sense of generating excess burdens and

capricious in their cohort allocation of the tax burden of financing

government expenditure.

       Announcement today of future changes in tax rates can have important

implications for current revenue since the current stream of income and

consumption may be affected by future tax rate policy.



A. Temporary Tax Cuts

       Table   4 presents the effect of cuts in tax rates lasting 5, 10, and

20   years on transition and long run values of the economy's consumption
                                                  Temporary Tax Cuts
                             5 YEAR TAX CUT                   10 YEAR TAX CUT                  20 YEAR TAX CUT
         Base Case      Income Tax     Wage Tax         Income Tax                       Income Tax              Tax
                                                                         ge Tax                           Wage
Year   K/Y      C       K/Y    C      K/Y    C          K/Y      C      K/Y      C       K/Y     C       K/Y      C

   1   3.11    J4.77   3.11    34.77   3.11    34.95   3.11    34.79   3.11     35.12   3.11    34.69   3.11     35.37



   5   3.11    37.64   3.10    37.9    3.10    37.dO   3.11    37.99   3.09     37.97   3.11    37.90   3.08     38.22




  10   3.11    41.55   3.08    41.78   3.09    41.69   3.06    42.33   3.07     41.84   3.08            3.03
                                                                                                42.25            42.10



  20   3.11    50.b5   3.U5    SU.5    3.07    50.59   2.9o    50.67   3.01     50.60   2.93    52.09   2.93     50.76



  50   3.11    91.74   3.ul    90.1    3.03    91.07   2.87    9.52    2.93     90.19   2.52    86.44   2.69     8d.31



 lOu   3.11   246.93   3.01   244.06   3.03   244.76   2.85   239.56   2.92   241.52    2.41   225.94   2.62   232.11




15u    3.11   664.63   3.01   65b.90   3.03   658.dU   2.85   644.77   2.92   650.08    2.41   604.87   2.62   624.4b
                                           — 43 —



and capital output ratio. Two types of tax cuts are considered, a re-

duction in the proportional rate of income taxation and a reduction in

the tax     rate   on wage income alone, holding the tax rate on capital in-

come constant. As mentioned, temporary tax rate cuts require future tax

rate     increases. The simulations presented are based on the assumption
that following       the period of tax rate cuts the per capita debt resulting

from these tax cuts is parmitted from that point on to grow at the

economy's 2 percent rate of productivity growth. The base case with

which to compare these results assumes p.02 and y1, and a 30

percent proportional rate of income taxation with no initial government

debt. For cuts in the proportional income tax, tax rates are reduced to

25 percent for the period in question. In the case of wage tax reductions,

this tax rate is lowered to 23.33 percent for either 5, 10, or 20 years; a

2.3.33 percent             wage tax rate       provides the same first year tax

revenue reduction that is generated by cutting both wage and capital in-

come tax rates to 25 percent.

         Although taxes are cut initially by over 15 percent, Table 4 indicates

fairly small responses of aggregate consumption to tax cuts of short

duration. A five year cut in the wage tax rate leads to only a .5 percent

increase in consumption in the first year of the cut. The reason is

simply that the majority of cohorts will end up paying for these current

tax   cuts in terms of higher tax rates and lower future wages after the
5 year     period. The deficit created by this short term tax reduction has
a limited wealth effect on the economy.
         Tax cuts   of longer duration have more significant effects on national
savings.     A 20   year wage tax cut increases aggregate consumption in the
                                     — 44 —



first    year of the transition by 1.73 percent and lowers the national

savings rate in year 2 from 9.40 percent to 8.34 percent. There is a

13 percent long run reduction in the capital output ratio from 3.11 to

2.62; the gross wage rate falls by 5.56 percent In the long run, while the wage

tax rate levied on this lower tax base must rise to 39 percent to finance

interest payments on the debt as wellas future government expenditures.

The net wage falls, therefore, by b percent relative to its value in

the no tax cut case.

     For each of the wage tax Cut simulations the long run crowding out

of private capital by one dollar of government debt is approximately 52

cents.     The long run ratios of debt to capital are respectively .07, .17,

and ..0   for   wage tax cuts of ., 10, and 20 years. The 52 cent figure

reflects two facts. First, holding gross factor returns fixed, switching

government tax receipts from the present to the future leads to a re-

duction in government savings, but an         increase in private savings to

pay for the higher future taxes. Secondly, the reduction In the long

run capital stock lowers gross wages and raises gross and net interest rates,

both of these factors induce greater savings.

     Deficits resulting from capital as well as wage tax cuts can generate

a quite different impact on capital formation in the initial phase of the

tax cut. Rather than increase consumption, Income tax cuts can lead to

more national savings in the short run. In the 20 year income tax cut

example, the first year national savings rate rises from 9.40 percent to

9.52 percent although the long run savings rate falls from 9.40 to 7.28

percent. Apparently the temporarily higher net rate of return induces

a sufficiently strong savings response that the government deficit
                                     — 45 —




actually   "crowds in" private capital. The incentives to savings are,

however, only temporary. As the end of the period of tax cuts approaches,

the impending higher tax rates on capital income reduce savings incentives

and the income effects of the tax cut take hold. In the long run there

is a smaller capital stock for deficits arising from changes in the pro-

portional income tax rate; the long run higher tax rate on capital income

generates a permanent savings disencentive. The long run degree of

crowding out is approximately 70 cents on a dollar for each of these

three cases.




B. Government Expenditure and Capital Formation

     Increases in government expenditures affect capital formation directly

by raising the government's contribution to total national consumption

and indirectly, by altering the expected path of future tax rates.

Table 5 describes the effect on capital formation of a 5 percent per-

manent increase in expenditures under a number of different financing

scenarios. The first scenario is that the government balances its bud-

get on an annual basis, and, therefore, immediately raises tax rates to

accomodate the increased level of expenditures. Alternatively, the

government is assumed to keep tax rates constant for 5, 10, or 20 years;

i.e.,use deficit financing for these lengths of time At the end of the

constant tax rate interval, the government is assumed to maintain the

current level of per capita debt adjusted for growth. In each case the

tax rate that is adjusted is the proportional income tax rate.

     Table 5 indicates that short run crowding out of private investment

is roughly fifty cents per dollar of government expenditure. Under the
                                   — 46 —

                               Table    5


             Balanced Budget and   Deficit   Financed Five Percent

             Permanent Increases in Government Expenditure —

              The Crowding Out of National Investment by

             Permanent Increases in Government Expenditures




Financing            I/G2                            AI/G50          1I/tG150
  Balanced            —.519            —.387          — .214          —.210
   Budget

 Five year
 constant             —.530            —.527          —.336           .—320
 tax rates

 10 year
 constant             —.520            —.743          —.495           —.451
 tax rates

 20 year
 constant             —.504            —.690          —.939          —.800
 tax rates
                                  — 47 —




balanced budget regime, crowding out is 52 cents in the first year of
the transition; it is 53 cents under the assumption of constant tax

rates for 5 years, but it is only 50 cents for the case of constant

tax rates for 20 years. In the latter case, the extended period

during which capital income Is taxed at a lower rate promotes savings

and "crowds in" an additional 2 cenEs of investment in the first year

of the transition.

     Short run crowding out exceeds long run crowding out in the balanced

budget example for two reasons.   First, even in partial equilibrium

permanently increasing the rate of proportional income taxation will alter

the economy's path of wealth accumulation; existing cohorts at the time

of the tax increase hold assets that were accumulated based on the

previously low capital income tax rate. The initial set of elderly in

particular find that at the lower net interest rate their assets are large

relative to their new desired levels of future consumption. They proceed to

rapidly adjust their consumption levels upward. In the long run this

consumption of "excess assets" does not occur; all long run cohorts hold

assets that were accumulated from birth based on the lower net return

to capital. The second reason is that crowding out leads to lower long

run capital labor ratios and, in general equilibrium, higher gross and net

rates of return. These higher long run gross interest rates dampen

the savings response to the higher tax rates.   Although tax rates

increase In the transition from .315 in the first year to .318 in year

   150, the net interest rate starts out at .055 and rises to .056 be-

cause the gross interest rate increases from .0&) to .082.
                                       — 48 —




     In   the example   of a 20   year1 deficit financed permanent increase in

government expenditure, long run crowding out is 80 cents which exceeds

short run crowding out by 30 cents. The failure to make early elderly

transition cohorts pay for any of the higher level of government expendi-

ture leaves the economy with a lower long run capital stock. Although

year its consumption is lower in the 20 year deficit case than in the

balanced budget example, consumption in the 20 year deficit economy is

higher in succeeding years than In the balanced budget case, and this

lowers long run capital intensity.
                                            — 49   —




 C. Early Announcement of Future Policy, Effects on National Savig


        Early announcement of future policy changes can significantly alter

economic behavior in periods prior to the actual implementation of the

new policy. Given the time required to formulate and enact new tax

legislation, announcement effects are a serious issue of concern. In-

deed, the simulation results suggest that the very process of formulat-

ing tax incentives to stimulate national savings can, itself, dramatic-

ally reduce national savings in the short run depending on the particular

type of tax incentives proposed.

        Figures 6 and 7 depict   the effect of announcements in year zero of
a complete switch to either      consumption or wage taxation starting either
immediately, in five years,      in   ten   years, or in twenty years. While the
national savings rate jumps      from ten percent to over 40 percent if the
consumption tax is immediately enacted, the short run savings rate

actually becomes negative in response to information that the consumption

tax switch will occur In the near future. Obviously the anticipated high

tax rates on future consumpt ion dramatically lower the price of consumption

today relative to tomorrow producing a consumption frenzy in the short

term.

        Announcements of future wage taxation have the opposite effect on

short term savings rate. Here the poniise of lower rates of capital

income taxation in the near future reduces the relative price of

future consumption and immediately stimulates savings. both diagrams indicate

that economic behavior changes less in the short term the further in the
                                                                 — 50 —




                                                                                                         '1I


4-
Ui
E
Ui
0
4-
0  x                                                     /
4-     I—                                            S
4-
a0
       I—
:1     U-                                                                                                U)
       a-
a      U)

       0                                    •
       I—)


                                    I
                                        /
       (I)
       U                     a
'I)
U0                                               .—— —
I-
 •-1                         ——                                      — S—   S   —   S     —
a -J
                                                                                  /
                                                                                              —



  0                                                                                       a
       U-                a'
(I)
                             7                   ——
U
z'-4                    S.
                                                                 —
                                                                          ---r--—--       —
                                                                                                         -4

                                                                                I.e — —
(I)


                                                                                                        '-4
             U)                                 F)               N                                ,-4

                                                                                                   I:




                   •
                                    I            I           I
                                                •1           I
                                    ,
                                    I            I
                  ill               •cioI
                                    I



                             :±
                                                     (J
                             o:u1
                             If.i                            •
                                    S ,.—4
                  Li
             I—   CD         (I)    ,U)          IC)).
                                                                           Figure   7


                                      SAUINGS RATES WITH t,)ARYING ANNOUNCEMENT
                                                POLICIES WAGE TA<
I                          2a

SA')WO
                                                                   II' I
                               18                                  I
•a a   a... 0 a_es..
SAI,JWI.O
— — — —         aa                            1
                               16
SAVW23                                        I                S

• — a — a —        a                                           I
                                          I                I
                                4         /                I
                                                       S



                                                       /
                               t2                  /




                       -   S




                                —.@               10                                    7.
                                     — 52 —                                -




future   is the date of policy implementation. Yet policy changes that

will not occur for ten years can still change savings rates in year

zero by over 25 percent.

     Figures 8 and 9       graph the utility paths associated with these

announced changes in the future tax structure. Nore distant implenta—

tion of the consumption tax relieves initial elderly cohorts of the

heavy taxation of their retirement consumption. Initial young cohorts

are, in constrast, hit hard by a delay in the switch to a consumption

tax. Early announcement reduces somewhat the loss in utility of that

cohort unfortunate enough to retire immediately prior to the tax switch.

The reason is that the induced consumption frenzy lowers the capital

stock and raises the rate of return these retirees receive on their

savings,providing a small offset to the additional substantial tax

burden these cohorts are forced to shoulder.

     A similar situation arises in the wage tax case. Here immediate

implementation significantly lowers the utility of Initial young cohorts

because these cohorts face higher wage tax rates during their working

years and lover gross interest rates during their retirement. Delaying

the wage tax implementation causes capital accumulation to increase

immediately providing a higher gross wage for initial young cohorts who

now face a shorter period of high wage tax rates. The short run increases

In capital lowers somewhat the utility of initial elderly cohorts by

lowering -the gross and, therefore, net return available on their savings.

For announcements of wage tax adoption 10 and 20 years in the future,

only intital cohorts of elderly are adversely affected. The induced

short run capital accumulation raises the gross wage enough to compensate workers

for higher wage tax rates when the switch takes place.
                                                                    Figure 8

                                         UT IL I T? PflTHS N I 1H     URY 1MG      ANNOUNCEMENT
                                                    POLICIES: CONSLIMPTION TA>
T                                  5

'Jo ti ci
    i
II•
• SSSS SSSS     —   S   —   — —


tJCfl'•I 10
— — — — —                     —

UCAN2CI
• —     S   —   e   —        —

                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                              S            U,
                                                                                                                          a                U)
                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                  S

                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                            / /
                                   1                                                                  a
                                                                                                  a                       /
                                                                                              a
                                                                                          a


                                   g     — .e —
                                          S
                                                    —   —
                                                               'S
                                                                                                  ,,
                                               'S                                    -p
                                                                                                          S
                                                        4.-                                   —
                                                                               S

                                  —1

                                   —55                  —:35                   —15                                                 05
                                                                                                  Figure       9



                                            U TI LIT Y PATHS WITH                           1)RYIHG NHOUHCEMEHT
                                                                                    POLICIES; WGE TX
                               i.
T                                                                                                                                     5%
                                                                                                                                  —



UW41E1                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                           /
                               1    •cj
                                                                                                           —S
I_I 1J A   45                                                                                                                  '
                                                                                                  —    S
a a a a as — a.     S   Seem
                                                                                                  ,1       a                                       '1
UWAN1O                                                                                             I                                                $
                                                                                                                   a                                           S
— — — — —                                                                   S
                                                                                                                   II                 'I
UWN2J                                                                   I                                               II
                                                                 S
                                                                   IS   /                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                        IpS            /
C   S      S    —   a   — a
                                                             $                              S
                                                         S
                                                                                                                             IS            t
                                                                                                                             S
                                                                      /I /                                                                                         I
                                                         S
                                                                                            1                                S                                 S
                                                         S                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                              S
                                                         S                              S                                                                I
                                                     S
                                                                      /                                                       S
                                                     I               I                                                            I
                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                               I               /
                                     2           S                                      I                                         S
                                                 S                                                                                                        'I
                                                 I               /                                                                $
                                                S

                                                         /.                     S
                                                                                    /
                                     a

                               —.2


                               —.4


                               —.6
                                      —60       —40                                         —20                         0                               20                 40
                                          — 55 —




VII.     Summary and   Suggestions   for Future Research


        This paper has developed an equilibrium simulation model that can

evaluate the effects of a variety of government policies on national savings and

the inter— and intra—cohort distribution of welfare. The simulations

described in the paper indicate that the long run welfare gains of alleged

"tax reform" policies arise to a considerable degree as a result of redis-

tribution from earlier cohorts. Pareto—efficient tax reform policies do

exist, but involve careful use of our limited set of tax instruments. The

current impact of current tax and expenditure policy depends critically on

the nature and timing of associated future tax rate changes. A corollary of

this is that questions such as "what is the effect of a government deficit

on current savings?" or "what is the effect on savings of capital income

taxation?" are sorely underidentified. Informed discussion of policy alter-

natives requires a full description of the entire future paths of policy

choice variables.

       The simulation model can be modified in a number of different ways to

conform more closely with economic reality and to investigate additional

savings policy questions. First, preferences can be extended to include

utility from the actual level of bequests rather than the utility of

descendents per Se.       This   feature will limit the wealth effects of deficit

policies, but permit more realistic modeling of the U.S. economy (see

Kotlikoff and Summers (1981)). Second, the model can be altered to allow

for costs of quickly adjusting the capital stock. Summers (1980) and

Lipton and Sachs (1980) have analyzed such "q" models in altruistic inter—

temporal settings, but the transition effects of adding investment adjustment

costs in selfish life cycle models may be quite different because of the
                                     — 56 —




real   effects on savings of inter—cohort wealth transfers (Feldstein (1977)).

In addition to distinguishing new capital goods from capital goods in place,

the introduction of other assets into the economy including land, money, and

housing will improve the predictive capacity of the model and permit an

analysis of the effect of inflation on the allocation of the capital stock

between housing and industrial capital goods.
                                       — 57 —




                                       Notes



    LChamley (1980a, l980b) provides a careful and extensive discussion of

the welfare implications of the tax structure and public debt in an inter—

temporal model of altruistic behavior.


          is intended to model a typical household that "appears" at age

twenty, retires at sixty—five, and dies at seventy—five.


    3The term    correctsforthe present value change in taxes assessed on

the stream of income arising from a change in average tax rates in a one

period setting; letting t   stand   for taxes and y for income, yA(T/y) = (AT/Ay—T/y)ty.


    4mis rules out the possibility that tax rates are so high initially

that lowering them increases tax receipts.
                                        —58--


                                   Ref erences


Auerbach, Alan J., 1979, "The Optimal Taxation of Heterogeneous Capital,"

     Quarterly Journal of Economics, November, pp. 589—612.

Barro, Robert J., 19.74, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political

     Economy, November/December, pp. 1095—1017.

Barro, Robert J., 1978, "The Impact of Social Security n Private Saving,"

     The American Enterprise Institute Studies 11199.

Boskin, Michael J., 1978, "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest," Journal

     of Political Economy, April, pp. S3—S27.
Bradford, David, 1980, "Economics of Tax Policy Towards Savings," George

     von Furstenburg (ed.) Government and Capital Formation (Cambridge, Mass.:

     Ballinger Press).

Chamley, Christophe, "Optimal Taxation and the Public Debt," Cowles Foundation

     Paper No. 554, April l980a.

              "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation in a Growing

     Economy," Cowles Foundation Paper No. 553, April l980b.

Felcistein, Martin S., 1974, "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate

     Capital Accumulation, Journal of Political Economy, September/October,

     Pp. 905—926.

              1977, "The Surprising Incidence of a Tax on. Pure Rent: A New

     Answer to an Old Question," Journal of Political Economy, April,

     pp. 349—360.

               1978, "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation," Journal

     of Political Econy, April, pp. S29—S51.

Green, Jerry R. and Eytan Sheshinski, 1979, "Approximating the Efficiency

     Gains of Tax Reforms," Journal of Public Economics, April 1979, pp. 179—196.

 King, Mervyn A.., 1980, "Savings and Taxation," in G.A. Hughes and G.M. Heal,

      eds., Essays in Public Polçy.
                                       — 59 —




Kotlikoff,   Laurence J., 1979, "Social Security and Equilibrium Capital Inten-

     sity," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, pp. 233—254.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence H. Summers, 1981, "The Role of Intergen-

     erational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of

     Political Econojy, forthcoming.

Lipton, David and Jeffrey Sachs, 1980, "Accumulation and Growth in a Two

     Country Model," NBER Working Paper #572.

Phelps, Edmund S. and John G. Riley, 1978, "Rawlsian Growth: Dynamic Pro—

    gramming of Capital and Wealth for Intergenerational 'Maximin' Justice,"

     Review of Economic Studies, February, pp. 103—120.

Summers, Lawrence H., 1979, "Tax Policy in a Life—Cycle Model," NBER Working

     Paper #302.

                1980, "Capital Taxation in a General Equilibrium Perfect Foresight

    Growth Model," mimeo.
