                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                AN EXAMINATION OF EMPIRICAL TESTS
                 OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND SAVINGS


                        Alan J. Auerbach

                      Laurence J. Kotlikoff


                      Working Paper No. 730




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          August 1981




We are grateful to the National Bureau of Economic Research for
financial support and to David Reitman for excellent research
assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Social Insurance and project in Capital
Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper 1/730
                                                                August 1981



                          An Examination of Empirical Tests of
                              Social Security and Savings



                                       ABSTRACT



     The effect of social security and other forms of government debt on
national savings is one of the most widely debated policy questions in
economics today. Some estimates suggest that social security has reduced
U.S. savings by almost forty percent. This paper examines recent cross—
section and time series empirical tests of the social security—savings
question and argues that, given current data, neither type of test has
much potential for settling the controversy. In particular, there are
a number of specification problems relating to social security time series
regressions that can easily lead to highly unstable coefficients and to
rejection of the hypothesis that social security reduces savings, even
if it is actually true.

     These points are demonstrated by running regressions on hypothetical
data generated by a perfect foresight life—cycle growth model developed
previously by the authors. While the data is obtained from a model in
which social security reduces the nation's capital stock by almost twenty
percent, time series social security regression coefficients vary enormously
depending on the specified level of the program, the preferences of
hypothetical households, the level of conconmdtant government policies,
and the time interval of the data.



                                                  Alan J. Auerbach
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Harvard University
                                                  Cambridge, Mass. 02138
                                                  (617) 495—3934


                                                  Laurence 3. Kotlikoff
                                                  Department of Economics
                                                  Yale University
                                                  New Haven, Conn. 06520
                                                  (203) 436—1937
            The effect      of social security wI other fonris of govemnnt debt
  on    national savings is perhaps        the   rrst   widely debated   policy   question in
  economics today.         The issue has   intrigued economics       since David Ricardo,

 but    is receiving increasing attention as U.S. economists seek explanations
  for   low rates of capital fonnation and productivity growth. The nufibers
 at    staJ<e in the social security debate are quite large. Martin Feldstein
 has pioneered theoretical and empirical research on this subject over the
 last decade. His estimates (Feldstein (19714)) suest that social security
 has reduced U.S. savings by aliiost 140 percent. General equilibrium
 sinnlations of the long run effects of unfunded social security on capital
 fonration     (Kotlikoff (1979)) confinn a potentially large              effect.
           Over'   the   years the issue has     been   joined at both the thoretical

 and    empirical levels.       (Barro (19714, 1978), 1rby       (197d),   Kotlikoff (1979),
 Lei-ner   and Lesnoy      (1980), Feldstein (19714, 1980)). This paper examines          recent
cross—section       and time series   errpirical tests of      the   social security—savings

question     and argues that given current data neither type of test has much
potential for settling the controversy The paper focuses in particular
detail on the specification of social security time series regressions.
There are a number of probl-ns of specification that can easily lead to

highly unstable coefficients and to rejection of the hypothesis that social
security reduces savings when this is in fact true. These points are

demonstrated       by running regressions on       hypothetical data simulated fnn a

perfect   foi'esit life cycle growth model (Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1980)).
While   the data is obtained from a model in which social security reduces
the nation's capital stock by almost 20%, time series social security
                                                                                  2



 regression wefficients vary enoncusiy depending on the specified level
 of the program, the preferences of hypothetical households, the level and
 type of concomitant governrrQnt policies, and the time interval of the data.
 Indeed social security coefficients for certain regressions are negative,
 despite the significant burden of the social security debt.
        The next section discusses theoretical problems with cross—section
and time series tests of the social security—savings hypothesis. Section II
points out siificant errors of specification in time series social
security regressions. Section III describes dynamic simulations of the
effect of unfunded social security in a perfect foresiit life cycle growth
model. Section IV uses data   simulated from this model   to   examine the pre—

dictions of                              sii, magnitude, and stability of
              the life cycle model for the

social security time series regression coefficients. The time series co—
efficients obtained from this sinpiest of life cycle nodels are sufficiently
unstable to cast major doubt on the value of the entire exercise.
  I. DriricaJ   Tests of Social Security
       and Savings—Theoretical Difficuties

           The life cycle (Ibthg1iani—Brinberg            (19514)) and      infinite horizon
  (Barr'o (19714)) models    of   intertemporal       const.rption   choice provide the

  theoretical   underpinning of     most      tests   of social security's effect on

 savings.     Both models posit rational utility maximizing behavior; the
 life cycle model assumes that economic agents are selfish and care only
 about their own current and future consumption. The infinite horizon
 model assumes that aents are alturistic and care about their descendent's
 consumption as well as their own. In a life cycle model since individuals
 care only about consumption over their remaining exDected lifetimes, their
 marginal propensities to consume out of full available resources will depend
 crecially on their age. Intergenerational redistribution of resources
 in a life   cycle model will affect aggregate            consumption and, thus, national
savings. In a Barro-type infinitely lived family model, consumption of
family members of a particular age depends not on their own resources, but
rather on total fanhly resources. In a Barro model cohort consumption and
thus aregate consumption is independent of the cross-cohort distribution
of resources.

          The theory of unfunded social security is            identical         to the general
theory    of deficit policy; holding the path of goverrnient expenditure

constant, any reductiod in        the   net   tax liabilities    of one generation that

are   associated     with a deItcit must      be   made up by a higher net tax         liability
on somo   other' generation.      Thus social security, as           well   as   any other
goveriTnent deficit, constitutes an           intergenerational      transfer.

This transfer will have a real effect on aggregate consumption and

national savings      if different cohorts. have different marginal

propensities    to   consume out of transferred resources. Ideally,
                                                                                           14




 one would think that the best way to test the Feldstein—Barro governnnt
 deficit question      is to re-ess    a   cohort's consinption   on that cohort's own
 resources as well as the resources of other cohorts. If resources of
 other cohorts significantly affect the consumption of a particular cohort,
 the flar'ro view would 'seem" to be supported. If the resources of other
 cohorts did not affect a particular cohort's consumption, Feldstein's view
 would "seem' to be supported. We use the word "seem" because a finding
 that resources of other cohorts did not affect the consuiiption of a particu-
 lar cohort could be consistent with the Barro view according to the follow-
 ing scenario: suppose that the family head at each rrient in time allocates
total resources to the various family merrbers and tells them to consi.ine just
like life cycle consmrs. The Barro family head could, then, always re-
distribute      family assets in such a way that each family member at each age
looked like he was behaving independently from the others. Such an exact
year—by-year reshuffling of family resources seems unlikely, but is,
none—the—less, a theoretical possibility.
          It   is also possible to provide theoretical arguments consistent

with both the Feldstein life cycle view of savin and              an enpirlcal   finding

that   the   consumption    of one cohort depends on the   resources   of other cohorts.

Ima,ine   a    life cycle world in which unexpected changes       in govemient   tax—

transfer policies as well as periodic macro economic fluctuations can,
cx ante, be expected to siyiificantly alter the cohort distribution of
lifetime full resources and utility. In such a world completely selfish,
but none-the-less risk averse life cycle savers might         seek   to pool these

risks with members     of   other cohorts. In the limit perfect insurance arrange—
                                                                                         5



 mants     between different cohorts concurrently alive will link the nsumption
 of one cohort to the conszrtion of other cohorts and the resources of one
 cohort to the resources of other cohorts. Consider the following sirr1e
 example of inter—cohort risk pooling. Suppose life cycle agents live for
 two periods, and suppose the government indicates at the beginning of one
 period that it will announce with probability P a lurip sum transfer from
 the young to old at the end of the period, and with probability 1-P a
 lump sum transfer from the old to the young at the end of the period. At
 the berinirig of the period risk averse old and young cohort rrnbers will
seek to pool this risk arrxng themselves. Since, by assption, there is
no social risk to be absorted collectively by the young and the old, insurance

arrangements permitting, these cohorts will arrange to consume exactly the
same a'Tnunt independent of the eventual goverrnent transfer. Each cohort's
consunption will depend on aggregate resources rather than the cohort
distribution of resources after the government enacts its policy.
           While it is hard to point to explicit real world        insurance   markets
that are in the business of pooling these types of risks across cohorts,
implicit cohort risk—sharing arrangements may be operative within real
world institutions such as firms and families. Robert Hall (1980) presents
evidence     that   a sizeable fraction of   American   workers experience a more or
less   perinent relationship     with a single firm     over   their working lifes.
If   one   thinks of finns as conpeting for new young hires by offering iirplicit
llfeLflm contracts that offer the highest level of expected utility, then
firms will certainly have an incentive to provide iJTplicit contracts            that

pool cohort risks between the firm s         current old   workers and the firm s
                                                                                                6



  new   young hires. Finns could, for exznple, offset vernment tax—transfer
 policies that redistribute across selfish, but risk averse, cohorts by
 adjusting their age corensation profile. Presunably selfish old and
 young fanily members          can   also devise acceptable cohort risk sharing schemes,
 since such an iirplicit contract could rrake each member better of f.
          We do not mean to suggest here that perfect insurance arrangements
 between living members of different cohorts would coiietely undo the
 long nm effects        of social security       on savings. Such an arg2ment for debt
 neutrality would       only    be valid if all     current   and   future cohorts   could come

 together ex—ante and        sign an insurance contract         protecting thnselves against
 redistributive    government behavior. Our point here is that existing cohorts

 can   collectively     hedge   themselves against goverrrnent         redistribution arrong

themselves, and        that this     behavior could mai<e     them act as if only     total
resources     mattered. Introduction of social security in such a world would

raise   the   consumption of all        currently   alive cohorts, since the        program
would still constitute redistribution against cohorts                   not yet   born.

         While   this   discussion suggests that both the life cycle and infinitive

horizon models     can rationalize        a wide range   of cohort specific consumption
behavior, actual knowledge           of such behavior would         greatly narrow the range

of theories     that   are   consistent   with the facts. Unfortunately, time series

data   on cohort consumption and after tax future resources is                 not available.

in its absence Feldstein and           others   have used time series data on aggregate

consumption. Section II examines a host of difficulties with conventional

time   series   tests of social security and         savinge.
                                                                                  7



          If tijr series data on cohort consrrption Is not available and
  aggregate tine series   consumptim   data Is insufficient, Is there hope that
  cross—sectional micro evidence could resolve the controversy? A key problem
 with using cross section data is that the data is based on households
 rather than families and again certain results that might at first glance
 be thought to verify the life cycle theory are also perfectly consistent
 with the Barro theory and visa—versa. In this case problems arise because
 the cross section data does not distinguish transfers across generations
 from   transfers across fnilies. *
         To give an exanpie, suppose one found a positive and significant
 effect of social security wealth on household consumption in a cross section
 regression. While such   a finding is predicted by the life cycle theory,
 it is also consistent with Barro's view for the following reason: Those
households with greater than average social security wealth are presumably
members of families that receive greater than average social security wealth;
thus the social security variable is contaminated with inter-family transfers
and these inter—family transfers will Increase the consumption of Barro—type
faully iteinLero in those fniIlies receiving these greater than average transfers.
        While a social security wealth coefficient would not help resolve
the issue, other cross section regression experirrents iuight. Under the
life cycle theory, ftr example, the marginal propensity to consume this
period out of all future resources increases with age. This prediction
holds for conventional specification of preferences independent of whether

*pJbert Barro suggested this point in a recent conversation with one of the
 authors.
                                                                                              8



 the date of death is taken to be uncertain and independent of whether
 annuity insurance is available. In a Barry ndel the rarginal propensity
 to consume out of total fanily resources could increase or decrease by
 age. Hence, given the problem that ater household reources may proxy
 for   geeater fanily resources, the Barro ndel could not be refuted by a
 finding that the marginal propensity to consume increased with age.                    &it
 suppose one found that the marginal propensity declined with age. Such
 a   finding would, we believe, be hard to reconcile with           the Feldstein life
 cycle view. This is an example      of   a   test that   could   possibly refute      the
life   cycle theory, but that could not support the strict life cycle theory
over the Bano view.
         ifortunately the paucity of U.S. consumption data is not confined
to the macro level; there exists no U.S. micro data set that simultaneously
reports household conscrption and household resources in sufficient detail
to conduct the above described experiment.
         In the absence of micro consumption data, economists have naturally
turned to data cn net worth and bequests. Net worth               reflects   in part
consumption, but in addition to accumulated past flows of consumption,
current net orth reflects accumulated flows of net intergenerational
transfers   as   well as patterns of earnings and rates of return that are not
directly related to consumption.
                                                                                   9



        Insofar   as net wDrth data reflects past patterns of consunption,
 regression coefficients of net worth on social security variables face
 tL sane problems of interpretation as regression coefficients of consnption
 on social security variables. Thus a finding that social security wealth
 depresses private   household net worth accuinulation   is consistent with both
the life cycle and the infinitely—lived family theories of consurption.
Aciln cross—family transfers could make families with greater than average
social security wealth accunulate less private assets than would otheriise
be the case.
       Cross section bequest regressions may provide refutable tests of at
least the life cycle theory, but caution is advised here as well. At
first glance the Feldstetn view would seem to be refutable by finding that
the elasticity of bequests with respect to full future resources was
siificantly greater than zero both in the statistical sense and in the
sense of a large number, and that this large elasticity held true at all
levels of resources; that is, for the rich and poor. If bequests repre-
sented the only forTn of intergenerational transfers from the old to the
young and there were no transfers from the young to the old, the issue
would be settled. Ce could sirrply take this elasticity, find the per—
centage change in full resources of the aged represented by social security
intergenerational transfers, and conpute how riruch they transferred back.
       C-ie might think that siJTply the real world observation that the
elderly at nil lifetime incorr levels leave bequests by itself refutes
the life cycle theory. The answer is not necessarily. First of all the
theory is about net transfer flows. Our data generally details gross
                                                                                              10


     bequests    and these gross   bequests   represent only one ccrnponent of the gross
     flow    of transfers fran   the   old to the young. Very little information is
     available    concerning transfers Ira-n the young to       the old. These transfers
     need   not, by the way, be pecuniary. Care of elderly parents in terms of
    housing and assistance in chores etc. constitute a transfer of resources
    fran the young to the old.
              In general, resource transfers     fran   the   old to the   young and Iran   the

    young  to the old need not reflect altruin; these transfers can occur and
    still be perfectly consistent with the selfishness assumed in the life cycle
    nodel.     rotflkoff and Spivak (1981) demDnstrate that family risk pooling
    behavior, where the risk is the uncertainty of the date of death, could
    give rise to bequests as well as transfers from the young to the old. These
    transfers can occur even though family members are completely selfish.
    Indeed, fauily members could hate each other and still bequeath and transfer
 resources to each other simply because of the desire to mitigate the risks
 associated with the date of death. The way these implicit family annuity
 contracts work is that old fanijy members use their pramise to bequeath in
the event that they die to extract consumption support from their children
as they continue to live. IC the government now comes to this selfish,
but risk pooling family and uses social security to transfer a dollar frcm
the young rrembers to the old members, the family risk sharing deal may be
renegotiated with the old extracting sore support from the young in exchange
for their now larger premised bequest. * The fact that social security


*
 This presumes that the fardly members did not ex—ante insure arrong
 themselves against such government behavior.
                                                                             II

 corres in the form of an annuity is not fundienta1, since old family
 nembers can purctase life insurance to, in effect, transfer those future
 streams into a current contingent bequest. In such a Feldstein world one
 could find a positive cross sectional coefficient of social security on
bequests despite the fact that the old people end up cons'Lnmtng nxre than
they would otherwise have consi.rd. The old may thus increase their
gross transfers to the young in response to social security while at the
sare tirre expected net transfers from the old to the young decline.
      To sunrnarize these general comrents, one must be cautious of any
macro or micro findings that proport to support one theory and, refute the
other because both theories are quite flexible in terms of the sangs
and transfer behavior they can explain and the regression coefficients
they can rationalize. In addition, in cir pre—occupation with Social
Security coefficients we may be overlooking scrne more ñmdamental tests
of the life cycle theory.
                                                                                            12



 II. pecification Bias         in Social Security Time Series        Regr'essions

          The   major difficulty in    evaluating   tflIE   series results suggesting
 that social security does or does not reduce private saving is that the
 regression specifications do not correspond very closely, to the life
 cycle   model of consumer choice. Though this cr1ticin may also be applied

to standard atterrçts at estimating the basic life—cycle mcdel using

aggregate tine series data (Ando and Ivbdigliani, 1963), it is              a nre
serious problem in the        IextendedT life—cycle model because the particular

phenorrononof interest, social security, introduces new difficulties to
the interpretation of regeession results.
         To ben our discussion,        we derive the   expression    for optin'aJ.   con—

sun)tion behavior by life—cycle nsi.rrs who have no bequest notive or
labor supply decision. Lifetime utility is assned to take the fonn:



                          T                  l—Y

                         t=1
                                (Jy(tl) C                      T>o    Y    1

                                                                                     (1)

                          T
                          E    (1+p)
                         t=1                1ogC
                                                                                        13


  where C is the household' s consurçLion at age t ,               T   is the age at
  death, and p and y are taste pareters characterizing respectively,
  the pure rate of tin preference and the inverse of the partial elasticity
 of substitution between any two years' corisunt1on.               -
         For   a household of age I     ,       the appropriate objective function is




                           T
                               (1÷)(tl)
          U(I) =
                           z
                                            li
                                            c                y>o,y # 1

                                                                               (2)
                          T
                              (p) \t        log C               I=     1
                          t=i



        U:der a igUm with a proportional lnccine tax and a social security
system supported by payroll taxes, the budget constraint facing a household
of age I is:

                      +        + 33W1       PVC1                              (3)


where   W1 ,               and   PVC1 are,      respectively, real assets, himian

wealth, social security wealth and the present value of current and future
consumption of the household. Real wealth Is directly observable. Hi.nan
wealth equals the present discounted value of labor income, net of income
and social security taxes. Social security wealth is the discounted value
of future benefits.
            Solving for the optimal consunption path yields the following ex—
 pression     for current         consurTption for       such a household:



                    C = a           + w.    +   cr-i




                   T—i.                    t                                      —1
     I  a                      (l+p)--'' [fl       (l+r (l-T
                                                          S      S           y
                                                                                                 (5)
                                             s=2

 and r        and     T
                          S    are the geoss interest rate and rate of income              tax   that
prevail when        the       household is age s.
            From    (24) and (5), it       is apparent        that unless y equals one, each
household's behavior will depend on future interest and tax rates,
the correct oonputation of                       and SSW1 .          Thus,   &Jen at the individual
level, the life—cycle expression (24) will not, in general, exhibit stable
coefficients as interest tax rates vary over tirre. This problem is
particularly acute when one considers as Important a change in policy as
the introduction of unfunded social security. If the hypothesis that
social security drastically reduces savings is correct, it will obviously
lead to changes in interest rates and income tax rates along the transition

path to the        economy's new      steady state equilibrium.               Moreover, the presence
of   active fiscal policy          will also make interpretation                 of ression results

difficult,     because various deficit and               tax policies that need have        nothing

to   do with social security will also                 change tax rates and rates of        return

and hence     the estimated        tirr series         coefficients. This is the L.ucas'

(19714) critique.
                                                                                                  15



           Even assuming that 'i , in                which case
                                                                  a   Is   a constant     that
  depends only on p           and   I, aggregation of (14) into an estimable
  equation Is not straightforward. Aggregation of these consumption
  relations over all households yields the expression:


                 CaW+ljW+a3SW                            (6)


 where           ,      and    a are the average values of a            in the sarrple weighted
 by each cohort's real wealth, human wealth and social security wealth,
 respectively, and C                    , Jf/
                                and SSW are agegate rreasures. At any
                                ,   W


 point in tine, these three coefficients will differ because the three
 forTr of wealth are distributed differently across age cohorts in the popu-
 lation. Aiong young individuals, for exasple, real wealth will be snail
 (perhaps negative) relative to human wealth. The opposite is true fcr
retirees. Thus, the aggregate coefficient on real wealth should be higher
thai that on human wealth, since a1 increases with i
          This       relationship would not pose        a probl    in itself if it were
 fairly    stable over time, I.e., if there were no important                   doRraphic
 shifts or other changes in the age                 distribution of these variables.
 However, such can         hardly       be   claimed for a period during which social

 security is introduced; the age                distribution   of human   ard   non-human
 wealth   will       change, and    the      aggregate coefficients a     and    cx
                                                                                      , and,
 as a result, the social security wealth                coefficient   a   should be unstable.
         Further       difficulties arise in actual        etirration atterpts because the

values of J-fAJ        aid SSW are represented by inexact proxies. }-Jurran wealth
typically is replaced by sane rreasure of disposable incorre. This inlves
several problems. First, the appropriate incaTle Treasure would not include
                                                                               16


 capital inccxne, for this constitutes double—counting. Second, the relation-
 ship between net labor incorre and human wealth changes by age, with the
 ratio of the latter to the fonmr decreasing over tiire. Again, these ratios
 will depend on the interest and tax rates expected to prevail in the future,
 and these surely cannot be assumed constant.
        Finally, socIal security wealth as it appears in equations 4) and
 (6) should be calculated using the actual path of future net Interest rates;
standard enIrical analyses assume sorr constant discount rates to estimate
social security wealth. Since rates of return will change during the
econcxriy's transition response to social security, this procedure obviously
introduces errors in variables bias.
       In surrrnary there appear to be severe difficulties in estimating a
stable relationship between ag-'egate consumption and the various forms of
aggregate wealth when variations in the data reflect changes in tax rates
or savings incentives that disturb net rates of return and the age distribu-
tion of different forms of wealth. The theory of unfunded social security
in a life cycle model uriequivocably predicts siguificarit change s in the
time path of Interest rates and the distribution of resources by age.
                                                                                                   17


  III. Simulation ofaLife-.Cycle Ecununy                with Social   Security
       The previous section detailed several problns of specification that
  make the interpretation of social security time series regression results
  difficult,       impossible. Since the specification errors interact in
                  if not

 a canpiex y, it is hard to know a priore what social
                                                        security regression
 coefficient one should expect to find under the hypothesis that the
                                                                     data
 was    actually   obtained fran      a   life cycle world. To investigate how serious
 this   probln     Is in practice requires, then,         data    for which    the   social

 security life cycle savings hypothesis is actually true. The purpose                         of
 this section is to describe simulation experiments that                   were run to, In
 effect, manufacture hypothetical life cycle social security data. These
 data are used in Section III in time series regressions to investigate
 the actual predictions of the life cycle model for                standard     time series
regression      coefficients.

         The simulation model is based         on    the assumption of perfect foresight

or, equivalently, since there is no uncertainty in the                 model,     rational

expectations. The interrelated supplies of capital of all                      cohorts   living
during    the   transition fran the econany's initial steady state to the new

steauy state are      solved simultaneously with finns' dnands for capital

along the      transition path   to   canpute the econciny's equilibrium growth

path. We next present additional equations of the model and then describe
the algorithn used to solve for the econany's equilibrium growth path.
        rho   the household behavior       already   described,   we add   a   single production
sector characterized       by the Cobb—Duglas production function:
                                                                                              18
                                                                       (7)
                                     A K ((l+;)tLt)l_c



  There             and Lt     are output, capital   and labor   at time     t       A is a
                                                                                 ,


  scaling    constant, g     is an exogenous   productivity growth rate      that is set

  equal     to .02 and   iS the capital share of output that is assud to equal
                         £

  .25 . Lt      i sJly equal to the sum of labor endownnts of all individuals
 in the work force. In our analysis we assume that each mdi. vidual 's endow—
 rrent of husai caDital grows at an annual rate of .007 and that general
 population growth is one percent per year. K is generated by a recursive
 equation that cii.ctates that the change in the capital stock equals private
 plus public savings. Competitive behavior on the part of producers insures
 that the gross factor returns r and w, areequated to the rrarginal
 products of capital and labor at time t:

                         r = cA(K/(l+g)tL)__                           (Sa)


                                                                       (8b)



The   assunption that the return to      capital equals   its    marginal    product implies
that the nr:et value of capital goods alwavs equals their reproduction cost;
i.e., adjustment of capital to desired levels is instantaneous.
          Leaving aside social       the government in our model is assumed
                                   security,

to have a stream of consumption expenditures,    that it must finance
using the income tax and one—period debt. bt is a perfect substitute for
capital in household poi'tfolios and enables the government to save (run
surpluses) and dissave (run deficits). If Ag is defined as the value of

government's assets (taking a negative value if there is a national debt),
government tax revenue at the end of period t is:
                                                                                          19

                             =



 where    Tt and r are the rates of income tax and interest at tiiT t
 Given the governinrit's ability to issue and retire debt, its budget constraint
 relates the present value of its expenditures to the present value of its
 tax receipts plus the value of its initial assets:
                                                       t
               Ag0 +      [
                       =o s0
                            (l+r )] 1
                                    p,    ' [s0
                                       = t0                (i+r )J 1Gt             (10)


 (Note   that G corresponds to a different concept              from   that reported in the
National    income Accounts, which includes goverrment purchase of capital goods.)
Equation (10) is required to hold in all our        siimilations.


          Social security is added to this government sector by introducing an
announced path of social security benefits. The path of social security
benefits    s calculated by assuming retired individuals receive a certain
replacement      rate of average lifetime wages, adjusted for productivity

growth. Our procedure corresponds to the         lifetin wage          indexing formula

of the U.S. social security system. The replacement rate chosen, in combina-

tion with      the   path of wages for each cohort, yields a pattern of liabilities

of the social security system, SSBt .         Th pay   for      those benefits, the

governm2nt uses strict 'pay-as—you—go" financing, assessing a payroll tax

at rate          in    year t to yield receipts equal      to    SSBt
         The   actual solution for the econorrs behavior over time always bens
with a characterization of the initial steady state, given initial tax
structure and govenunt debt. We assne that individuals of different
generations alive during this steady state correctly perceive the tax
schedule and factor prices they will face over time, and behave optimally
                                                                            20



 with respect to these conditions. We utilize a Gauss—Seidel iteration

 technique   to solve for   this equilibrium; we start with an initial guess of

 the capital labor ratio (K/L), derive in each iteration a new estimate
 to update our guess, and continue the procedure until a fixed point is
 reached. Given the method of deriving new estimates of VL, such a fixed
 point corresponds to a steady—state rational expectations equilibrium.
         The foflowirig is a description of how the iteration technique proceeds.
 A schematic representation is provided in Figure 1. In the first stage, a
 guess is made of the capital—labor ratio (equivalent to a guess of the
 capital stock, since labor supply is fixed). Given the marginal productivity
 equations (Ba) and (Bb), this yields values for the wage w and interest
rate r. By using the estimate of w , we may then solve for the steady
state level of benefits, SSB as well as the payroll tax,.
                                 ,
                                                             necessary
                                                                   ,

to   support those benefits.. Since incne and required goverrrnent revenues
are given a first guess of T is obtained. Fmn the values of r and r,
we then calculate the present values of social security benefits (SsW)
as well as future earnings (HW) . Assuming initial assets to be zero,
we then apply equations (14)   and   (5) to obtain the life—cycle consumption
path of the representative individual, .         From   the definition of
savings, this yields the age—asset profile, A, which may be aggregated
(subtracting any national debt assumed to exist) to provide a new value
of the capital stock and capital-labor ratio. When the initial and final
values of NIL and the tax rate are the same, this implies that the steady
state has been reached.
    Iteration Procedure:
    Progres    Income Tax
                    Definition
J
                                                                                        22




              Solution for the final steady state prtceeds in a similar rranner.
  The transition is solved for in the following way. We assume the transition
  to the new steady state takes 150 years, then solve simultaneously for equil-.
  ibrium in     each
                 of the 150 years of the transition period under the assumption
  that everyone believes the new steady state will obtain. This solution
 method is necessary because each household is assund to take the path of
 future prices into account in detennining its behavior. Hence, the equilibrium
 that results in later years will a.ffect the equilibrium in earlier years.
 Specifically, we assume that Lidividuals born after the transition begins
 ow the transition path iriuiediately, and that those born fore the beginning
 of    the   transition behaved up   to the time   of the change   in   government policy as    if
 the   old steady state would continue forever. At the time             of   the announcement
 of a new     policy existing cohorts are "born again," they       behave like members
of the new generation except that their horizon is less than fifty—five
years, and they possess initial assets as a result of prior accumulation.

An iteration technique is used ain, but here we must begin with vectors
of capital stocks and tax rates (one pair for each year). Further, we
cannot simply solve for the behavior of a representative cohort, but rather
must calculate the behavior of each cohort alive during the transition.
This procedure, while conceptually no more difficult than that used to find
the steady states, requires considerably more computation. As the ultimate
paths converge to the final steady state well before year 150, the assump-
tion about conditions after year 150 does not influence our results.
                                                                                     23



          The   solution technique just     described   was used to simulate the intro—
 duction of an unfunded       social   security system similar in      size   and character
 to that currently in force in the U.S. A ntzther of thfferent types of
 similations     are considered. In each sirrulation exercise' we assume that
 there is no social security program in the economy's initial steady state;
 socIal   security   is introduced unexpectedly; there is no prior announcement
of the systen before benefits start being paid.
          our basic siniulation the utility taste paraneters p and y are
          In

set equal to .02 and 1, respectively. There is no national debt aside fmm
that imulicit in the social security system, the income tax rate Is set
initially at      .30, and   the replacement   rate is irrrnediately   set at its long

run value of .145

          In   the initial steady   state without social security, the capital—
output ratio is 3.11 and the gross interest rate is 8.014 percent. The

introduction of social security ultimately leads to a new steady state

where the capital stock Is lowered by 17 percent, with the gross interest

rate rising to 9.214 percent. Because Of the lower output levels the income

tax rate must rise to 31.14 percent to raise the required revenue. The

solid black line in Figure 2 describes the transition path of the economy's

capital—effective labor ratio. Year 1930 Is the hypothetical year of enact-

ment. The value of 100 inilcates the capital—eff'éctive labor ratio that

would have prevailed with no social security. Suprisingly, the transition

to this final steady state occurs quite rapidly; it     is virtually           complete

only   thirty years after social security is first introduced.
                                         Fure   2
(N
     tJl   1t ..!
             ! 1                1CiIi
                                        HP I T(L    ETOc:K I ii   TFII IT I OH *
                   f.
                   ( •L':        95
     — — — —
                                 9a
                                                                             ese
                                                                         I         Case   Tans1tIon Path
                                                                                                      S
                                                                                           'Jr'p1us p1icy
                                                                                           Def'c!t rc11cy
                                 I'J
                                        19iO 192a 1940            19G0   1980      2000     2020
                        *                                                                          20413
                        A   rep1acen rate Is assed.
                                                                                   25



           As    expected, the introduction of pay—as—you--go social security is
  beneficial to initial, retirees under the new system since they receive
  benefits and are required to pay no payroll taxes. However, ultimate
  crowding out of capital lowers the welfare of individuals, in the long run.
  F'iire 3 depicts the path of welfare changes by birth date of particular
  cohorts the vertical line in the diagr marks the year of birth of the
 cohort born in the year of enactrint. 1900 is taken as the hypothetical
 year of enactment. The nurrers on the vertical axis measure the percentage
 increase (decrease) in each cohort's lifetime resources that would leave
 them with the saiie 1ifetirr level of utility in the absence of social
security as they receive under social security. Thus a cohort born in
1900 at the time of enactjyent suffers a loss in welfare due to social
security that corresponds to a 7 percent reduction in lifetime resources
in a world of no social security.
       All retirees at the time of enactment gain; those retiring just at
the time of the enactrrent gain the most, the equivalent of a percent increase
in lifetirr resources; these retirees receive benefits for their entire retire—
iiient period, but pay no taxes whatsoever. The gain to initial     middle—age
generations is smaller, since they must pay payroll taxes, and continues to
decline for successive younger cohorts because of the gradual crowing out
of capital and reduction in wages. The eventual loss in welfare for genera-
tions in   thenew steady state is quite large—about 9 percent. !breover,
this 1Ios COUC3 on quite rapidly. Even cohorts fifteen years old when social
security is introduced are net losers, and individuals born in the year of
enactment lose close to the full long—run amount.
Ot'61   O5T   6i     oeB O9T                  Ot'Bt




                                                      -
                                                          /- /




               !Jj4Ej fr:Ji .1 ric:_9   H   Liit'1
                                                                                    27


            A   more generous social security system would be expected to airçlify
  the results just described. This is indeed the case. In fact, the basic
  characteristics of the transition are virtually unchanged. Adoption of a
  60 percent replacemant rate, rather than the L45 percent rate used in the
  baseline simulation, leads to eater gains and losses by those generations
  already in these respective categories. The long—run welfare loss is now
  12 percent; those just retiring at the tirr of enactnnt gain about 55           per'—

  cent, and cohorts age 15 at the tirn of enactment again approximately break
 even. The capital stock declines by 22 percent, and the transition is again
 quite rapid.
           Just as a sir1e increase in replacement rates has little qualitative
 effects on the patteni of economic consequences of social security, this is
 also tree of a change in preferences. Simulations carried out for values
 of y      ranging   betoen .5    and   2 indicated that both the speed of con-
 vergence to the new steady state and the ultimate size of capital stock
reduction were comparable to those of the baseline simulation.
       In reality, we are never able to observe the effect of a single
isolated fiscal policy change on the economy. Nany policy shocks may be
at work at once, and this fact not only confounds our understanding of how
any on of these policies affects the economy, but may also influence the
coefficients of a tirre series regeession atterrting to "hold constant" the
effects of all but one policy change, such as social security. This latter
iuoblern   is present   because, as discussed above, such regeessions axe mis—
specified and hence are not invariant to policy.
                                                                                       28



              One   major   goverrrnent fiscal policy lever other than   social    security
    is the    national debt.* Figure 2 shows the      additional   effects   on the

    capital   stock of an active debt policy during the period of transition to
    social security. The light dotted line shows what happens when a national
    debt equal to 10 percent of long run wealth is introduced over a ten year
    period, beginning twenty years into the social security transition,
    through a tenporary cut in inccxne taxes. This leads to a further decline
    in the capital stock equal to about 70 percent of the debt introduced.
An alternative debt policy shown by the darker dashed line assunes an
initial       steady state debt level equal to 20      percent of wealth; in this
simulation       a quarter of this debt is retired      over   a ten year period

ccrimencing twenty years after the introduction of social security.                 Here,
of course, there is an offsetting increase in the capital stock that canes
fran the debt retjrnent.




*
 See   Auei'hach ar1        KotljJ{Off (19d0) for a simulation analysis of debt policy.
                                                                                29



  IV. Time Series Pr'essions Using Simulated Data
         The data generated by the various simulations described in the
  previous section are rrucb t)cleanerU than any aggregate data we could hope
  to collect from actual observation. There is no nasw-ent error, and
  the multitude of other shocks to the system have been assumed
                                                                away. Thus,
  it is not possible to state with confidence that our madelling of the
 effects of social security is or is not realistic. However, these data
 may be used to estimate what the tire series regressions coefficients
 would be for a Feldstein—type consumption function if indeed the 1extended"
 life—cycle model were exactly correct and social security had a major impact
 on national saving. If the coefficients of such a controlled regression
 prove to be highly unstable, this sh3uld cast doubt on the assumed stability
 of tire series coefficients in rrore complicated dynamic econc)-rdes.
        Table 1 presents results of rssions on data obtained fran the
baseline sirrulation in which an unfunded social security system with a
percent replacement rate is enacted at tire zero. The dependent variable
in the estimated equation is per capita consumption. The independent
variables are disposable inccne (YD), disposable income lagged (YD1), real
wealth (W), and soca1 security wealth (Ssw), all measured per capita. The
three regeessions in Table 1 differ only with respect to sample period; the
first regression is based on 70 years of data starting ten years prior to
enactment. Regression 2 covers 60 years of data, but begins with data from
the 1'irut year of emmactnent. The third regression is based on data frcn
the year 10 to year 60. The results for the sple period which begins
10 years prior to enactment do not correspond exactly to previous estimates,
                                                                               30




                                     Table 1

     SoSecirty F rssions                    for D1ffepn Sanr)1e Periods

                                    Base Case                 -




                                                 Interial
epndent Variable                 -10 to +60        0 to +60       +10 to +60
   Constant                        .21.47           -.72              .029
                                 (3.23)           (1o.3)           (3.3)
                                   ..43            -01            -10.026
                                 (9.00)           (11.4.53)       (66.3)
         -1                       -.239             -.132          11.66
                                 (.oo)            (.7i)           (57.16)
     W
                                   .16               .205           -.036
                             (29.71)             (1.47.21)         (8.27)
                                  .261            10.863           —.523
                             (77.3)              (16.7             (.6)



              t —   statistics   in parentheses
                                                                                        31



   but   are of the    appropriate          and order
                                     sign               of   magnitude. The coefficients
   on disposable incciiie and wealth are of the "correct" sign; the wealth
  coefficient is much larger than obtained in standard time series
                                                                      regressions,
  while the social security wealth coefficient is about ten times
                                                                     larger
  than that presented by Feldstejn (19714),
              Shifting the sample pericxl    wreaks havoc with these results. For the
  rnainjg two intervals, the          coefficients   are nonsensical. The social
  security wealth coefficient        for   the nddle    period sgests    that   an addit1on
  dollar of 35W will increase
                                     concurrent consumption by amost eleven dollars.
 Yet this same coefficient becaes
                                            significantly negative with the      next
 shift in sample period.
        One might argue that this is an unfair test because the history of
 U.S. social security is one of a gradual increase in
                                                       benefits, while the
 data underlying Table 1 assume an ininediate shift for a social security
 syst i1th a 40 percent replacnent rate. An additional simulation was
run that involved a -nooth increase in the replacnent rate over 40 years
frau zero to 60 percent. Table 2 provides scrne regression
                                                           coefficients
based    on   this simulated data. The coefficients for the —10          to +140 sample
for'   the non—social security variables are in         closer ca-npliance with the
real world results, but the SSW coefficient is negative and insignificant.
The stability probl€-n is even worse for this simulation as one changes
sample periods. Social Security coefficients            for 0 to   +50 and +10 to +60
rugresslons are large negative numbers and highly significant.
1•




                                                                                 32


                                            Table   2


                       c1Sec1ty Reessons: 0 Ye
                    Gradual   Fiase In To A 60% Replacnent Fate

                                                        Interval        _____
     Indeperient Varab1e         -10 to +14Q            Oto +50     +10 to +60
         Constant                  —9 .609               —23 .001     —33 .896
                                  (30.82)               (—19.67)     (—9.976)
         YD                          .766                   .17          .506
                                  (1.293)               (1.137)     (1.908)
         YD—J.                      -. 089                 - .172      -. 487
                                  (—.185)               (—1.369)    (—2.o7)
        W                            .102                   .909       1.2428
                                 (1.896)                (15.37)     (9.375)

                                   -.00136            .277           -11.2408
                                 (—.077)            (—ii.oi)        (—7.082)




        t —   statistics   in parentheses
                                                                                         33


             Table    3   depicts the results   ci   other experiments.     Here, the
     sarle   period         at —10 to +60, as in the first colur-i of Table 1,
                       is fixed

     arxi differences in debt policy, social security policy and preferences are
     posited to generate simulated data. Feading           fi-un   left to right,   the first
     two cohruns of estimated coefficients correspond to cases where the social
     security policy Ibllows the baseline simulation, but y is set at .5 and
  then to 1.5, rather than 1.          The next two     colmins present    results for the
  simulations described in the previous section of a phase—in and phase—out

 of national debt, age.in with the basic social security policy. The last

 two    colulTns correspond to simulations of a higher             level of the social security

 replacement        rate, .6, enacted either inmediately orin          three stages over a
 twenty    year period.
           The nest       interesting pneral   characteristic      of these results is
 their    stability relative to those in the previous table.              However, there is

 still substantial variation in the coefficients where naive theory would not

 predict     any.    Ebr example, an increase in the level of social security

 from a replacement rate of .145 to one of .6 increases the social security
coefficient by over 30 percent. However, this instability is quite small
relative to the severe instability found above. Indeed, just as the results
for alternative policies cluster about those for the baseline sinulation,

given    the same     sample period, the same is tn for other sairple periods.

Fbi'   exa'iple, the absurd      coefficient   on social security wealth     in   the
middle    saipie    period is   present   regardless of   which simulation is used.
This suggests that, at least in the simulations conpared here,                the adoption
of unfunded social security dczuinates other effects, and it is               the   behavior
of   the econorrrf around the period of enactment which largely determines

the regression results.
                                                                                              3L4




                                            Table
       Social Security Regressions for Different Regizres and Preferences


                            (Sarrple       Period =     —10   to +60)


                                Preferences                    Lbt Policy           Social  Security
pendent VarIable                  =   .5      =   1.5    p phase—out rr =                 .6  rr = .6*

 Constant                        .291         .193        2.642           .063         .337    —.357
                               (14,35)      (2.31)      (10.1414)       (0.146)     (3.31)    (3.50)

    YD                           .150     .592                .1439       .14314      .1425    .613
                               (3.614) (10.52)           (2.62)         (8.88)      (8.914) (13.85)

   YD                           —.223        —.239        —.206         —.091        —.231      .030
       -1
                               (14.1414)    (3.52)       (1.06)         (1.56)     (-3.96)    (0.561)

   W                              .1145       .1149           .121       .107         .1148         .052
                            (35.05) (23.56)              (9.99)       (20.07)      (28.114)   (8.52)

   sSw                         .155    .386     .222                     .230         .379          .303
                            (75.714) (67.91) (19.07)                  (59.72)      (82.15) (69.06)




            t   — statistics   in parentheses



            *
                gradual adoption
                                                                                  35


 SumT-ary and Conclusion

          This'   paper has   raised   a runber of    with respect to actual
                                                     concerns

 and   potential tests of the effects of social security on savings. Much
 of the pir1cal       literature   on social security and savings has proceeded with-
out a precise statenent as to what           npirical results   eould definitively
refute either the life cycle or infinite horizon consumption models.
Many actual npirical tests appear to have very little power in deciding
the issue they address. Time series reession analysis of social
security   is a case in point. The simulation regressions presented here
suggest   that virtually any social security time series coefficient,
negative, zero, or positive is potentially consistent with          the   life cycle
hypothesis.
         .
                                                                                                   36
    4.

    I

/
                                                      References


                  Auerbacb,   A. and L. Kotlikoff, "National Savings, Econcznic Welfare, and
                         Structure of Taxation," Cowles Foundation discussion paper, no. 570,
                      Deciiber,       1980.

              Barro, IL, "Are Goverrrrient Bonds         Net   Wealth?," Journal of Political

                      Econcnv,     Nov./Dec. 1974, 82. 1095—119.

              ir'by,      N.,    Effects of SocIal    Security on   Incane   and the Capital   Stock,

                      American Enterprise Institute, 1979.

              Feldstejn, N., "Social Security, Induced             Retiranent   and Aggregate Capital

                      Accumulation," Journal of Political Econany, Sept./Oct. l974, 82,

                      905—26.

              -                 , "Social Security. Induced Betirenent and Agjregate Capital
                      Accumulation:       A Correction and Update,"    NBER working paper 579,
                     Nov.     1980.

             Hall,    B., "The Importance of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Econny," NBER
                     working paper no. 560, Oct. 1980.
             Kotlikoff, L., "Social Security and Equilibrium Capital Intensity,"
                  arterly Journal of Econics, May 1979, 93, 233—25k.
             _____________         "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle
                     Accumulation,"       American   Econa-nic Review, June 1979, 69, 396_tIlO.
             __________           and   Avia Spivak, "The Family as an Inccznplete Annuities
                     Market," forthccxnin, Journal of          Political Econa-ny, 1981.

             Leirrier,    D. and S. Lesnoy, "Social Security and Private Savings: A
                     Be—examination of the Time Series Evidence using Alternative Social
                     Security Wealth Variables ." paper present at AEA meetings 1980.
                                                                               37



Uicas,R., "Econcinetric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in The Phillips
     Curve and Labor Markets, edited by Karl Bn.mner and Allan H. Meltzer.
     The   Carnegje_jchester Conferences in Public Policy, a suppl.
     series to the Journal of Monetary       Econcvrjcs, vol. 1, Amsterdam:

     North—Hollard, 1976.
Mcdigliani,   F.,   and H. Bn1mberg,   "Utility Analysis and the Consi..ziiption
     Function:      An Interpretation of Cross—Section tata," in Post—

    Keynesian    Econcrnlcs , K.   E. Kuvibava (ed.), New Brunswick, N. J.:
    Rztgers   University Press, 19524.
