NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHANGES IN THE PROVISION OF CORRESPONDENTBANKING SERVICES AND THE ROLE OF THE FEDERAL
RESERVE BANKS UNDER THE DIDMC ACT

Edward J. Kane

Working Paper No. 131

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
August 1981

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #731
August 1981

Changes in the Provision of Correspondent—Banking Services
and the Role of Federal Reserve Banks Under the DIDMC Act

ABSTRACT

This paper focuses on microeconomic incentives set in motion by Federal
Reserve decisions about how to implement the reserve—requirement and pricing—
of—service provisions of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and

Monetary Control Act of 1980 (the DIDMC Act). These incentives promise
to reshape the production and character of correspondent—banking services,
the margin of jurisdictional competition between state banking regulators
and the Federal Reserve System, and ultimately the regional structure of
the Federal Reserve itself.

Edward J. Kane
Economics/Finance
Ohio State University

Columbus, Ohio 43210
(614) 422—8708

CHANGES IN THE PROVISION OF CORRESPONDENT-BANKING SERVICES
AND THE ROLE OF FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS UNDER THE DIDMC ACT

Edward J. Kane*
Ohio State University

Although it is convenient to think of the Federal Reserve System as a
unified agency, it is in fact a decentralized bureau with 50 offices. The Fed's so—

called head office is the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. The System's
partly autonomous regional divisions consist of 12 district Reserve Banks, whiéh
coordinate in turn the work of 25 branches, 11 regional check—processing centers

and a communications center. The Fed's decentralized structure was conceived
originally as the solution to a political problem: quieting populist fears that the

U.S. central bank would come to be dominated either by Wall Street (i.e.,
financial interests) or by Washington, D.C. (i.e., elected federal politicians).

Fear of centralized government has long since been overtaken by concern

for accountability and cost-effectiveness in government activities. With this

shift in national priorities, the political rationale for the Fed's decentralized
structure has become inoperative. Over the last 50 years, just as the federal
government consolidated its authority over the individual states, the Board of
*The author is Everett D. Reese Professor of Banking and Monetary Economics,
The Ohio State University and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic

Research. He wishes to express appreciation to Richard Aspinwall, George
Benston, Robert Eisenbeis, Donald Fraser, Arline Hoel, George Kaufman, Thomas

Mayer, William Melton, Allan Meltzer, and Gene Uselton for comments on
earlier drafts and to John Castner, Julie Gerdnic, James Moser, and Alexander

Shumay for research assistance. This paper was presented in the CarnegieRochester Conference Series on Public Policy and at Oklahoma State University,

the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the 1981 Meetings of the Western
Finance Association. Opinions expressed are those of the author and should not

be construed to be those of the National Bureau of Eeoorrc Research.

2

Governors asserted practical sovereignty over the 12 Reserve Banks. In the
process, the justification for the Fed's regional structure moved quietly from the

political to the economic dimension. In practice, Reserve Banks emerged as
convenient facilities for organizing, producing, and delivering central—banking

payments services. Administratively, this diiision of 1bor had the further

advantage of freeing the Board and its staff to concentrate on the moreglamorous tasks of making macroeconomic and regulatory policy.

This paper points out that Fed decisions about how to implement the
reserve-requirement and pricing-of--service provisions of the DIDMC Act —the

semi-pronounceable acronym for the Depository Institutions Deregulation and
Monetary Control Act of 1980 — now threaten to undermine even the economic

justification for System decentralization. These decisions set in motion incentives that will encourage paper instruments used in regionally based local and
within—district transactions to shift into collection channels outside the aegis of

the Federal Reserve System, while encouraging regionally footloose and inter-

regional transactions into electronic forms. As telecommunications make online bank—to-bank connections increasingly economical, concern for economy in

government will eventually require politicians to consolidate the regional structure of the Federal Reserve System.1"
Changes in Fed Powers and Responsibilities Mandated by the DIDMC Act

This paper concerns itself with Title I of the DIDMC Act. Although this

section of the Act is known as the "Monetary Control Act," we argue that its

provisions have more to do with depository-institution control and Federal
Reserve independence than with monetary control p se. By empowering the
Fed to set reserve requirements for all depository institutions, the Act extends

the sphere of Federal Reserve control to cover more than 35,000 nonmember

p.

.

—.

3

depository institutions. At the same time, it imposes a series of new obligations

on Fed officials. First, it mandates that Fed-produced correspondent-banking
services be made available to any depository institution that wishes to use them.

Second, it requires that Fed officials set explicit prices for these services.
Finally, among its other provisions, this section of the Act specifically directs

the Fed to recover all direct and indirect costs attributable to Federal Reserve
-

float.
While

other titles of the Act set up mechanisms for easing longstanding

government restrictions on the competitive behavior of U.S. depository institutions, on balance this title is restrictive. Although it promises to reduce reserve

requirements for member banks, it sweeps thousands of nonmember deposit
institutions for the first time into the Fed's regulatory net. Henceforth, every
depository institution that offers interest-bearing third—party payment accounts
or nonpersonal time deposits must meet reserve requirements determined by the
Fed.

Congress did not expand the Fed's reserve—requirement powers arbitrarily,

without Fed support and connivance.

In agreeing to extend the System's

jurisdictional reach, Congress answered a long series of Federal Reserve
Chairmen's prayers. The Fed high command had long complained that it lacked
the statutory powers to arrest an uncomfortable secular decline in the number of

member banks and in the percentage of total commercial-bank assets lodged in
these banks. To persuade Congress that the Fed needed to extend its regulatory
dominion, Fed officials repeatedly claimed that, in times of high market interest

rates, deposit institutions and fund-raising techniques outside the Fed's direct
span of control were increasingly able to blunt the anti-inflationary thrust of
traditional forms of monetary restraint.

4

In the modern theory of regulation (Stigler, Posner, Peltzman, Becker,
Kane, 1977 and 1981) the statutory configuration of economic regulation is

determined by incumbent politicians' self—interest, as conditioned by their
perception of the balance of political pressures for wealth redistribution. The
Fedts membership problem and its new authority to place reserve requirements

on nonmember deposit institutions are best viewed as stages in a larger
dialectical process driven by economic and political arbitrage. Before Congress
could seriously consider answering the Federal Reserve's prayers, it had to think

through the political effects of alternative responses. Many different interest
groups had a stake in the solution and would be affected quite differently by

alternative regulatory adjustments. The issues in the distributional conflict
focused on effects of alternative reserve-requirement structures on implicit
federal revenue, on different classes of deposit institutions, on deposit-institution customers, on the regulatory domain of state banking departments, and on

the political clout of the Fed itself. To appreciate the solution adopted in the
DIDMC Act, we must understand the problems from which the Fed sought relief

and the balance the Act strikes between opposing interests on each of the
principal issues of distributional conflict.

To provide analytic perspective on the desirability of pricing the Fed's
correspondent services, we begin by identifying the various components of the

opportunity cost of Fed membership. During the 1960s and 1970s, secularl,

rising interest rates associated with accelerating inflation raised this cost,
intensifying two kinds of competition: (1) between the Fed and state banking

departments for regulatory jurisdiction over state—chartered banks, and (2)
between the Fed and correspondent banks for interbank deposit balances.

While recognizing that the Fed's membership problem has political, mone-

tary-control, and tax dimensions, in the final analysis member-bank departures

5

from the System symptomized a spillover into the market for correspondent—
banking services of competition between the Fed and state-banking departments

for regulatory jurisdiction over state-chartered banks. This paper focuses on

how the compromises embodied in the DIDMC Act promise to reshape the

market for correspondent-banking services, the competition between state
banking regulators and the Fed, and ultimately the regional structure of the Fed

itself.
The Fed's Membership Problem: The Ultimate Determinants of Reserve
Requirements
During the 1960s and 1970s, the steady loss of members posed two kinds of

political and monetary-control problems for Fed officials (Kane, 1980). On the

policy-selection front, the decrease in membership eroded the Fed's political

base, undermining its ability to resist pressure from incumbent politicians
pushing for inflationary policy actions.' On the policy-execution front, fear of
speeding up the ongoing deterioration in Fed membership made System officials

slow both to raise its discount rate or existing reserve requirements and to
extend reserve requirements or deposit-rate ceilings to emerging deposit substitutes (such as offshore funding) developed by member banks to compete for funds

effectively in the face of monetary restraint.
Reserve Requirements As a Tax

Declining membership in the Federal Reserve System traced to the impact

of accelerating inflation (and the increasing nominal rates of interest this
implies) on the costs and benefits of membership to individual banks and on the
intensity of industry competition for correspondent balances and other customer

funds. A definitive analysis of this process is offered by Benston (1978).
Although Federal Reserve pronouncements determinedly emphasize the macro—

6

economic role reserve requirements play as devices for influencing growth paths

of monetary aggregates, microeconomically they function as selective excise
taxes on deposits that may also be interpreted as a form of implicit taxation on
deposit—institution profits. If restrictions on an institution's ability to pursue

profitable opportunities are binding, they take potential income from the
institution and/or its customers by force of law. Revenues from the reserverequirement tax and from the Fed's monopoly on currency issue accrue to the

Fed in the form of the interest it earns by investing reserve balances in
government securities. After meeting its expenses, the Fed turns most of its
remaining income over to the Treasury. In 1979, the so—called Fed "interest
payment to the Treasury" was $9.3 billion.

In implicit as well as in explicit taxation, analysts must distinguish between

effective and statutory tax rates and recognize the role that penalties play in
securing compliance. Fed officials have tight control only over the statutory
structure of differential reserve requirements and may resort only to a limited

set of nonretroactive civil sanctions to enforce them. Because it is relatively
easy to dream up low-requirement (and even nonreservable) deposit substitutes
and because reserve requirements can not be imposed on a new instrument until
after recognition and administrative lags, the costs to member banks of avoiding

reserve requirements are in the long run both low and predictable. Exemption

from reserve requirements was particularly secure in cases (e.g., bankers
acceptances and federal funds) whe're the Federal Reserve had proclaimed its
desire to develop broad markets in the instruments involved (Eisenbeis, 1980).
Through the process of substituting low-requirement liabilities for high-requirement ones, the response of deposit institutions, their customers, and unregulated

competing institutions ultimately determines the effective strueure of reserve
requiremeniS.

4.

7

In a free society, a degree of voluntariness is inherent in every system of

differential taxation. But before the DIDMC Act, member banks' option to
withdraw from the Federal Reserve System added a second dimension to the
voluntariness in the reserve—requirement tax system. Fed officials had to
concern themselves with tracking and controlling the components of what we
may call the "net disincentive to membership."
Components of the Membership Disincentive

Whether an individual bank should alter its membership status depends both

on the balance of continuing costs and benefits that membership offers to it and

on the transition cost of effecting a change in status. For national banks, the
transition cost of becoming a nonmember includes the expense and trouble of

switching to a state charter and the public-relations effects of removing
"national" from the bank's name. No bank should become a member unless the

balance of continuing benefits and costs is positive. Similarly, no bank should
remain a member if the present value of continuing membership costs exceeds
the sum of the transition cost and the present value of its continuing membership

benefits.
Abstracting from transition costs, the net disincentive to membership may
be described as a function of three sets of determinants:
1. Elements that determine the gross burdens of membership.

2. Service offsets to this burden that are offered by the Fed;
3. Opportunity costs of alternative forms of holding reserves.

The gross burdens of membership consist of two opportunity costs: the
cost of holding Federal Reserve stock and the cost of conforming to the Fed's
schedule of reserve requirements. In the short run, both costs vary directly with

market rates of interest. The cost of reserve requirements also varies with the

8

distance between (1) Fed requirements and enforcement practices and (2) the
reserve-requirement structure and penalties enforced by the banking commission

in the bank's home state. Whether governed by Fed or state requirements, a
bank systematically endeavors to lighten its reserve burden by exploiting
opportunities to make advantageous adjustments in the composition of its
liabilities and in the form in which it holds its reserves.

Offsetting the gross burdens of membership is the net value of the
formerly "free" Fed correspondent services used by the bank. This value depends

on the level and mix of the bank's particular service needs. Compared to fees
charged for correspondent services by commercial banks, membership benefits
have traditionally been thought to be of minor value to small banks.! The value

of the Fed's service offset is increased by improvements in the availability of
transit items and reduced by explicit or implicit service charges set by the Fed.
Before the DIDMC Act, the Fed's explicit service charges were zero. Implicit
charges refer to the costs of complying with access-to-service provisions such as

deadlines for depositing collection items and requirements that items be finesorted by destination. It includes the value to the bank of the option to borrow
from the Fed's discount window and of any leverage that membership may confer

with respect to the outcome of Fed regulatory decisions, particularly on holding-

company and merger applications. Managers of large member banks believed
that leaving the System would adversely affect the Board's future willingness to
allow their banks to expand operations under the provisions of the Edge Act and
the Bank Holding Company Act. Also, it is hard for nonmember banks to solicit

much correspondent business from national-bank respondents (because national

banks may place only a small percentage of their deposits in nonmember
correspondent banks) and a few state-chartered banks may have believed that

9

membership helped them to garner favorable actions from the Board under the
Bank Merger Act.

Finally, exogenous movements in the marginal opportunity cost of different

forms of holding reserves affect both the optimal composition of a bank's reserve

balances and its optimal liability structure. Increases in interest rates tend to
raise the gross burden of membership for given reserve composition and liability

structure and, by increasing the volatility of a bank's liabilities, to increase the
level of implicit interest that can be earned on balances due from correspondent

banks. Increases in implicit interest consist either of expansions in the quantity
of services offered in exchange for a given level of deposits or of reductions in
the level of supporting—balance requirements necessary to purchase a given level

of correspondent services.
Why Fed Reserve Requirements Are Not A Redundant Policy Instrument

Fed officials have repeatedly testified about their concern for countering
unfavorable trends in membership. This suggests that the agency's goal function

includes, in addition to traditional indices of the state of the national economy,
some index of membership penetration of the banking industry. Considered as an
opportunity cost, the membership disincentive has a number of components, only

two of which (service benefits and requirement structure) are directly controlled

by the Fed. To counter unfavorable movements in membership penetration
occasioned by increased interest rates, reductions in effective reserve requirements in individual states, or increased offers of implicit interest by correspon-

dent banks, Fed officials must be prepared to adjust its offer of service offsets
and its structure of reserve requirements.

The Fed's interest in stabilizing membership precludes it from treating

reserve requirements as part of its permanent kit of macroeconomic instru-

10

ments. Except in the very short run, Fed reserve requirements are set in
response to competition, i.e., by political and microeconomic forces largely
beyond its control. Whenever the financial environment changes, self-interested
actions by respondent banks, correspondent banks, and state banking commissions

change the statutory structure of reserve requirements and offsets that is
optimal from the Fed's own point of view. In long-run general equilibrium, the
effective level of reserve requirements is market-determined.

Member banks' exit option restricted the Fed's ability to make statutory
reserve requirements stick and put it inescapably into the correspondent-banking

business. Before the DIDMC Act, in regulatory rule-making and in pursuing

stabilization objectives, Fed officials dared not view member banks as a
subservi-ent clientele. Because they had to compete for regulatory jurisdiction

against state banking authorities and the FDIC, Fed officials have had to
consider more closely than central bankers in other countries even the short-run

benefits and costs their actions visit on individual commercial banks. This
concern explains a number of distinctive elements in the framework of U.S.
central-banking policy as schemes for paying implicit interest on bank reserves.
I have in mind such regulatory details as the System's movement to a progressive

structure of reserve requirements (including adjustments in the definition of
what constitutes a "deposit"), its adoption and continued use of a macroeconomi-

cally counterproductive system of lagged reserve accounting, its adherence to a
maximal two—day delay in the availability of uncollected items which forces the

Federal Reserve to make interest-free loans to member banks, its creation of
seasonal borrowing privileges, its discriminatory "surveillance" of individual-bank

use of what in most phases of the interest—rate cycle have been subsidized
opportimities for borrowing at the Fed discount window, and the substantial

11

recent expansion in the quantity and quality of the subsidized services it offers
to member banks.

Notwithstanding textbook claims to the contrary, the Fed's statutory
authority to set reserve requirements cannot, except at brief and infrequent
intervals, be exercised arbitrarily. Decisions about the level and structure of
reserve requirements are shaped by an interplay of economic and political forces
that I call the "regulatory dialectic" (Kane, 1977 and 1981).

The Regulatory Dialectic
Accelerating inflation raises the opportunity-cost burdens imposed by statu

tory banking regulation. When nominal interest rates rise, differential elements
in pre-existing regulation inevitably open up opportunities for arbitrage. Incen-

tives exist for financial institutions of all types to reconsider regulatory
affiliation and to expand the production of nonreservable deposit substitutes.

Whatever set of statutory requirements the Fed sets, deposit institutions,
customers, and unregulated competitors must be expected to rearrange their
accounts to optimize with respect to effective changes in their opportunity set.

Avoidance activity includes actions taken by regulated institutions and their

customers to minimize the effective burden of statutory requirements. The
concept also covers induced invasions of regulated markets by nontraditional
competitors.

The displacement of traditional banking business into new institutions and

new contractual forms determines the structure of effective requirements and is

subject itself to a subsequent round of statutory review and political counteraction.

Regulatory avoidance typically makes some form of re-regulation

politically optimal. Deposit institutions and customers that feel the net burden
on them is too heavy would bring political pressure for statutory relief directly

12

and indirectly on Fed officials. This pressure would take the form of publicrelations and lobbying activity aimed at building a coalition among Fed officials

and incumbent politicians for an alternative regulatory strategy. On the other
hand, political forces favoring a strategy of high effective reserve requirements

would push for extending the reserve-requirement tax to nondeposit bank
liabilities or to previously unregulated institutions. The statutory outcome of
such lobbying activity inevitably kicks off fresh rounds of avoidance and reregulation.
Competition for Bankers Balances

Besides directly raising the opportunity costs of reserves, rising interest

rates stimulate correspondent-bank competition for interbank balances.

In

recent years, to counter the effects of rising interest rates, Fed officials
generally lowered statutory reserve requirements and expanded the supply of
subsidized services for member banks. At the same time, they lobbied Congress

for new powers, particularly for a system of universal reserves. Frustrated by
legislative inaction, in 1978 FRB Chairman Miller went so far as to threaten that

the Fed would on its own authority pay interest on member-bank reserve
balances.
Dimensions of Competition from Private Correspondents

In principle, respondent banks can purchase serviqes from correspondent

banks either by contracting to pay explicit service charges or by holding a
deposit balance large enough to compensate the correspondent implicitly. In
almost every state, reserve—requirement statutes count balances due from other

banks the same as "cash." Some states count cash items in the process of
collection (CIPC) arid even marketable securities as well.

13

Balances due from correspondents have a dual productivity for nonmember

banks. Paying for correspondent services with due—from balances allows a
nonmember bank to earn implicit interest at the market rate on reserve balances

requirçd by its home state. On the supply side of the market, neither the Fed
nor private banks could pay explicit interest on demand balances due to domestic
banks.

They had to compete by offers of implicit interest instead.

In

competitive markets, implicit interest payments would take the form of lowering
fees and/or expanding the range of available correspondent services when and as

the value to the correspondent of the customer bankTs balances increase. The
key point is that competition among correspondents for nonmember banks' duefrom balances must assure that, in equilibrium, reserve balances would be as
productive in risk—adjusted after-tax yield as vault cash or any earning asset.
Supplier competition in the market for correspondent services must make due-

from balances earn, at the margin, the going implicit rate of return. Moreover,
responding to customer demands for transactions services and the structure of

fees for robbery and burglary insurance, nonm ember banks must adjust their
holdings of vault cash until they earn the same implicit yield.
In markets where the Fed and private suppliers compete equally, the supply

price of correspondent services — i.e., implicit or explicit pporting-balance

requirem—shoUld have been the same at the margin for each type of
producer. To recognize that a wider array of services is available from private
correspondents and available as well on more flexible terms,-" competitive
pricing would require that supporting balances set by private suppliers slightly
exceed reserve requirements established by the Fed. Types of deposits on which
Fed reserve requirements exceed supporting requirements at private banks would

be burdened by an implicit tax. On the other hand, deposits on which

14

correspondent supporting requirements greatly exceed Fed requirements would
be receiving a net subsidy.

While the development of a longstanding membership problem guarantees

us that the Fed was imposing a net tax on at least one type of deposit, it is not
at all clear that its reserve requirements were burdensome across the board.
Using the model and data set described in the next section, two colleagues and I

-

estimated that in 1974-1975 Fed reserve requirements were uniformly burdenand Peterson). As this
some only for time and savings accounts (Kane, Castner,

account category loomed larger and larger on bank balance sheets, so did the
size of the membership problem facing the Fed. In accord with our criterion for

Fed reserve requirements to be competitive, correspondent requirements for
due-from balances to support ordinary demand-deposit accounts at different
sizes of banks prove to be slightly in excess of the statutory ratios set by the
Fed. Finally, supporting-balance requirements on balances owed to other banks

and to the U.S. Treasury greatly exceeded Fed reserve requirements. Our
analysis indicates that these accounts were being subsidized.

As a sensitivity test, this quantitative pattern of supporting-balance
requirements at private correspondents was confirmed for a parallel sample of
member banks in unpublished regressions run for me by Federal Reserve Board
personnel. Presumably, when acting as correspondents for other banks, member
banks would channel much of their activity through their Fed accounts. Consistent with this presumption, supporting balances imposed on member-bank due-to
balances (though slightly higher) proved much the same as those imposed on

In turn, estimates of supporting balances on other
demand deposits and on time accounts were comparable to those found for
other demand deposits.

nonmember banks. This supports the notion that the high working-balance

15

requirements observed for volatile depositS at nonmember banks reflects the rich

with the
menu of services that these accounts generate. It is also consistent

view that, for banks located in states where CIPC is not counted as legal
uncollected
reserves, a high percentage of due-from balances may represent
with
funds. Taken together, these hypotheses serve to reconcile our results
subsidies to correspondent banks are shifted

Benston'S finding that Fed service
banks of
forward, so that the burden of membership falls "rather evenly" on
different deposit size (Benston, p. 55).

Econometric Analysis of Implicit Pricing in the Market for Correspondent
Services

Model of Working-Balance Requirements.

Our analysis defines the ith

the
nonmeniber bank's holdings of vault cash and due-from balances, R, as
working-balance equivalent of reserve balances recognized by the Fed (cf.
of the
Gambs). We hypothesize that nonmember banks vary their holdings
the
reserve-eligible assets defined in their state's banking law to minimize
potential net burden of state reserve requirements. Our analysis focuses on
transactions
respondent banks' individual response to exogenous demands for
serservices from depositors and exogenous prices for wholesale transactions
market. We assume that the volume of

vices set in the correspondentbaflkig

with the
correspondent services that a nonmember bank demands varies inversely
and directly with market interest rates and its
price of correspondent services
Since neither customer service demand
customers' aggregate deposit activity.
directly observable, we resort to proxy variables.
nor correspondent prices are
of correspondent and currency services

We assume that the volume
of customer
purchased for deposit customers depends on the level and mix
categories
deposit balances. To simplify the analysis, we distinguish just three
of deposits:

16

1. "volatile" deposits, Dv, defined as the sum of interbank and Treasury
accounts;

2. other demand deposits, D0;
3. time and savings accounts, DT.
Making use of Hicks' composite-good theorem, our choice of proxy for the price
of corresponient and currency services can be justified by imposing the following
identifying assumptions on wholesale and retail payments technology:

1. every class of accountholder is offered a specific mix of account
services;

2. the volume of correspondent and vault—cash services offered to account
holders is proportionate to the amount of deposits in each class.

Our analysis conceives of working-balance requirements on each type of
deposit — by, b0, bT —

as

a set of implicit prices appropriate for the mix of

services demanded. These prices are determined exogenously by payments
technology and by competition in the market for correspondent-banking services.

In our model, a nonmember bank adjusts its working balances, R, both to

comply with state reserve requirements and to deliver a target level of transactions services to accountholders of each type. The bank's goal is assumed to
be to maintain an exogenously targeted time path for deposits, given supporting-

balance and currency requirements, and subject to exogenous changes in its

reserve position and in the level of interest rates. Because of differences in

state reserve requirements and variation in opportunity costs, the level of
transactions services offered could vary systematically across banks and across

time.
Respondent banks supply working balances, customers and correspondent
banks demand them. Customers demand them indirectly by valuing the services

17

performed by these balances and correspondent banks directly demand due-to

balances as an implicit price for performing correspondent services. We
explained previously that correspondent-bank competition for nonmember-bank

reserye balances makes them as productive at the margin as any other bank
asset. To convert this intuitive argument into a partial-equilibrium model of
respondent-bank portfolio equilibrium, we assume that Rshifts exogenously with

a bank's current funding needs. We present the following conditional model of
S
.
.
the!.th
bank's instantaneous
supply of working balances, R:

Rmax(Zs..D..,R)IRS),
J1J1 1

(1)

1

1

where s represents effective liquid-reserve requirements in the bank's home
state on the 1th class of deposits at the th bank and R1 fR represents customer

and correspondent demand for working balances when R is made exogenously

available by bank i. As we have explained, working balances required by the
bank's home state can only momentarily exceed working-balance demand. This is

because the marginal return earned on the differential amount of working
balances would be zero. Any level of working balances that takes its place as
part of a respondent bank's equilibrium portfolio must lie simultaneously on the

demand function for the bank's working balances, R

If a random portfolio disturbance were suddenly to lift

above the

conditional demand for it, the bank would act immediately to raise its marginal

return on working balances to the anticipated risk-adjusted, after-tax rate of
return on other assets. To accomplish this, bank i would undertake two types of
balance-sheet adjustments:

1. It would adjust its mix of liabilities (shifting its funding from hihs
into low-s1 categories) and it would lower the effective s by expanding its holdings of reserve-eligible earning-asset substitutes for working
balances;

18

2.

It would transfer working balances from vault cash to due-from
balances. Because of due-from balances' value to correspondent banks,
competition among these banks forces due-from balances to earn the

market yield.

jR. Econometrically,
this condition serves as an identifying restriction. If we assume that financial

Full portfolio equilibrium is possible only when R1 =

R1

transactions costs are negligible for banks, the working-balance demand curve
can be estimated by ordinary least squares.

Our most parsimonious model of working-balance demand neglects inter-

est-rate effects. It expresses R as a linear reduced form in the exogenous
variables Dv, D0, and DT:
= a+

bvDv. + b0D0. + bTD + Ui.

(2)

This model may be given an accounting interpretation. Within the sample of

data from which its parameters are estimated, the slope estimates tell us the
average level of supporting currency and due-from balances on each class of

deposits. The intercept a represents the average amount of working balances
explained by omitted variables, i.e., by nondeposit sources of bank demands for

correspondent and currency services. R is defined as the sum of the bank's

balances due from other banks, RD, and vault cash, Rc; u represents a
stochastic error term.
Richer models of the working-balance demand equation allow correspon-

dent banks to vary working-balance requirements inversely with two other
variables which are also assumed to be exogenous: (i) the individual bank's flow

of funds in the process of collection (which serves as an additional source of
liquid funds to suppliers of correspondent services), CIPC1, and (ii) the opportun-

ity cost of interbank balances as represented by the federal-funds rate, FFR.
The expanded model is:

19

+ cFFR +
+
+
R. = a +
dCIPC
bvDv. b0D0. bTDTi

+

Ui.

(3)

In models where either c or d are nonzero, the supporting—balance require-

ments (the b's) themselves may be interpreted as functions of FFR or CIPC.
Unlike possible simultaneity among Dv, D0, DT and R (which would play havoc

with identifiability), this issue can be examined by looking at ordinary-leastsquares estimates of (3). Because estimates of equation (2) and (3) are subject to

substantially richer types of simu1taneous-equaton and omitted-variable bias, it

is pleasant to report that the only noteworthy effect of relaxing restrictions on c
and d is to lower somewhat the estimate of by.
Interpreting the Slope Coefficients of (3).

1. The slope coefficients b, b0, and bT represent the estimated values of
the working-balance requirements imposed against the respective de-

posits. On the basis of the volatility of the underlying accounts and
supposing marginal—cost pricing by correspondent banks, we expect each

b to be positive, with b > b0
2.

>

bT

>

The sign of the interest-rate coefficient c is ambiguous. On the one
hand, it should reflect reductions in correspondent-bank requirements

associated with increases in the opportunity cost of reserves. On this
interpretation, c should be negative. On the other hand, as an indirect
effect, high interest rates should also make customer deposits turn over

faster, which would increase the amount of currency and clearing
services to be performed for a respondent bank with a given deposit

structure.
3. Many correspondents give depositing banks immediate credit for uncollected items (Knight, Melton). This practice would bias the b estimates upward (especially b) as compared to Fed requirements. Includ-

20

ing CIPC in our regressions may be interprete.d as overcorrecting for

this bias, letting d estimate the percentage of uncollected items
customarily included in R. According to Gibert (1978), CIPC counts as

part of a bank's primary reserves in 16 states. If R and CIPC were
perfect substitutes in meeting balance requirements, d would equal
minus unity.

This treatment constitutes an overcorrection because, where corre-

spondents do not grant immediate credit, respondents' uncollected
items generate funds for correspondents in advance of the time that
they credit them to the depositing bank. Hence, suppliers of correspon-

dent services should be willing to tie supporting—balance relief to a
bank's CIPC volume. Giving a bank credit for its CIPC is a way that
private correspondents can price their services advantageously vis-a-vis
the Fed. This analysis leads to the restriction, —1 < d

<

0.

The Data Set. As part of a joint Federal Reserve-FDIC study of the
possibility of improving monetary statistics, the FDIC collected daily data on
individual-bank reserve and deposit holdings between June 20, 1974 and May 7,

1975 for a sample of 181 large nonmember banks and between August 22, 1974
and May 7, 1975 for a supplementary sample of 396 small nonmember banks. The

sampling frame defined a large bank as one that at yearend 1973 had total
deposits of at least $100 million. The form that reporting banks employed is
reproduced as Figure 1. The variables we have previously defined aiign with
these reporting categories as follows:
R = sum of RD as entered in column (5) and Rc in column (8).

Dv = sum of entries in columns (1) and (2).

D0 = entry in column (3).

/

TOTALS

—

—

Schedule F (item
1

and part of item 4)

Schedule E (item 4)
Schedule E (items 2, 5, 6, and 9)
Schedule D (item 1)
Schedule 0 (item 2)

Schedule E (items 1, 7, and 8)

CORRESPONDING ITEMS ON REPORT OF CONDITION

--

—

mrlf,ong

(8)

I

—

(Ou

CURRENCY
AND COIN

TELEPHONE NO. (Include Ares Code
and a*t'ision

ADDITIONALDEFINITION

.

-_- —

OTHER TIME DEPOSITS
SAVINGS
DENOMINATIONS, L)ENOMINATIONS
DEPOSITS
LESS THAN
$100,000
AND OvER
(6)
Slc.ooo
—
hAl
million: thou, million:
millions thou.

P

weo'nesciav,

COt.djt)

Includes Christmassavings, vacation club and similar accounts that are.covered in Schedule F, item 4

Includes balances in Treasury tax and Loan Account and Series E Bond Account

DEFINITIONS

TITLE

—

—

DEMAND
BALANCE DUE
FROM BANKS
(5)
million: thou.

FOR THE ABOVE DATES.

-

—

CASH ITEMS
IN PROCESS OF
COLLECTION
(4)
thou,
millions

•

REPORT FOR PERIOD ENDING

'I!

Excludes Christmassavings, vacation club and similar account, that are covered in Schedule F,
Other Time Deposits'
Schedule F (items 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 101
item 4 and that are reported in Column 6. Include both single and multiple maturityaccounts and
7a. Denominations Less than $100,000
Include both negotiable and nonnegotiable instruments issued to any holder.
of
(excluding part item 4)
- instruments.
and
Over
7b. Denominations $100,000
Schedule 0 (item 5)
.Currency and Coin
loans (Schedule F, item 2) are notcovered by this report.
of
for
personal
payment
'Deposits accumulated
• not open, repeat balances for the mostrecent open day.
the Division of Research: (202) 389-4331.
Any questions regarding this report should be directed to
the dose of each reporting period.
IMPORTANT: This report is to be submitted on the first business day following
roic l'.'?n'42 18 74)

6. Savings Deposits

1. Demand Deposits Due to Banks
2. U.S. Gov't Demand Deposits
3. Other Demand Deposits
4. Cash Items in Process of Collection
5. Demand Balances Due from Banks

REPORT COLUMN

AUTHORIZED SIGNATURE

1

DAILY CLOSING BALANCES (IN NEARESTTHOUSANDS)

I CERTIFY THAT THE REPORTED CLOSING BALANCES ARE CORRECT

Wednesday

Tuesday

Monday

Sunday"

Saturday''

Friday

Thursday

Oay

DATE
(Month and

VAULT CASH

DEMAND DEPOSITS
OTHER DEMAND
U.S GOVT
DUE TO BANKS
DEMAND
DEPOSITS
(3)
DEPITS
ml!lions thou,
thou.
millions
thou.
millions

REPORT OF DEPOSITS AND

FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATIN
550 17th Street. NW. Room 3004•C
Washington,0. C. 20429

FIGURE
NAME OF BANK ANO LOCATION (City and Scare)

22

DT = sum of entries in columns (6), (7A), and (7B).

CIPC = entry in column (4).

Since the FDIC survey developed over 150,000 readings on 9 variables (46
weeks x 7 days x an average of roughly 500 banks), checking the accuracy of the
misreported data was
data was a difficult task. Our primary safeguard against

to delete every observation that showed a negative entry in any column. Also,
besides using CIPC as a regressor in some runs, our study used CIPC values as a

screen for editing out defective reports and as a way to eliminate a particular
class of reporting errors. Sample banks that reported zero figures in this column
are presumed to be mistakenly including "cash items" in collected balances due
from other banks (see Knight).

It took almost three years and three research assistants to compile a
satisfactorily edited tape of survey responses. Disaggregating our sample — over
time and across banks that differ in size or are located in states with different
reserve-requirement frameworks — uncovered additional evidence of measurement error and nonresponse. The number of banks responding to the FDIC survey
varied from week to week and declined on average during the life of the survey.
The FDIC never established a mechanism for policing responses. Less than half

of the large nonmember banks in the sample (74 out of 181) filed an accurate
report every week, although 69 of the other laige banks missed no more than a
few weeks. However, only 255 of the 396 small banks reported with reasonable

regularity and accuraqy. Rather than introduce extraneous gaps or extrapolations, we decided to ignore irregular and inaccurate respondents. Also, because
Saturday and Sunday observations were not reported consistently, it seemed w e

to restrict ourselves to Monday-through-Friday data.
Two problems developed in disaggregating the data over time. First, four
weeks of data for January 1975 unaccountably failed to be pched and read ont"

23

the project tape. Second, splicing small banks into the sample in August 1974

presented awkward problems, which we handle by explicitly testing for a
common structure between small and large banks in the subset of weeks in which

both groups were surveyed. Since banks' demands for correspondent services are

apt to differ qualitatively with bank size and unspecified omitted variables, it is
reasonable to expect to find differences in structure across various subsamples.

Finally, disaggregating the data across groups of states with similar
reserve requirements for demand deposits uncovered a few anomalous estimates

and missing observations that further helped us to sharpen our screening
procedures.

Overall Results. Table 1 presents estimates of model (3) for two different
subsamples: the "minimum-frequency subsamples" of banks that filed accurate
reports in the vast majority of weeks in which their size group was sampled:

1. 143 large banks that filed in at least 39 of the 42 weeks.
2. 255 small banks that filed in at least 28 of the 33 weeks.

The principal qualitative result is that, in these and nearly every run we
performed, by > b0 > bT > 0. Just as we anticipated, suppliers of correspondent services imposed higher balance requirements against a bank's more-volatile
deposits. This is why differences in deposit volatility belong at the center of the

debate over the equity of differential reserve requirements. Even after the Fed

institutes explicit pricing, Fed reserve requirements will be a tax only to the
extent that they force a bank to hold "idle" reserves tliat it would otherwise have

invested at interest. With implicit pricing, universal reserve requirements on

demand deposits would not have imposed a uniform "burden" on all banks.

Because of the structure of correspondent service fees, universal reserve
requirements would have caused less inconvenience to banks whose deposits were

24

TABLE 1

ESTIMATED PARAMETERS FOR MODEL (2) OF SUPPORTING-BALANCE
REQUIREMENTS AT NONMEMBER BANKS,
USING FDIC SURVEY DATA

143 Minimum

Variable Name and Symbol

Frequency
Large Banks

255 MinimumFrequency
Small Banks

Volatile Demand Deposits, D

.36

.46

Other Demand Deposits, D0

.17

.19

Time and Savings Deposits, DT

.003

.001

Federal Funds Rate, FFR

-41.4

-25.7

Cash Items in Process of Collection, CIPC

-.40

-.56

Intercept (in thousands of dollars)

1.67

. 29

.79

.67

R2

Note: All Coefficients are significantly different from zero at 5 percent.

25

volatile than to those whose deposits rested quietly on their books.

This

asymmetry explains why sample-period reserve requirements (listed in Table 2)
bothered some banks more than others.

It is no accident that traditionally nonmember banks were disproportion-

ately smaller and held disproportionately fewer correspondent and Treasury
balances than member banks. Because small banks' deposits are typically less

volatile, they derived fewer direct benefits from Fed services. Even with
graduated requirements, net costs of membership tended to be higher for such
banks. Arguing from revealed preference, it would have cost nonmember banks
more on average to comply with the Fed's schedule of reserve requirements than
such compliance actually cost the average member bank.

Tests of Alternative Model Specifications. Deleting CIPC from the model

forces d in equation (3) to equal zero. Table 3 reports estimates of the CIPCdeleted model for four subsamples: the two minimum-frequency subsamples and

the "consistent subsamples" of 74 large banks and 166 small banks that filed an

accurate report in every week that their size group was surveyed. We still
include FFR, although we can report that its inclusion or deletion affects the
estimated intercept and b, but not estimated balance requirements for D0 and
DT. CIPC provides a direct measure of the amount of clearing services a barlkts

depositors put through the bank's correspondent system. Recognizing that CIPC
may be simultaneously determined with D (i.e., that CIPC is likely to be highest
for banks with high levels of volatile deposits) helps to explain why the principal

effect of deleting CIPC is to lower by.

A second class of specification experiments focused on differences in
estimated coefficients between the various subsamples of large and small banks.

With reference to the Table 3 results, formal covariance tests establish that,

7—1/2
7—1/2

1975—Feb. 13

In effect May 31, 1975
12

13

13

...

13—1/2

13

16—1/2

100—400

16—1/2

16—1/2

17—1/2

18

...

17—1/2

400

Over

Source: Federal Reserve Bulletin, 61 (June 1975), p. A7.

Time deposits

6

...

6

5

7
3

10

10

22
14

Minimum Maximum

3

...

...
3

...

...

3

...

3

3

cr

On Time Deposits
Other Time
Over 5, maturing in
.0-5
30—179
180 days
and over
days

...

...

3

...

Savings

Net demand deposits, reserve city banks...
Net demand deposits, other banks

Legal limits:

10

12

...

...

...

1974——Dec. 12
10

12—1/2

10—1/2

...

1973—July 19

12

...

...

10

10—100

...

2—10

8

0—2

1972—Nov. 9
Nov. 16

Effective
Date

On Net Demand Deposits

(Deposit intervals are in millions of dollars.
Requirements are in percent of deposits.)

RESERVE REQUIREMENTS ON DEPOSITS OF MEMBER BANKS, NOVEMBER 1972 THROUGH MAY 1975

TABLE 2

D0

D

.75

2.33

—56.9

_.001*

.16

.24

*Not significantly different from zero at 5 percent.

R2

Intercept (in thousands of dollars)

Time and Savings Deposits,
DT
Federal Funds Rate, FFR

Other Demand Deposits,

Volatile Demand Deposits,

Frequency
Banks

.86

.84

—67.8

.006

.16

.31

Banks

74

Consistent

143 Minimum

Large-Bank Subsamples

.66

.35

—27.4

.001

.18,

.42

*

.86

.24

—26.9

—o

.19

.52

N)

Consistent

Frequency
Banks

Banks

162

255 Minimum-

Small-Bank_Subsamples

ESTIMATES OF CIPC-DELETED MODEL OF
SUPPORTING-BALANCEREQUIREMENTS
AT SELECTED NONMEMBER BANKS,
USING FDIC SURVEY DATA

TABLE 3

28

while the FFR coefficients do not, the b estimates differ significantly between
the following pairs of subsamples:

1. Consistent small banks versus consistent large banks over the last 33
survey weeks.
2. Minimum-frequency small banks versus minimum-frequency large banks

over the same 33 survey weeks.
3. Consistent small banks versus other minimum-frequency small banks.
4. Consistent large banks versus other minimum—frequency large banks.

The differences between parallel samples for large and small banks suggest that

private suppliers of correspondent services perform a greater range of services
for small banks. In addition, 30 sample banks averaged more deposit balance due
to other banks than due from them. These nonmember banks may be labeled "net

sellers of correspondent services.'1 Substantial differences between the consis-

tent and other minimum-frequency subsamples are observed only for b.
Although this difference might reflect measurement error or nonresponse bias, it

probably indicates that other variables could usefully be included in the
specification.

To investigate this, two other classes of specification experiments were
run. One set looked at day-of--the-week and week-by-week seasonal variation in

estimated coefficients.

While the intercepts bounced around a good deal

(presumably capturing seasonal influences), the b coefficients generally fluctu-

ated within the plausible range of values. A final set of experiments grouped

sample banks into subsamples that operated under similar structures of state

reserve requirements. The evidence failed to establish a systematic relation
between any model coefficients and the severity of statutory reserve requirements.

29

Unbundling Fed Service Charges

Fed-produced correspondent services may be viewed as banking chores
performed for banks and other deposit institutions. In performing these chores,
the Fed finds itself running both a transportation and a communications network.

Interregional clearing of paper instruments and coins puts the Fed into the

courier business and turns the Fed's banks and branches into a nationwide
network of clearinghouses. As electronic substitutes for paper instruments
developed, the Fed was led first into high-speed wire communications and then

into batch processing of magnetic tapes of payments instructions that travel
between so-called automated clearinghouses (ACHs).

In the past, competitive pressures led the Fed to subsidize inferior forms of

funds transfer. The DIDMC Act requires the Fed to set explicit cost—based fees

for a series of services that, by and large, it used to perform for members gratis:

"(1) currency and coin services; (2) check clearing and collection services; (3)

wire transfer services; (4) automated clearinghouse services; (5) settlement
services; (6) securities safekeeping services; (7) Federal Reserve float; and (8)

any new services which the Federal Reserve System offers, including but not
limited to payment services to effectuate the electronic transfer of funds."

So far (specifically, since January 29, 1981), the Fed is charging only for
wire-transfer and net—settlement services. Check-collection and ACH pricing is

currently scheduled to begin on August 1. The proposed fees are reported in
Table4. Target dates for imposing fees on securities and safekeeping services
are set for October, with fees for currency services to follow in January, 1982.

How to reduce or to price float is still up in the air. Float exists because
the Fed has adopted availability schedules that exceed Reserve Banks' collection

capabilities. Float consists of credit the Fed has given to senders of collection

30

TABLE 4

-

FEE SCHEDULE FOR FEDERAL RESERVE COMMERCIAL CHECK SERVICES

in cents per item, effective Aug. 1, 1981
TYPES OF CASH LETTER DEPOSITS (1)

Accepted only from
Institutions located within
the U.S. office territory

Accepted from institutions located in any F.R.
office territory (2)

Other
Fed

Non-

Package
Sort

Group

City

Country
or RCPC

Sort

MachinablE

1.65

5.54

Federal Reserve Office

Mixed.

Boston (as well as Lewiston
and Windsor Locks)

1.81-

4.29

1.60

1.81

0.42

New York

2.87

5.30

2.74

2.87

0.47

Buffalo, Cramford, and
Utica

1.66

3.99

1.51

1.66

0.79

1.46

6.08

Philadelphia

2.30

4.64

1.79

2.30

0.87

1.98

5.33

Cleveland (as well as
Cincinnati, Pittsburgh,
and Columbus)

1.92

4.16

1.48

1.92

0.82

5.12

1.85
1.97
1.50
1.52
1.75

4.03
4.37
4.01
4.10

1.39
1.67
1.29
1.37
1.40

1.85
1.97
1.50
1.52
1.75

0.67
0.63
0.49
0.44
0.52

5.54
5.86
5.24
4.68
5.30

and Miami

1.86

4.15

1.46

1.86

0.98

o.13

Chicago
Des Moines
Indianapolis
Milwaukee

2.94
1.57
1.99
1.50
1.82

5.02
3.93
4.17
3.79
4.06

2.36
1.46
1.65
1.24
1.41

2.94
1.57
1.99
1.50
1.82

0.94
0.56
0.73
0.48
0.61

6.29
3.97
5.88
3.23
3.59

St. Louis (as well as
Little Rock, Louisville,
and Memphis)

2.51

4.54

2.06

2.51

0.78

5.09

Minneapolis (and Helena)

2.22

4.68

1.80

2.22

0.62

2.10

5.60

Kansas City
Denver
Oklahoma City
Omaha

2.80
1.63
1.90
1.76

4.67
3.97
4.11
4.06

2.12
1.24
1.52
1.27

2.80
1.63

0.45
0.72
0.67
0.46

0.89

7.55
7.98
6.94
6.26

Richmond
Baltimore

Charlotte
Columbia
Charleston

Atlanta (as well as
Birmingham, Jacksonville,
Nashville, New Orleans,

Detroit

3.96

1.90
1.76

9.04

31

TABLE 4 (CONTINUED)

Dallas (as well as Houston,
San Antonio, and El Paso)

2.22

4.64

1.74

2.22

0.80

San Francisco (as well as
Los Angeles, Portland, Salt
Lake City, and Seattle)

1.71

4.12

1.54

1.71

0.58

0.64

0.64

0.64

Consolidated shipment surcharge for
transportation from local F.R. office to
collecting F.R. office (3)

1.64

7.19

7.99

0.64

0.64

(1) Depository institutions should consult with their local Federal Reserve office about the availability
of check services at any F.R. office, since all services are not available at all offices.

(2) Accepted by a F.R. office for presentment to depository institutions located within that F.R. office

territory.
(3) A collecting F.R. office is responsible for presentment of cash letters to the paying institutions in its

territory.
Source: The American Banker, March 26, 1981.

32

items that

it has not yet been able to collect from the banks on which the items

are written. In 1980, float averaged $4.2 billion per day.

Rising interest rates increase the value to check writers of delays in
collection. With the Fed absorbing the interest costs of difficult collection
routings, banks have an incentive when interest rates are high to arrange for
their customers to make disbursements from remote locations. To reduce this
incentive, on April 23, 1981, the Board of Governors authorized improvements in
-

its handling of checks that will place some of the onus from float costs on the

writers of checks.

Float can be reduced either by speeding up collection or by delaying
availability. For a given set of fees, faster collection (which could be achieved,
e.g., by changing check writers' incentives or instituting electronic collection of

all but the smallest checks) would improve the quality of Fed correspondent
services, but would presumably also raise Fed costs. Under the DIDMC Act, this

would force the Fed eventually to raise its fees. Cutting back the availability of

uncollected items to match Fed collection capabilities could be achieved
straightforwardly by making only fractional amounts of uncollected items
available to sending banks. While this would reduce incentives for remote
disbursement, it would lower the quality of Fed correspondent service and make
it harder to compete with private correspondents.
In lobbying activity preceding the DIDMC Act, substantial lip service was

paid to substituting explicit Fed income from service charges for the implicit
Treasury revenue to be lost by lowering reserve requirements for member banks.

But in pushing Congress to require the Fed to price its services explicitly,
correspondent bankers had high hopes of shaking loose profitable new business

for themselves. Confident that profit-oriented institutions could outcompete a

33

bureaucratic agency, they expected to take away respondent-bank business from

the Fed and to supply profitable instrument—collection, data-processing, and
interbank communications services that thrift institutions would need to administer their customers' newly authorized NOW accounts.

Although the DIDMC Act focuses on Fed pricing, the Fed's long-run
problem will be to compete. in quality (i.e., in speed and reliability of service).
Private correspondent networks see themselves as playing United Parcel Service

to the Fed's U.S. Postal System. Like the federal postal system, the Fed is the

nation's "clearer of last resort." Also like the Post Office, Federal Reserve
Banks may (as Humphreys' analysis of 1974-76 data indicates) be operating on the

upward-sloping portion of their average—cost curves. Federal Reserve Banks

must underwrite services that are unremunerative if these are necessary to
secure the external economies of a comprehensive national payment system. It
must make sure that collectable items (no matter how intricate) can be collected

and that deposit institutions in all communities (no matter how remote) retain

timely connections to the national clearing system. It is hard to retain an
adequate capacity to handle exceptional tasks (such as instrument returns and

other reconciliation items) and isolated locations while at the same time
maintaining a streamlined system for basic clearing services. In the face of
private—sector competition, the Fed will be hard-pressed to maintain anything
like its current 40-percent share of the correspondent-banking business.

But this does not mean that existing correspondent banks are on their way

to a turkey shoot. For four reasons, traditional suppliers will find the going
tough, too. The analysis presented in the last section indicates that imposing
cost-based explicit fees on the (previously underpriced) services the Fed per-

forms for banks that sell correspondent services will sharply raise these

34

institutions' own supply prices. Second, nontraditional competitors are responding to the market opportunity. Respondent-bank fears of monopolistic pricing by
correspondent banks arid of their potential for penetrating local banking markets

is leading small banks to set up local clearing arrangements and cooperative
regional service organizations. By January, 1981, 19 cooperative EFT systems
were operational on a regional basis. Wholesale institutions designed specifically
for local independent banks are already operating in Minnesota, Colorado, and
Nebraska, and are scheduled to open late in 1981 in Wisconsin and Ohio.
Nonbank communications and data-processing firms and regional Federal Home
Loan Banks are hotly pursuing opportunities for processing, clearing, and settling

thrift-institution customers' third—party payments. Such multiform competition

should keep correspondent-bank profit margins at normal competitive levels.
Third, if Fed efforts to reduce float succeed, they will substantially reduce the
amount of cash items in process. As we have seen, about 50 percent of what are

currently called due-to balances could almost equally well be classified as cash

items in the process of collection.-" Hence, the aggregate amount of due-tobanks balances around should fall. Fourth, the fee schedules and state—of-the-art

improvements in facilities that the Fed has proposed suggest a strategy of
concentrating in the long run on the electronic-services market. Although Fed
officials seem prepared to surrender a great deal of nonelectronic business, the
System is able to draw on its seignorage profits to subsidize its correspondentbanking activity. This allows it to fight in ways that private competitors cannot

afford to match for a dominant place in the evolving national system of
electronic payment.
Currently the ACH system is owned by 38 regional ACE associat1ons, 37 of

which (all but the New York City ACE) are subsidized by the Fed (Mitchell).

35

Today, ACHs move only about one percent of interregional clearings. ACH

transactions consist principally of direct deposits of social-security checks,
institutional payrolls, corporate dividends, and annuity and pension payments.
The 38 ACHs are linked by means of a Federal Reserve Communications Service

known as the FedWire. In January, 1981, the Fed contracted to upgrade the
technology of this system to expand its capacity and improve its reliability by
incorporating a packet-sw itching approach

Three important competitive transfer systems are owned and operated by

private parties:'
1. BankWire: This system is owned cooperatively by 190 commercial
banks;

2. CHIPS (Clearing House Interbank Payment System): This system, which

is owned by the New York Clearing House Association, clears respondent transactions through NYCHA members' reserve accounts;
3. SWIFT (Society of Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunications):

This network, which includes foreign as well as U.S. banks, is oriented
toward international payments.

Delays in clearing and in returning exception items through the Fed have
boosted use of these private networks and is encouraging the development of

direct-send connections between leading correspondent banks in different regions. As perhaps the most vocal spokesman for correspondent-bank interests,
White has repeatedly called attention to these operating problems and wondered
whether Fed pricing policies are predatory.
Understanding The Fed's Pricing Strategy

That Federal Reserve banks would try to maintain their service base (if
need be, even at the expense of payments-system efficiency) is fully predictable

36

from the theory of bureaucracy (Niskanen). In each district, Federal Reserve

Bank employees have a definite stake in maintaining the volume of services
performed at district installations.
Along with stretching out the schedule for implementing explicit charges,

the Fed's strategy appears to have three elements. First and most importantly,
the Fed has posted low "incentive prices" on its electronic-funds transfer (EFT)
services: averaging a little more than a penny an item. This was done ostensibly

to promote EFT development but in full awareness that, as long as the Fed can

match the quality of privately produced services, these prices simultaneously

secure a paramount place in the electronic clearing ACH systems. Equally
aggressive is the Fed's proposal to allow floating-rate "earnings credits" on
clearings balances held at Reserve Banks by institutions that anticipate near-

zero levels of required reserves.

Just because these credits are openly

announced, doesn't prevent them from being implicit prices. They make deposit

balances at the Fed redeemable against Fed fees for service. Finally, by having
certain regulatory actions rendered at the Reserve Bank level and by deciding to

let its prices for most services vary regionally, the Fed has opened a number of

options by which to counteract poor service performance at particular regional
banks (e.g., as rumored in Dallas, San Francisco, and Atlanta) and correspondentbank cherrypicking as it develops.

At the same time, with surveys showing the quality of Fed check-collection

services to have been deteriorating for some time, it may be in the Fed's short—

run interest to shift some of its check-processing workload onto the private

sector. Throughout the middle and late 1970s, the Federal Reserve Board

pressured District Banks to cut their operational staffs. The DIDMC Act
threatens to overwhelm these already-taut staffs with the bureaucratic effort of

37

plugging new institutions into their reporting and services system. It is not

feasible for the Fed's staff to monitor and turn aside more than the most
important incursions into the System's payments-system domain by correspondent—bank arbitrage against its service—charge schedule. Even with its nonelec—

tronic correspondent-service workload reduced, System employees may have to

work harder on average than they have in decades. This could create severe
problems of labor relations at Reserve banks and branches.

Fed defense of itspayments-system turf may or may not be in the public
interest. The issue turns on the degree to which the net-settlement phase of the

nation's payment system may be regarded as a public good, at least some of
whose benefits accrue nonexclusively to every member of society. Even though

the Fed is bound to be technically less efficient than profit-making firms in
producing safekeeping and ite rn-collection services, processing information, and

transmitting communications, these services are produced jointly with services

that vitally affect public confidence in the integrity of the U.S. payments
system. At such tasks as insuring against multimillion—dollar fraud, theft, or
sell—interested nonperformance in EFT transactions and assuring nondiscrimin-

atory access to clearing services, the Fed has a distinct comparative advantage.
These guarantees lessen the need for private individuals to expend resources to

collect, verify, or make secure information about the current financial standing

of intermediate parties in a financial transaction. The Fed's vast resources and
its responsibility for preventing sudden fluctuations in base money mean that it
has nearly unlimited funds with which to back up these guarantees. This absolute

credibility establishes a qualitative difference between the quality of Fed
communications and settlement services and comparable services produced in

the private sector.

38

While it is reasonable to expect society to value this difference, two issues

remain before public production and the current Fed pricing strategy may be
deemed socially optimal. First, relative to guarantees provided by large private

correspondents, does the public value perfect guarantees sufficiently to cover

the actuarial costs of these guarantees to the Fed (and ultimately through the
Fed, to the general taxpayer). Second, in principle does not the DIDMC Act
require the Fed to charge explicitly for providing these guarantees? So long as

the Fed does not expliciitly include in its service fees the costs of producing
various kinds of insurance against iuiquidity and default, private producers of
EFT clearing and settlement services are at a disadvantage. To compete away
the Fed's traditional correspondent-banking business, they must be that much
more cost-efficient at moving instruments and information.

Administration of Reserve Requirements Under the DIDMC Act

One of the strongest arguments for universal reserves was widespread

dissatisfaction with the competitive inequities fostered by the differential
regulatory treatment of large as against small banks and of banks as against
other deposit institutions. Banks were particularly upset by what they saw to be

the piecemeal extension of bank-like powers to thrift institutions without their

being required to accept an accompanying burden of bank-like regulation. As
evidenced by the Fed's membership problem, bankers were also unhappy with
what — at least at then-current levels of interest rates — they regarded as

unreasonably high levels of Fed requirements. The DIDMC Act addressed both
issues.
Under the DIDMC Act, eligible reserve balances may be held as vault cash,

deposits at the Fed, or passthrough accounts at correspondent banks that

39

maintain reserve accounts of their own with the Fed.' Reserve requirements
will be 3 percent on nonpersonal time deposits and on the first $25 million of an

institution's transactions accounts. The breakpoint that will apply in future
years is to be indexed to observed deposit growth. Requirements on transactions

balances that exceed the breakpoint are 12 percent.

For member banks,

applicable ratios are being phased "down" over the next 3-1/2 years (starting in
November, 1980) to the new lower levels. For purposes of reserve requirements,

banks that left the System after July 1, 1979 (who may be characterized as

"involuntary member banks") are treated the same as members. For other
nonmember institutions, starting in November, 1980, reserve requirements are

being phased "jn" gradually at one-year intervals over the next eight years.
However, in states where NOW accounts are newly authorized (everywhere
outside of New England, New York, and New Jersey), NOW accounts have to bear

the full weight of transactions-account reserve requirements from the word go.

At its discretion, the Fed is empowered to lower the 3-percent requirement all
the way to zero (prior to the DIDMC Act the floor for time and savings deposits
was 3 percent) and the 12 percent requirement as far as 8 percent.

Lest lawyer-like thinking mislead anyone, what is important for the Fed is

its expanded authority to set low requirements, not the narrowing of its
discretionary power at the high end. Market reactions have always limited the
Fed's ability to convert high statutory requirements into high effective ones.
Response of State Banking Commissioners

Many state banking commissioners resent Fed-imposed universal reserve
requirements, viewing them as a federal power play undermining state regulatory

authority over deposit institutions. Ceteris paribus, universal reserve requirements do not just eliminate the disincentive to membership. In most states, they

40

threaten to reverse the incentive. In any state which has nontrivial reserve
requirements, the DIDMC Act subjects state-chartered nonmember banks to a

dual reporting burden and at some point in the phase-in process would force
these banks to hold larger reserves than comparable member banks. As the Fed's

requirements first took hold, to avoid a "nonmembership penalty," banking
commissioners in Georgia, California, New York, Missouri, Delaware and Penn-

sylvania acted to eliminate or to reduce reserve requirements for nonmember
banks in their states.

-

In the face of their jurisdictional loss to the Fed under the DIDMC Act,

state legislatures are competing against each other for banking jurisdiction more

directly than ever before. Individual states are openly changing their banking

laws (e.g., in South Dakota and Delaware) to attract out-of-state affiliates of
bank holding companies.' This competition responds to bank managements' desire

to minimize the burdens nationwide that state usury ceilings and state-and-local

taxation place on the net profitability of their domestic operations. Bank efforts

to escape the jurisdiction of states with onerous tax and usury laws is
simultaneously transforming the margin of federal-state regulatory competition

from the issue of membership in the Fed to the designation of what banking
activities may be legally performed by nonbank corporations.
Responses by Deposit Institutions

Whenever and wherever the reserve-requirement burden begins to pinch,
deposit institutions as well as state regulators must be expected to work hard to

alleviate the pain. As we have seen, an individual bank does this by reordering

its activities and rearranging its balance sheet and dominant contractual forms
to keep the effective level of requirements relative to total bank liabilities close
to its voluntary working-balance ratio. The longer any set of differential require—

41

ments is held in place, the more successfully banks can shortcircuit its impact.
—

At the margin, the effective burden from complying with reserve requirements

must equal the incremental cost of avoiding that burden. In the long run, the
marginal costs of avoiding the reserve-requirement tax are very low. Regulation-induced innovation and political pressure combine to make effective reserve
ratios largely voluntary in the long run.

To illustrate how difficult it is to determine the effective reserve-require-

ment tax a priori, we may note that the Kane-Castner-Peterson study of
voluntary ratios at nonmember banks suggests that in the middle 1970ts the net

burden of Fed reserve requirements (i.e., net of the return flow of associated

Fed services) was highest for bona fide time and savings accounts, the very
accounts on which gross requirements are lowest.

One potentially important avenue for alleviating an individual institution's
reserve-requirment burden lies in the so-called "passthrough option" the DIDMC
Act provides to nonmember depository institutions. At its own option, a nonmem

ber institution can pass its required reserves through a correspondent bank, a
Federal Home Loan Bank, or the National Credit Union Administration's Central

Liquidity Facility (Gilbert, 1980). As highlighted in the square-root rule of
inventory theory, a pool of reserve balances managed by a single correspondent

bank can manage a given risk of reserve insufficiency with a much-smaller
aggregate of reserve balances than members of the pool would have to hold on
their own. While the benefits are ameliorated by carryover provisions in reserve

accounting, the incentive for small institutions to make use of passthrough
arrangements (even if they must quit the System to do so) will be very great.

Understanding these incentives helps to explain why the Fed has thus far
deferred (and gone on to propose a permanent exemption from) reserve require—

42

ments for nonmember depository institutions whose total deposits are less than

$2 million. It also clarifies the competitive importance to Federal Reserve
Banks of giving service credits (calculated at floating interest rates) to institutions that hold "clearings balances" with the Fed.

Moreover, the DIDMC Act's steeply graduated schedule of statutory
requirements should encourage banks, ceteris paribus, to substitute holdingcompany affiliates in multibank systems for ordinary branch offices. This would

multiply the number of low-requirement deposit brackets available to the
stockholders of the consolidated firm. While the Fed can forestall crude spinoffs of existing branches into holding-company affiliates, it will be difficult to
disentangle (let alone to stop) effects on decisions about future acquisitions or de
novo offices.

Maintaining selectively high levels of reserve requirements on transactions

balances will also encourage banks and their customers to substitute nondeposit

instruments for deposits of all kinds and lower-requirement deposits for highrequirement ones. The DIDMC Act's reserve-requirement tax will also encourage nontraditional and foreign-bank competitors to develop new and improved

substitutes for traditional forms of bank deposits.

Subsidized pricing of

electronic payment services, combined with ongoing technological change, will

simultaneously change the forms in which payments can most profitably be
made. These adaptations will hamper monetary policy by making the money
stock that is relevant for policymaking harder to define.
On the other hand, without having to worry about provoking member-bank
withdrawals, under the DIDMC Act the Fed is free to pull innovating instruments

into its regulatory net as soon as they are recognized to be a problem. Last
October, when Citicorp attempted to pay eight-percent interest on positive

43

balances in households' credit-card accounts in a Maryland-based affiliate, Fed

officials blocked the scheme before it could get off the ground. Similarly, the
Board of Governors took only three weeks to kill Bank of California's May, 1981

scheme to avoid deposit-rate ceilings by transferring designated small-denomina-

tion accounts to an offshore branch.

Table 5 shows that, during the next few years, nonmember institutions'

operational needs for vault cash should prevent the new requirements from
proving onerous.

Except for involuntary members (who are simply being

bureaucratically brutalized), member banks' statutory burdens will lighten stead-

ily. Hence, while the 3 and 12 percent requirements are gradually settling into
place, the Fed will have ample opportunity to gauge — as if by experiment —
regulatees'

reactions both to different levels of reserve requirements and to

different definitions of the main classes of reservable liabilities.
As settings of the level and structure of requirements change, Fed officials

can observe variations in the political heat that emanates from different
sources. In this way, they can obtain a good idea of what would, from the
System's point of view, constitute a politically optimal reserve-requirement
framework. By simultaneously observing changes in the rate of regulationinduced innovation, they can also make judgments about the economic viability

of alternative frameworks. Of course, economic and political pressure against

even a statically optimal reserve-requirement tax system will rise if inflation
keeps accelerating. On the other hand, authorities should be prepared to see the
pressure relent if and when inflation ever decelerates.

Effects on Fed's Policymaking Autonomy

Although the DIDMC Act promises to create a heavy transitional workload

for Fed staffmembers and to threaten the survival of at least a few of the 12

44

Table 5

Frequency Distribution of the Conservatively Estimated* Number of
Years Before the DIDMC Act's Reserve Requirements Could
No Longer Be Met on a Daily Average Basis Solely
By Nonmember-Bank Holdings of Vault Cash
Estimated Number
of Years

Number of Banks

in Data Set

Mean Deposit Size
(in millions of dollars)

Less than 1

38

248

lto2

146

173

2to3
3to4
4to5
5to6

128

96

74

36

43

26

18

17

over 6

35

14

Total Sample

482

112

*Calculations are conservative because they assume no room for 1974-1975
balance-sheet ratios to adjust costlessly to the new requirement structure and
because they assume that all personal time deposits are switched to transactions accounts.

45

Reserve Banks,1-' it offers substantial political benefits to the Fed's Board of
Governors. It simultaneously enlarges the Board's political clientele and expands

its capacity to tailor reserve requirements on time and savings accounts to the

low levels needed to maintain clientele allegiance.

Nevertheless, although

universal reserve requirements greatly increase the Board's short-run policy
options, they mainly change the form of its long-run jurisdictional problem. In

place of fretting about unfavorable trends in membership, the Board will find
itself worrying increasingly about a secular displacement of traditional banking
business to nondepository "financial-services institutions" whose operations lie
similarly outside its traditional regulatory purview.

46
FOOTNOTES
1.

In October, 1980, Henry Reuss asked the Government Accounting Office to

study this very issue. Although the GAO report found no merit in the
proposal to close district banks at this time, the activity criteria used to
justify this determination would lead to this reverse conclusion if events
came to pass as predicted in this paper.
2.

Burns (1978, p. 430) argued that, by skewing the distribution of membership
toward large banks, membership attrition threatened the political sustain-

ability of "the insulation of the Federal Reserve System from day-to-day
political pressure."
3.

See the sources cited and evidence developed in Gilbert (1977). For some

contrary evidence, see Hume and Russell, which examines use of Fed
facilities by a sample of Second District Banks. It may be that physical

proximity to New York City simplifies a bank's correspondent-service
needs.

4.

For example, to deposit checks for direct collection by the Federal
Reserve, a bank must first presort the checks by the location of the paying
bank and magnetically encode them with the dollar amount and bank
routing numbers involved.

5.

Thanks to the linearity property of least-squares estimators, the intercepts
and slopes reported for the R equations which are estimated here may be

interpreted as the sums of the corresponding coefficients from separate

6.

Rc and RD regressions on the same sets of exogenous variables.
Knight estimates that only 56 percent of demand balances due from other

banks are collected balances.

7.

packet-switching is akin to putting data tapes on a real-time system
directly connecting Federal Reserve Banks. The "packets that are switch-

47

ed" are small sets or data into which natural messages are disaggregated.
The "switching" combines packets with other message fragments in transit

in ways that optimize the efficiency of transmissions moving through the

network. The packets are reassembled into the original messages at the
receiving point, much as a fictional teleportation device (such as the Star

Trek transporter) is supposed to reassemble a flow of atoms into the
objects originally dispatched (Mitchell).
8.

We deliberately neglect nationwide point-of-sale systems operated by bank
credit—card firms and large retailers.

9.

A careful analysis of incentives inherent in the proposed passthro4gh
reserve option is presented by Gilbert (1980).

10.

Recognizing that Reserve Bank Presidents have long held 5 voting places
on the Federal Open Market Committee, in the first stage of consolidation
five Reserve Banks might survive. Based on regional interests, New York,

Chicago, San Francisco, Atlanta, and Dallas seem the best candidates.
However, the last two locations may be captured as political patronage by
chairmen of Congressional Banking Committees.

48

REFERENCES

Becker, G.
(1976)

"Comment" (on Peltzman), Journal of Law and Economics, 19:
245-248.

Benston, G. J.
(1978)

Federal Reserve Membership: Consequences, Costs, Benefits and
Alternatives, Chicago: Association of Reserve City Bankers.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
(1980)

"Federal Reserve Bank Services: Proposed Fee Schedules and
Pricing Principles," Washington, D.C.: (Mimeographed)

Burns, A.F.
(1978)

"Vital Issues of Banking Legislation," Address at the eighty—third
annual convention of the Kentucky Banking Association, September

12, 1977, reprinted in A.F. Burns, Reflections of an Economic
Policy Maker: Speeches and Congressional Statements: 1969-1978,
Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute, 425-435.
Eisenbeis, R.A.
(1980)

"Financial Innovation and the Role of Regulation: Implications for

Banking Organization, Structure and Regulation,'t Washington,
D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System(Mimeographed).

Federal Reserve System
(1981)

"Procedures for Administration of Clearing Balances, Service
Charges, and Interim Price and Service Charges," Washington,
D.C.: (Mimeographed)

a

49

(1980)

"Fee Schedules and Pricing Principles for Federal Reserve Bank
Services," Washington, D.C. (Mimeographed)

Gambs, C. M.
(1980)

"State Reserve Requirements and Bank Cash Assets," Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking, 12:462-470.
-

Gilbert, R. A.
(1977)

"Utilization of Federal Reserve Bank Services by Member Banks:

Implications for the Costs and Benefits of Membership," Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review:2-15.

(1980)

"Effects of the Monetary Control Act of 1980 on Federal Reserve

Membership, Operations of Federal Reserve Banks, and the Correspondent Banking System,t' Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
(Mimeographed)

Gramley, L. E.
(1980)

"Pricing and Access to Federal Reserve Services," Remarks before
the 1980 Southern Regional Operations and Automation Workshop,
New Orleans, Louisiana.

flume, S. R., and Russell, K. S.
(1978)

"A Study of the Relative Usage of Federal Reserve Services by
Member Banks in the Second Federal Reserve District," Banking
Studies Department, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, (Mimeographed)

50

Humphreys, D.B.
(1981)

"Economies of Scale in Federal Reserve Check Processing Operations,": Journal of Econometrics, Part H of Supplement to Volume
15: 155—173.

Kane, E. J.
(1977)

"Good Intentions and Unintended Evil: The Case Against Selective
Credit Allocation," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 9:55-69.

___________ Castner, J., and Peterson, M. 0.
(1977)

"Deposit Volatility and the Cost of Federal Reserve Membership:
Voluntary Reserve Ratios at Nonmember Banks," Ohio State University (Mimeographed)

(1980)

"External Pressure and the Operations of the Fed," Paper presented

at the Conference on the Political Economy of Domestic and
International Monetary Relations, Pennsylvania State University.

(1981)

"Accelerating Inflation, Technological Innovation, and the Decreas-

ing Effectiveness of Banking Regulation," Journal of Finance, 36:
(forthcoming)

Knight, R. H.
(1977)

"Comparative Burdens of Federal Reserve Member and Nonmember

Banks," Monthly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City:
24—25.

Melton, W.
(1977)

"Reserve Requirements and Membership in the Federal Reserve
System: An Analytical Framework and Survey of the Evidence,"
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper.

51

Mitchell, C. W.

"Federal Reserve arid the Payments System: Upgrading Electronic

(1981)

Capabilities for the 1980's," Federal Reserve Bulletin, 67:109—116.
Niskanen, W. A.

Bureaucracy and Representative Government, Chicago: Aldine-

(1971)

Atherton.
Peltzman, S.

-

"Toward a More General Theory of Regulation," Journal of Law and

(1976)

Economics, 19:211—240.

Posner, R. A.
(1971)

"Taxation by Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science, 2:22-50.

Stigler, G. J.
(1971)

"The Theory of Economic Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics
and Management Science, 2:3—21.

White, G. C., Jr.
(1977)

"Private Sector Alternative," Issues in Bank Regulation, 1:6 and 13—
15.

(1981)

"Federal Reserve Pricing Shortcomings" (and enclosures), New
York: Chase-Manhattan Bank.

Wolkowitz, B.
(1977)

"The Fed's Role if EFTS," Issues in Bank Regulation, 1:7-12.

</ref_section>

