NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE DECISION TO RETIRE

Anthony J. Peflechio

Working Paper No. 734

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

August 1981

Assistant Professor of Economics, University of Rochester. I want
to thank Catherine Helbig for her assistance with this research.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
on Social Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of program
the

author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #734
August 1981

Social Security and the Decision to Retire

ABSTRACT

This study examines empirically whether social security influences

the retirement decisions of individuals. The framework for this study is
the life—cycle model of individual behavior. The life—cycle model shows
that there are two main ways in which social security can affect behavior.
One way is through the change in an individual's lifetime income that social

security can bring about. The other way has to do with how the system

changes compensation for work. Social security's income and substitution
effects are included in a model for examining retirement decisions. This
model is based on the model of labor force participation that has become

standard in the literature on labor supply. The data used in this study
come from the Social Security Administration and are particularly well

suited for this study. Retirement models are estimated separately for
samples of 62—64 and 65—70 year old men. The empirical results support the
conclusion that social security influences the decision to retire. The
magnitude of behavioral responses to changes in social security benefits
are reported and implications for future behavior are discussed.

Anthony J. Pellechio
Social Security Administration
Room 320—I
1875 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20009
(202) 673—5730

SOCIAL SECURITY AND THE DECISION TO RETIRE
Anthony J. Pellechio

I.

Introduction
Social

retirement

security is the major source

in

of

income support for

the U.S.; the program paid benefits of approximately 105

billion in 1980.1 There are two broad views on how people are affected

by social security. One view emphasizes that people retire because of
poor health or because they are otherwise forced out of their jobs and
that social security benefits compensate in part for the concomitant

reduction in earnings. This view stresses the insurance aspect of
social security with the implication that social security has little or
no effect on when people retire.2 Another view based on economic models
of labor supply allows for a potential effect of social security on

retirement. This economic view has received considerable theoretical3
and empirical4 attention in recent years. Determining whether social

security influences individual behavior, especially retirement, is

important. Such information can be used to structure the system so that

1 Sources of information on benefit payments in the
past and projected
payments in the future are: Bayo, Ritchie, and Faber
(1978);

Petri(1980); Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statistical
Board of Trustees (1980), 1980 Annual
2

Ball

ppie,

(1978), Myers (1964).

Sheshinski (1978), Diamond and Mirrlees (1978), Hu (1979), Kurz
(1981), Crawford and Lilien (1981).
Campbell and Campbell (1976); Boskin (1977); Pellechio (l979a); Clark,
Johnson, and Sumner (1981); Mitchell and Fields (1981); Esposito and
Packard (1980).

—1—

it does not distort individual behavior and is financially sound. The
purpose of this paper is to examine empirically whether social security
influences the retirement decisions of individuals.

Social security can affect both an individual's decision to retire
and, if he does not retire fully, his decision on how much to work.

Based on these two dimensions of social security's effect on the labor
supply, my empirical study of retirement has been divided into two

parts. This paper presents the first part which focuses on the
retirement decision and the influence that social security benefits can

have upon this decision. A companion paper (Pellechio, l981b) presents
the second part of my study which examines how much retirement-aged

individuals work when they do not retire fully. In this second part the
social security earnings test, a regulation that reduces an individual's
benefit payment when his earnings exceed a certain amount, enters the

analysis. The econometric problems posed by the earnings test require a
methodology for estimating labor supply over kinked budget constraints;

this methodology has been developed in Pellechio (1979b). The
examination of the separate effects of social security benefits and the
earnings test on retirement is an important feature of this two-part
study.

The framework for the empirical study here is the life-cycle model

of individual behavior. The empirical specification of the model allows
for testing whether the life-cycle model is a valid description of

behavior. The way in which social security enters the model is
presented in Section II. Briefly, what this section shows is that there

-2-

are two main ways in which social security can affect behavior. One way
is through the change in an individual's lifetime income that the system

can bring about. Several studiesS have shown that the total amount an
individual can expect to receive from social security does not
necessarily equal what that individual paid into the system. In
somewhat more precise terms, the present value of the benefits that an
individual can expect to receive during retirement does not necessarily
equal the present value of payroll taxes paid during his working career.
Any difference between these two present values represents a change in
lifetime income that has a potential income effect on economic behavior
in general and retirement in particular.
The other way in which social security can affect retirement is by

changing compensation for work. This can happen because benefits are
based on earnings and will in general change in value in response to
continued employment, i.e. delayed retirement.

Any change in the value

of benefits from delayed retirement becomes part of the compensation for

work just like the money wages paid at the time of employment.
Excellent discussions of this incentive to delay retirement in order to
receive larger benefits in the future are given by Blinder, Gordon, and
liise (1980) and Bulow (1981). This study represents, in part, an

attempt to measure responses to this incentive empirically. The main
point is that by changing the compensation for work social security has
potential substitution effects on how much people work. Social
security's income and substitution effects are discussed in more detail

Pellechjo (1981a); Ferrara (1980); Orb and Schrejtmueller (1978);
Leimer and Petrj (1980).

-3-

in Section II.

The model used for examining retirement decisions is based on the
model of labor force participation that has become standard in the

literature on labor supply. This model uses two equations, one for the
market wage that an individual faces and another for the individual's

value of time or shadow price. The market wage equation is expanded to
include variables that measure social security's effect on an

individual's compensation for work. Social security variables that
influence an individual's shadow price are added to the shadow price

equation. The final alteration that converts the standard labor force
participation model into a retirement model is to define

nonparticipation according to a suitable definition of retirement. The
definition adopted here in effect implements the definition of
retirement that is implicit, in the rules for receiving full social

security benefits. With this definition the effect of these benefits on
retirement can be examined independently of the earnings test. A
description of the retirement model and techniques for identifying and
estimating parameters are given in Section III.

The data used in this study come from the Social Security

Administration. An important feature of the data is that it is possible
to calculate accurately the social security benefit that an individual

is entitled to receive. In other words, an individual's potential
benefit is known even when no benefit payment is made. This benefit is
used to construct the social security variables presented in Section II.
Details on the empirical specification of the model are given in
Section IV.

-4-

Estimated retirement models for samples of retirement-aged men are

given in Section V. The empirical results support the conclusion that
social security affects the decision to retire. There are significant
responses to the system's income and substitution effects and the

magnitudes of these responses are presented and discussed. The results
of this study and their implications for future behavior are summarized
in Section VI.

II.

The Life-Cycle Model and Social Security

The potential effects of social security on retirement will be
discussed using the model of life-cycle behavior.6 In the absence of
social security an individual chooses a path of lifetime consumption and
labor supply by maximizing lifetime utility subject to the following
Constraint:
T
(1)

E cD =
t=l

6

R-l
Z
t=l

wiD

excellent theoretical models of life-cycle behavior are given by
Blinder and Weiss (1976), and Heckman (1976). Versions of the lifecycle model that add social security in a way similar to what is done
here are given by Feldstein (1976b), Samuelson(1975), Kotlikoff
(1979), and Ru (1979).
Two

-5-

where T =

number of years of an individual's life

c consumption expenditures in year t
= wage rate in year t
labor supply in year t

R = year

of retirement

discount factor from year t to whatever year
defines present value

This simply says that the present value of total lifetime consumption
expenditures must equal the present value of total lifetime earnings.

The adjustment to equation (1) for social security entails reducing
an individual's earnings during his working career by the payroll taxes
he pays and

increasing

his income during retirement by the benefits he

receives. The lifetime budget constraint becomes:
T
(2)

E cD =

t=l

t=l

where Pt
Bt =

T

R-l

(l_p)wltD

+

t=R

BtDt

payroll tax rate in year t

social

security retirement benefit payments in

year t

The first term on the right-hand side of equation (2) can be
separated into two components as follows:

-6-

R- 1

=

(3a)

PVE

(3b)

PVTAX =

E

t=l

w1D

=

present value of earnings

R-l
Z

t=l

p wtltDt =

present

value of payroll taxes

The second term on the right-hand side of
equation (2) equals the
actuarial present value of the social security benefits to which an
individual is entitled as a retired worker; the survival probabilities
that make it an actuarial calculation are included in the Dt's
This

present value of benefits is

called "social security wealth" and is

denoted SSW.7 If SSW equals PVTAX then

equation (2) is the same as
(1) which means that social security does not change lifetime

equation

income.

However, as was

pointed out before (see n. 5),

SSW does not

necessarily equal PVTAX. When SSW exceeds PVTAX social security has

raised an individual's lifetime income. The life-cycle model predicts a
potential decrease in labor supply on the usual assumption that leisure

is a normal good. This decrease could occur as a reduction in labor
supply

"

Social

in the years in which a person works or a reduction in

security wealth was defined and first calculated by Feldstein

(1976a).
'

Whether social security can affect behavior is a
question with diverse
answers. Crawford and Lilien (1981) show in a theoretical model how
behavior can be affected by social security even when it does not
change lifetime income, i.e. when it is actuarially fair. In another
theoretical model with perfect capital markets and fixed labor supply
Barro (1974) shows that social security has no economic effects even
if it is not actuarially fair.

-7-

the number of years of work (R-l). Of course, if SSW is less than PVTAX
labor supply may be affected in the opposite way, i.e. individuals may

work more per year or increase their number of years of work. The
overall point is that SSW - PVTAX measures the change in lifetime income
produced by social security and this change has a potential income
effect on retirement.9

Another effect of social security comes from the influence that an
additional year of earnings can have on an individual's present and

future benefit payments. The influence on present benefit payments
arises because an individual foregoes current benefits when he decides

not to retire. The effect on future benefits arises from the fact that
earnings are used to calculate benefits. To see these effects consider
the change in the budget constraint when a person works rather than
retires in year R:'°

Barro's (1974) theory of life-cycle behavior with bequests implies
that there is no lifetime income effect. Intergenerational transfers
would cancel any change in an individual's lifetime income that social
security might try to impose. However, Barro's argument rests on his
assumption that labor supply is fixed. This paper examines whether
labor supply responds to changes in the lifetime budget constraint
produced by social security. Information on bequests is needed along
with the data used here (see Section IV) to examine Barro's theory.
The results here do not refute Barro's model but do stand in
juxtaposition to his assumption of fixed labor supply.
10

The year that defines present value is taken to be R so that
DR = 1.

-8-

(4)

T
E

ctDt =

I'VE + SSW

- PVTAX

T
+

t-1

(l_PR)WR1R

-

+
BR

E

t=R+l

(B - Bt)Dt

where BR = foregone benefits in year R

B = the

benefit obtained in year t by adding earnings

in year R to the benefit calculation

The term (lpR)wR1R denotes the individual's net

earnings from working in year R. The last two terms in equation (4)
represent the two ways in which social security can affect the

compensation from work. One way has to do with the fact that benefits

are foregone in year R by working. The BR term represents this
loss in current benefits. This loss reduces the compensation from work
and as such raises the likelihood of retirement.

The second way in which social security can affect compensation for
work is through the influence that earnings can have on future benefits.
Excellent discussions of this point are given by Blinder, Gordon, and

Wise (1980) and Bulow (1981). The issue arises because an average of an
individual's earnings is used to calculate benefits.11 Earnings in the

current year tend to increase this average because they are likely to be

'

The calculation of benefits begins by calculating the
average of an
individual's annual earnings from age 22 through the year before
retirement. Only earnings up to a maximum amount in each year are
used. In 1972, the year of this study, the social security system
computed the simple average of actual earnings after dropping the
five years of lowest earnings, i.e. no adjustment was made for
different wage or price levels in different years. This simple
average is the base for calculating benefits; in other words, a
benefit formula is applied to this average to yield a benefit amount.

-9-

higher in nominal terms, if not in real terms, than past earnings. An
earnings-induced increase in future benefits is denoted by
Bt -

B

in the last term of equation (4). The present

value of any increase in future benefits constitutes additional
compensation for work and this additional compensation makes retirement

less attractive and therefore less likely. This present value is given
by the last term in equation (4) and will be denoted DSSW.

Both the influence of foregone current benefits and increased
future benefits come under the heading of a substitution effect in the
sense that they change the compensation for work and as such can change

how much people work. Compensation for work is decreased by the loss in
current benefits, _BR, and increased by any gain in the value of

future benefits, DSSW. Thus, the main point of equation (4) is that
social security has two potential substitution effects that work in

opposite directions. The variables needed to estimate these
substitution effects as well as the income effect discussed in this
section are included in the retirement model constructed in the next
section.

III.

The Retirement Model
The labor force participation model developed in the labor supply

literature'2 is used to construct an econometric model for examining

retirement behavior. The model uses equations that describe an

12

Gronau (1973, 1977); Hall (1975); Hanoch (1976); Heckman (1974).
10 -

individual's total compensation for work and his value of time in

nonmarket activities or shadow price. Let an individual's market wage,
w, be given by the following equation:

(5)

w = X

+ e1

where X is a set of variables measuring wage,

is the vector of

coefficients for X, and e. is an error term.
1

As discussed in Section II, a person's compensation for work equals
his market wage and any earnings-induced change in the value of current

or future benefits. A loss of current benefits, denoted BR as
before,- reduces compensation and a gain in the value of future benefits,

denoted DSSW, raises compensation. An individual's compensation for
work, denoted v, is therefore given as follows:

(6)

v =
=

clBR + c2DSSW + w
c1BR

+ c2DSSW + X +

e1

The coefficients of BR and DSSW should ideally equal -].

and

1

respectively. However, they are left open to empirical estimation and
given as c1 and c2 in equation (6); c1 is expected to be
negative and c2 positive.

—

1]. —

The decision to retire also depends on the value of an individual's
time in activities other than working in the labor market, i.e. his

opportunity cost or shadow price. The lifetime income effect discussed
in Section II arises because a change in lifetime income has a potential

effect on an individual's shadow price. For example, an increase in
lifetime income makes it possible to spend more time outside the labor

market and therefore raises an individual's shadow price. As shown in
Section II, the change in lifetime income produced by social security is
given by the difference between social security wealth and the present

value of payroll taxes. The number of hours an individual spends
working also affects his shadow price. The more an individual woiks the
more valuable leisure time is to him. So, as hours of work go up so
does shadow price. The equation for shadow price, denoted s, is given
as follows:

(7)

S

= b1SSW

+

b2PVTAX

+

+

b3h

'f

+

e2

where SSW and PVTAX denote social security wealth and the present value
of payroll taxes as defined in equations (2) and (3b) of Section II, h
equals hours of work, Y is a set of additional variables that influence
shadow price,

is the vector of coefficients for Y, and e2 is an

error term.

A strict interpretation of the life-cycle model implies that an
individual responds to the change in lifetime income brought about by
social security; Section II showed this change to be SSW - PVTAX.

A

consequence of this is that the coefficients of SSW and PVTAX should be

-

12

-

equal in magnitude and opposite in sign. These coefficients will be

estimated freely. Examining whether b2 =
-b1 serves as a test
of the life-cycle model.

The definition of retirement used in this study says that a person
is retired when his earnings are low enough so that there is no
reduction in his social security retirement benefit payment due to the

earnings test. In other words his earnings are below the amount at
which the earnings test begins to reduce benefit payments - -

called

the

exempt amount. Let K denote the number of hours of work it takes an

individual to earn the exempt amount. In the terminology of the model a
person is retired when the shadow price of his time at h=K exceeds his

compensation for work. In terms of equations (6) and (7) this means:

(8)

+
b1SSW + b2PVTAX +
b3K

Y

+

>

e2

C1BR

+

c2DSSW

+ Xc

+

+

-

e1

or,

(9)

e2 - e1

Let

>

c1BR

+

c2DSSW

-

-

b1SSW

b2PVTAX

-

b3K

DR be a binary variable that indicates whether a person is

retired (DR=l) or not (DR=O). The probability of retirement, P(DR1),
equals the probability that equation (9) holds which depends on the

distributions of

distributed

e1 and e2. Let e1 and e2

normally with variances

be

and

respectively, and covariance a12. In this case e2 is
e1
also normally distributed with variance

- 13 -

=

÷

-

2a12.

Letting F denote the standard normal distribution function, the
retirement probability becomes:

P(DR=l) =

(10)

1 -

F[(c1B

+

+ Xrz -

-

c2DSSW

-

b1SSW

b2PVTAX

-

b_K

Y)/a]

The argument of F will be called the "retirement index" and denoted J.

Estimates of c1, c2, b1, b2, b3, a, and

up

to a scale factor a can be obtained from a probit analysis of DR. This
is done by dividing a sample of individuals into the subsamples of those

who are retired, (DR1), and those who are not, DRO}, and maximizing
the likelihood of observing this behavior in the sample. The likelihood
function following from equation (10) that is maximized is:

L =

(11)

II
ie{DR=l}

where

J. =

the

[1 -

F(J.)]
1

U

ic{DR=0}

F(J.)
1

value of the retirement index using individual's

values for the variables.
In this way maximum likelihood estimates of c1/ø, c2/C,

b1/a, b2/a, b3/a, a/a, and /a are obtained.

It is important to point out that the above retirement model is

valid even in the presence of the social security earnings test. The
effect of the earnings test on the individual budget constraint is

illustrated in Figure 1. The social security benefit that an individual
could receive in retirement is represented by the vertical distance AB.

- 14 -

FIGURE 1
THE EARNINGS-TESThD BUDGET CONSTRAINT

F

Income

N

N

E

N

N

N

N

N
D

N

N
N

N

N

N

N

N

B

Hours of
Leisure

______ Hours
Work

- 15 -

of

The variable BR in the model is measured by this distance. As
Figure 1 shows, the budget constraint is divided into three segments by

the earnings test. On the first segment, points B to C, a person can
receive his full retirement benefit and earn income up to the exempt

amount without losing benefits. Along the second segment, points C to
D, benefit payments are reduced by $.50 for every $1.00 of earnings

above the exempt amount. This effectively reduces a person's wage by 50
percent and, as the figure shows, the slope of the budget constraint

drops in magnitude. Once benefit payments are reduced to zero at point
D a person goes back to receiving his full wage above this point. Due
to this increase in wage from 50 percent to its full amount, the budget
constraint is nonconvex around point ID.

The overall effect of the

earnings test on the individual budget constraint is to make it kinked
and nonconvex.

The crucial feature of the earnings-tested budget constraint for

the analysis here is that the extension of its initial segment BC, given
by the dashed line CF in Figure 1, lies above the rest of the

constraint. In this situation when an individual's shadow price at
point C is greater than

his

compensation for work there is no chance of

the reverse happening above point C.

In other words, equation (9) is a

necessary and sufficient condition for retirement. This would not be
the case if the budget constraint, because of a nonconvexity, did lie

above CF at some point. It would then be possible both for equation (9)
to hold indicating a decision to retire and for an individual's shadow
price to be less than or equal to the slope of a portion of the budget

constraint above CF which indicates awillingness to work above point C,

-

16 -

i.e. a decision not to retire.

with the earnings-tested

However, this problem does not arise

budget constraint as illustrated in

Figure 1,

and equation (9) remains a complete description of retirement.'3
It is important to point out that the slope of the budget

constraint equals the individual's

compensation for work and not his

wage alone. As such it includes the value

of any earnings-induced

increase in the value of future benefits. This additional
compensation
could result in the budget
constraint lying above its initial segment.
Blinder, Gordon, and Wise (1980) focus attention on this additional
compensation and how it affects the

budget constraint. They find that

in some cases this additional

compensation approximately cancels the
implicit tax rate of 50 percent in the
the earnings test would not
imply that point C is not a

earnings test. A cancellation of

affect the analysis here; it would just

very important point to focus attention on

and that K is not an important

variable. The important question that

Blinder, Gordon, and Wise raise is whether individuals understand
or

perceive this additional compensation

behavior in response to it. This

and change their retirement

additional compensation was presented

as the variable DSSW in Section II and is included in the retirement
model that is estimated here.
can be accurately calculated.

Given the data used in this study DSSW
By including DSSW in the empirical

specification of the retirement model I attempted to find out whether

13 Because

the budget constraint has the above.mentioned feature the
effect of the earnings test at point C and above can be excluded from
the analysis here. This feature provides the technical justification
for the division of my study of retirement behavior into two
parts.
The effect of the earnings test on the hours of work of retirementaged individuals is studied in the
companion paper (Pellechio 1981b)
to this one.
—

17 —

the work incentive discussed by Blinder, Gordon, and Wise and in

Section II affects individual retirement decisions empirically. The
data and calculation of variables in the empirical analysis are
described next.

IV. Data and Empirical Specification
The empirical analysis is based on a rich file of data from the
Social Security Administration --

the

1973 CPS-IRS-SSA Exact Match

file.14 This file starts with the March 1973 Current Population Survey

(CPS). Each individual's CPS record is matched to extracts of his 1972
income tax return (IRS) and social security records (SSA). The sample
drawn from this file for empirical study here consists of married men
age 60 -. 70 who are entitled to social security retirement benefits.

The social security data permit precise calculation of the social

security variables mentioned in previous sections. The reason for this
is that annual earnings covered by social security and the number of

quarters of coverage in each year from 1951 through 1975 are given for

each individual. This earnings information is precisely that used by
the Social Security Administration to calculate benefits. Benefits for
each individual were calculated according to the law in 1972, the year
for which the CPS gathered information and in which retirement behavior

is being examined in this study. The benefit variable, denoted BEN, in
the empirical specification of the model equals the retirement benefit

14

Aziz

(1978).
- 18

-

that the couple is entitled to receive based on the earnings histories
of the husband and the wife and the allowance for a dependent spouse.
It is important to point out that the calculation of this variable in no

way depends on their earnings in 1972. It is a potential benefit, not
an actual benefit payment, and as such is exogenous with respect to the
behavior in 1972 being estimated.

The benefit payments that the husband and wife are entitled to
receive in the future if they retire in 1972 are also projected

according to the law. Social security wealth, SSW, equals the actuarial
present value of these benefit payments. The actuarial part of the
calculation takes into account the probabilities that husband and wife

each survive to years in the future. In this study the potential
benefit payment in a future year is multiplied by the probability of
surviving to that year.15 If the husbandts own benefit is under
consideration then the probability of his surviving to that year is

used. If a dependent spouse benefit is under consideration then the
probability that both survive is used. If a survivors benefit is under
consideration then the probability that the partner who is being
considered the survivor survives and the other partner does not is used.

The survival probabilities used here are the latest available from the
Bureau of the Census.'6 These probabilities are given by sex and age and

' The

use of survival probabilities in this study rather than life
expectancies as in other studies is an important difference worthy of
note. These other studies assume individuals live to their life
expectancies. I do not know how life expectancies could be used to
account for the contingencies discussed in the following sentences in
the text.

16

U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. Projections of
the Population of the United States: 1977 to 2050 Series P-25, No.
704, July 1977.
— 19 —

incorporate improvements in survival rates to the year 2050. Benefit
payments in future years are also discounted at a real interest rate of
1 percent.

The present value of an individual's earnings and the present value
of the payroll taxes he paid over his working career are calculated from

the social security earnings data. These variables are denoted PVE and
PVTAX and equation (3) gives the formula for each. It is important to
note that PVE is the present value of covered earnings and as such falls
short of encompassing a person's entire lifetime earnings. PVTAX is

computed accurately from covered earnings. Earnings and payroll taxes
in past years are converted into dollars of present value, i.e. 1972

dollars, at the same real interest rate of 1 percent as were benefits in
future years in the calculation of SSW.

The social security earnings data are also used to compute a wage

variable for each individual. This computation uses earnings in the
years 1967-71 to produce a variable measuring a person's potential full-

time earnings in 1972. In order to do this a limitation in the earnings

data had to be overcome. This limitation is that earnings only up to
the maximum amount taxed by social security are reported. However,

along with these earnings the data report the number of quarters in
which the individual had covered earnings during the year. If an
individual earned the taxable maximum in any year a procedure developed
by Fox (1976) that approximates earnings above the maximum based on the
number of quarters it took to reach the maximum is employed here. This

procedure is used to calculate full-year earnings. An approximation to
full-year earnings is also made when an individual did not earn the

-

20

-

taxable maximum but

had less. that four quarters of coverage. Thus, the

first step in constructing a wage variable is to use actual earnings and
quarters of coverage in 1967-71 to calculate full-year earnings in those

years. The objective is to convert actual earnings which may depend on
labor supply into a wage variable that does not depend on labor supply.

After computing full-time earnings in 1967-71, earnings in each

year are converted to 1972 dollars. This is done by increasing fulltime earnings in a particular year by the rate of increase in average
wages in the population as a whole between that year and 1972.

Finally,

full-time earnings in 1967-71 expressed in 1972 dollars are averaged to
yield the variable used as the measure of a person's potential market

wage in 1972. This variable is calculated for both husband (WAGE) and
wife (WAGEW).

The number of years of past earnings used to construct the wage

variable is of course arbitrary. However by

considering using more past

years an important issue is raised. It can be argued that a person's
entire history of earnings and labor supply should be used to examine

his behavior in any particular year. An implication of this is that it
is possible to consider using all past annual

earnings

to compute WAGE.

However, this would cause problems for a study such as this where the
objective is to examine whether social security influences retirement

decisions independently of other variables. The reason is that social
security benefits are computed from a person's entire history of

earnings. It would be difficult to estimate an effect of social
security independently of other variables if the assertion is made that
these other variables include all the information that goes into

- 21

-

calculating social security benefits. This would be the case if WAGE
were computed from all previous earnings.

It is important to point out that this issue arises in any

empirical study of retirement, not just this one. Consequently there is
an identifying assumption in this and any other retirement study that

should be made explicit. The assumption is that there is a difference
between the way in which past earnings affect current behavior and the
way in which social security benefits, as computed from past earnings,

affect current behavior. The form that this identifying assumption
takes in this study is that the wage variable is computed from the
previous five years of earnings, and social security benefits are

computed according to the law from the entire earnings history. In
other words, benefits depend on an earnings history that is longer than
that which directly affects behavior, and therefore can have an
exogenous effect on retirement.

Given a person's potential earnings it is possible to figure out
how his benefit would change if an additional year of earnings were

included in the benefit formula. This is done in order to calculate the
variable DSSW discussed in previous sections. DSSW equals the present
value of any increase in future social security benefits that can be
gained from working an additional year and adding another year of

earnings to the benefit calculation. Operationally, a person's average
earnings as specified by social security law is recomputed with earnings

in 1972 set equal to his potential earnings. The benefit that a person
would be able to receive based on this new average earnings at the end
of 1972 is calculated using the same benefit formula used to calculate

- 22 -

benefits in 1972. DSSW equals the present value of the difference
between this benefit and the benefit he would receive if he did not

work, i.e. retired, in 1972. Discounting in the calculation of DSSW is
done at the same real interest rate of 1 percent used in the other
present value variables.

Table 1 illustrates the magnitude of the variables discussed up to

this point. The table reports retirement rates, social security wealth,
social security benefits, and DSSW by potential earnings (WAGE) brackets

and age groups in 1972. The definition of retirement is that a person's
earnings in 1972 are less than the exempt amount in the earnings test

for that year, which was $1,680. The age groups in the table are those
over which the retirement model was estimated; results are presented in

the next section. The benefit is the combined benefit that the husband
and wife are entitled to receive. SSW is the present value of the
benefit payments to both the husband and wife. In the bracket where the
mean value of potential earnings of $8,967 for 62 - 64 year olds falls
the table shows that the retirement rate is .257, social security
benefits equal $4,576, SSW equals $80,830, and DSSW equals $2,275. In
the potential earnings bracket containing the mean value of potential
earnings for 65 - 70 year olds the retirement rate is .695, social
security benefits are $4,508, SSW equals $73,143, and DSSW equals
$1,358.

Another variable in the retirement model is the number of hours of
work it would take to earn the exempt amount in the earnings test. It
appears because a person's shadow price depends on how much he works.

This variable is denoted K and equals $1,680, the exempt amount in 1972,

-

23

-

TABLE 1

SUMMARY STATISTICS BY WAGE BRACKETS

POTENTIAL
EARNINGS

2000 -

4000 -

4000

6000

VARIABLE

AGE GROUPS
65 - 70 YEAR OLDS
62 - 64 YEAR OLDS

DR
SSW
BEN
DSSW

DR
SSW
BEN

DSSW

6000 -

8000

DR

SSW
BEN
DSSW

8000 - 10000

10000 - 12000

53,519
3,143
1,044

54,849
3,516

.359

.709

63,058
3,616
1,001

64,827
4,013
793

.253
73,517

.695

1,572

DR
SSW
BEN
DSSW

DSSW

.581

78,231
4,814
2,323

.264

.565

86,288
4,868
2,377

82,480
4,956
2,308

.091

.401

82,831
4,798
2,156

79,609
4,907
2,241

The mean of DR equals the observed retirement rate.

- 24

73,143
4,508
1,358

.257

DR
SSW
BEN

398

80,830
4,576
2,275

DR
BEN
DSSW

*

.847

4,230

SSW

> 12000

.500

-

divided by a person's wage. Since the wage variable WAGE equals a:
person's annual wage, K equals $1,680 divided by WAGE and multiplied by
2080, the number of hours of work in a full-time year. Since the exempt
amount

is

the same for everyone, K is really just the inverse of WAGE.

As such it does not measure any response to changes in the earnings

test. Thus, K may be more properly regarded as a variable measuring a

nonlinear wage effect. If the effect of wage were taken to be strictly
linear by assumption then the inverse of wage would measure the

coefficient of hours of work in the shadow price equation as specified

in equation (7). An exact interpretation of K is not an important point

in this study. It is important to realize that the wage effect i given
by both the coefficient of WAGE and that of K.

Some additional variables that appear in labor force participation
models can

be

defined from the data used here and included in the

empirical specification of the retirement model. One such variable is
capital income, denoted KINC. The CPS data report capital income as the
sum of interest payments, dividends, rental income, and

other

property

income. The IRS data report total dividends and the taxable portion of
interest payments. The larger of the amounts reported by the CPS and

IRS as capital income is taken to be KINC.

Other variables that appear in the empirical specification of the
retirement model are the husband's and wife's age (AGE and AGEW,
respectively) and number of years of schooling (ED and EDW,

respectively). There are also binary variables to denote race (RACE = 1
for whites) and residence in a rural area (RURAL).

-

25

TABLE 2

MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF VARIABLES IN

THE RETIREMENT MODEL
.

MEANS

(STANDARD DEVIATIONS )

VARIABLE

62 - 64 YEAR OLDS

SSW

76,152
(16,194)

PVTAX

9,042
(2,830)

BEN

4,373

65 - 70 YEAR OLDS
71,562
(16,261)

7,953
(2,765)

(844)

4,421
(858)

DSSW

1,853
(964)

1,522
(1,041)

WAGE

8,968
(3,227)

7,841
(3,639)

K

480
(283)

PVE

140,480

594
(365)

(44,575)

125,462
(43,383)

KINC

1,453
(3,544)

2,105
(4,885)

ED

11.2
(3.3)

10.9
(3.5)

AGE

63.0
(0.8)

67.1

WAGEW

3,069
(3,240)

3,090
(3,279)

EDW

11.7
(2.9)

11.4

AGEW

58.9
(5.9)

62.6
(5.7)

RACE

0.94

0.94

(0.23)

(0.24)

0.30

0.31

(0.46)

(0.46)

RURAL

-

26

-

(1.7)

(3.0)

The means and standard deviations of the variables appearing in the
retirement model for the two age groups are given in Table 2. The
empirical specifications of the equations for compensation for work and
for shadow price, i.e. equations (6) and (7) in Section III, are:

(6)

(7)

v =

s =

c1BEN

b1SSW

+
c2DSSW

+

b8WAGEW

+

+

b2PAX

+

+

+

b9EDW

c0 + e1

C3WAGE

b3K

+

b4P\

b10AGEW

+

b5KINc

+
b11RAcE

+

+
b6ED

b12RURAL

+

b7AGE

+

+

b0 +

Estimates of the retirement model defined by these equations are
presented next.

V.

Empirical Results
This

section presents estimated retirement models for the sample of

married men drawn from the 1973 Exact Match file.
eligible to receive social security benefits.

These men are

They did not receive

public assistance income in 1972. They were not covered by the railroad
retirement system. Their full-time annual earnings as given by the
variable WAGE described in the last section were greater than or equal•

to $2000. These criteria represent an attempt to exclude any potential
behavioral effects of low income support provided by programs other than

social security. In other words, attention is focused on social
securityts potential influence on retirement decisions.

-

27

-

Estimates of the retirement model were obtained by maximizing the
likelihood function given by equation (11) using the variables given in

Table 2 for the sample of married males. The empirical specification of
the retirement index J used in the likelihood function is:

J =

(12)

(b1SSW

b4PVE

+

+

b10AGEW

b2PVTAX

b5KINC
+

+

+

c1BEN

b6ED

b11RACE

+

+

+

+
c2DSSW

b7AGE

b12RURAL

+

+

c3WAGE

b8WAGEW

+

b3K

b9EDW

+

+

+ b)/ô-

where a equals the standard deviation of the difference between
terms, e2

error

-

e1,

the

in the shadow price and compensation for

work equations. Thus, probit analysis produces estimates of
coefficients relative to a. Table 3 presents the probit estimates of
coefficients.

Estimates of the retirement model were obtained separately for
62

64 and 65 - 70 year olds. The results in Table 3 provide overall

support for the life-cycle approach taken here and the conclusion that

social security has significant effects on retirement decisions. As was
pointed out in previous sections, the life-cycle model leads to the

hypothesis that the coefficient estimates for SSW and PVTAX should be

equal in magnitude and opposite in sign. The coefficient estimates are
significantly different from zero and have opposite signs but the

magnitudes are not equal. Nonetheless, the coefficient estimates for
both SSW and PVTAX indicate that social security has a strong lifetime

income effect on retirement. The difference in magnitude says that the
lifetime income effect of benefits is different from that of taxes. The
positive coefficient for SSW and negative coefficient for P\7TAX both

- 28 -

TABLE 3

VARIABLE

62 -

COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES
(STANDARD ERRORS)
64 YEAR OLDS

ssw4

0.402

0.049

(0.098)

(0.077)

PAX/1O3

-0.454
(0.079)

-0.285
(0.06)

BEN/b3

0.382
(0.208)

0.819
(0.167)

DSSW/103

-0.375
(0.089)

-0.338

0.082
(0.044)

0.139

(0.034)

0.383
(0.416)

(0.305)

PVE/104

0.002
(0.049)

-0.102
(0.037)

KINC/104

0.244
(0.143)

-0.201
(0.107)

ED

-0.049
(0.021)

-0.074
(0.017)

AGE

0.163
(0.067)

(0.031)

WAGE/lU3

WAGEW/104

EDW

-0.809
(0.231)

0.009
(0.023)

- 29

-

(0.068)

0.393

0.084

0.686

(0.153)
-0.007

(0.019)

TABLE 3 --

continued

PROBIT ESTIMATES OF T1{E RETIREMENT MODEL

VARIABLE

AGEW

RACE

RURAL

CONSTANT

COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES
(STANDARD ERRORS)
65 - 70 YEAR OLDS
62 - 64 YEAR OLDS

0.048

0.012

(0.012)

(0.009)

0.242
(0.253)

(0.182)

-0.088
(0.126)
—14.47

0.829

-0.048
(0.102)

—6.81

(4.28)

(2.08)

RETIRED

199

680

WORKING

642

393

212.766

343.440

-2 X LOG LIKELIHOOD

- 30

-

imply that an increase in lifetime income obtained through social
security raises the probability of retirement.

The estimated substitution effects of social security conform with

expectations. The benefit variable BEN measures the current social
security benefit that would be lost if the individual did not retire.
Such a loss in benefits reduces the compensation for work and should

raise the probability of retirement. The positive coefficient estimate
for BEN indicates that this is what happens empirically. DSSW equals
the present value of the increase in future benefits obtained when a

person continues to work and adds another year of earnings to the

benefit calculation. DSSW represents extra compensation for work and as
such should encourage work and lower the probability of retirement. The

negative coefficient estimate for DSSW provides empirical evidence that
this is the case.

It is interesting to note that the coefficient estimates for BEN
and DSSW have nearly the same magnitude for 62 - 64 year olds. The

difference in their magnitudes is statistically insignificant. When the
compensation for work equation, equation (6), was specified the fact

that the coefficients for BEN and DSSW should have the same magnitude

was pointed out. Although this should hold for 65 - 70 year olds as
well, it does not. This suggests that older individuals respond more to
the substitution effect of a loss in current benefits rather than that

of an increase in future benefits. In other words, older individuals
are more inclined to collect current benefits and less willing to

respond to the work incentive in the social security benefit formula.

-

31

-

The magnitude of the effect of a change in a variable on the
probability of retirement is not immediately apparent from the estimates
given in Table 3.

In order to calculate such effects it is necessary to

start with the estimated probability of retirement given by the model:

(13)

P(DR=l) =

I

-J

f(t)dt

'S

where J is the estimate obtained from Table 3 of the retirement index

given in equation (12), and f is the normal density function. J equals
the coefficient estimates in Table 3 multiplied by their respective

variables. Let Z denote any variable and bz, its coefficient
estimate, then the change in the retirement probability with respect to
Z is given by:

(14)

P(DR=l)

=

f(J)b z

where use is made of the fact that f(-Z) =

f(Z).

Equation (14) shows that the effect of one variable on the

probability of retirement depends on its coefficient estimate and on the
values of all other variables because of the presence of J in the
argument of f.

In order to calculate effects of variables, J was set

equal to its value at the mean value of all variables (see Table 2),

except that RACE was set equal to 1 and RURAL, 0. The derivative of the
retirement probability with respect to a variable was then computed

according to equation (14). These estimated derivatives were multiplied
by changes in the social security and wage variables and other selected

-

32 -

variables to find the effect of these changes on the probability of

retirement. These results are presented in Table 4.

Table 4 shows that, based on the estimated retirement models in
Table 3, a $10,000 increase in SSW raises the probability of retirement
by .103 for 62 - 64 year olds and .108 for 65 - 70 year olds. This

result assumes that the current benefit remains the same. Such an
increase in SSW could be achieved through an increase in the present

value of future benefits. Also, an increase in SSW has the same effect
as a decrease in the present value of payroll taxes. This follows as an
empirical result because the coefficient estimates for SSW arid PVTAX are

opposite in sign. Thus the main point to draw from the effect of an
increase in SSW is that it measures the effect of a corresponding
increase in lifetime income obtained through social security.

An Increase in current benefits of $500 has a substitution effect
that raises the probability of retirement by .049 for 62 - 64 year olds
and .149 for 65 - 70 year olds. In this case SSW is held constant.

This could be achieved by increasing current benefits at the expense of

future benefits. It is interesting to consider just the opposite, i.e.

decreasing current benefits while keeping SSW constant. A $500
reduction in current benefits would reduce retirement probabilities by

the magnitudes just given for a benefit increase of the same amount. A
decrease in current benefits that holds SSW constant is, by definition,

actuarially fair. Such an actuarially fair reduction in current
benefits would not result in lower benefit payments in total from social

security to the individual (since SSW is constant). However, it would
increase revenue for the system because people work more years, i.e.
postpone retirement, and pay more taxes into the system.
- 33 -

TABLE 4

ESTIMATED EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN VARIABLES

VARIABLE

CHANGE

CHANGE IN TifE PROBABILITY OF RETIREMENT
62 - 64 YEAR OLDS
65 - 70 YEAR OLDS

SSW

+ 10,000

0.103

0.108

BEN

+

500

0.049

0.149

DSSW

+

500

-0.048

-0.061

WAGE

+

500

-0.008

-0.021

ED

+

1

-0.013

-0.027

AGE

+

1

0.042

0.030

WAGEW

+

500

-0.010

-0.012

1

0.062

0.300

RACE

- 34

-

DSSW was shown in Table 3 to have
the probability of retirement.

a significant negative effect on

This result provides empirical support

for the point raised by Blinder, Gordon, and Wise (1980) that social
secuity law, in particular the calculation of benefits from earnings,

provides a work incentive. Table 4 shows

that when DSSW goes up by $500

the retirement probability decreases by .048 for 62 - 64
year olds and
.061 for 65 - 70
year olds. Whether the change is an increase in DSSW

or a decrease in current benefits
idea is the same: retirement is

holding SSW constant as before, the

postponed when future benefits can be

raised by foregoing current benefits.

As discussed when K was defined, the effect of the wage variable is
not given in the coefficient of WAGE alone. Recall that

K = 1680 * 2080 / WAGE.

As a result the wage effect is determined by

both the coefficient of WAGE and the coefficient of K. To be precise:

(15)

P(nR=1)

WAGE

=

f

-

1680 * 2080

bK
(WAGE)

)

f(J)

where bWAGE and bK are the coefficient estimates for WAGE and K

in Table 3. Given the magnitude of

these coefficient estimates and the

fact that the minimum value of WAGE is $2000, the estimated derivative

of the retirement probability with respect to WAGE is always negative.
Note that •this derivative depends on the level of WAGE. This derivative

was calculated at the mean value of WAGE in

35 -

both age groups. Based on

this derivative, Table 4 shows that a $500 increase in an individual's
annual wage decreases the probability of retirement by .008 for 62 - 64
year olds and .021 for 65 - 70 year olds. The nonlinear wage effect
yields the expected result that individuals with higher wages are less
likely to retire.

Having K in the model to pick up any nonlinear effect of the wage

variable is important. An argument can be made that the benefit
variable is really just measuring a nonlinear wage effect that is being

transmitted through the benefit formula. A person's benefit is, in
part, a nonlinear transformation of his wage. However, the presence of
K alleviates the problem posed by this argument.

The estimated effects of schooling conform with Mincer's (1974)
hypothesis about the relationship between schooling and retirement.
Individuals who obtain more schooling are expected to retire later.

In

the estimated models the coefficient estimates for schooling (ED) are
b

significantly

negative. A one year increase in the number of years of

schooling lowers the probability of retirement by .103 for 62 - 64 year
olds and .027 for 65 - 70 year olds. The estimated effect of the wife's

schooling is small and insignificant in both age groups.

Increases in age have the expected positive effect on retirement.

An increase in age of one year raises the probability of retirement by
.042 for 62 - 64 year olds and .030 for 65 - 70 year olds. Increases in

the wife's age raise the probability of the husband's retirement as

well. The coefficient estimates for wife's age (AGEW) are smaller. The
effect of the wife's age relative to that of the husband's is one-third
for 62 - 64 year olds and one-eighth for 65 - 70 year olds.

- 36

-

The effect of the wife's wage (WAGEW) on her husband's retirement

is an interesting result. The highly significant negative coefficient
estimates for WAGEW show that higher wages for a wife decrease the

probability of her husband's retirement. A $500 increase in the wife's
wage reduces the husband's retirement probability by .010 for 62 - 64
year olds and .012 for 65 - 70 year olds. This implies that husband's
and wife's time are complements in household

utility.

The race variable indicates that whites have a higher retirement

probability. The coefficient estimate for RACE for 65 - 70 year olds is
larger in magnitude and more precisely measured than for 62 - 64
year

olds. These estimates imply that the retirement probability for whites,
holding all the other variables constant, is higher than that for blacks
by .062 for 62 - 64 year olds and .300 for 65 - 70
year olds.

The negative coefficient estimates for the variable RURAL indicate
that retirement rates are lower for individuals who reside in a rural

area. These coefficient estimates

are not precisely measured though.

Both capital income (KINC) and the present value of earnings (PVE)

were expected to have positive coefficient estimates in the model. The
reason is that when a person's financial

accumulation is larger it is

possible to spend more time on leisure in later years, i.e. to retire

early. For 62 - 64 year olds the coefficient estimates for KINC and
PVE

-

37

-

have the expected positive sign. However, the coefficient estimates for
65 - 70 year olds are opposite to what was expected. Since it was not

possible to measure capital income and the present value of earnings
precisely in the Exact Match dataset, problems in measuring KINC and PVE
may be responsible for the unexpected coefficient estimates in the 65 70 year old age group. These variables were not important for the

general purpose of this study. Also they did not have much effect on
the results obtained for the other variables that were the focus of

study. For these reasons KINC and PVE do not receive much attention in
the empirical results.

VI.

Summary and Conclusion
The results of this study and their implications will be summarized

briefly. In the framework of the life-cycle model social security was
shown to have a potential lifetime income effect and two substitution

effects on retirement. A retirement model was defined by expanding the
standard labor force participation model to include life-cycle variables

that would measure these potential effects of social security. The
definition of nonparticipation implements the definition of retirement
that is implicit in the rules for receiving full social security

benefits. The retirement model was estimated using the 1973 Exact Match
file, a dataset well suited for this study.

Retirement models were estimated for 62 - 64 and 65 - 70 year olds

separately. The results showed that an increase in lifetime income

-

38

-

obtained through social security raised the probability of retirement in

both age groups. This increase could be achieved either through an
increase in social security wealth or a decrease in the present value of

payroll taxes. A clear implication of this result is that if the system
were structured so that social security wealth equals the present value
of payroll taxes there would be no lifetime income effect on retirement.
Under such an actuarially fair system retirement rates would have been
lower in past years because social security raised lifetime incomes of
individuals reaching retirement age to date.

The results showed that social security's two substitution effects
work in opposite directions on the decision to retire.

Larger current

benefits increase the probability of retirement. A larger gain in the
value of future benefits obtained through earnings reduces the

retirement probability. Given that the magnitude of the coefficient
estimate for current benefits equals that for the earnings-induced
increase in the value of future benefits for 62 - 64 year olds, social
security's two substitution effects cancel in this age group. The
estimated lifetime income effect implies that social security's net
effect is to induce retirement for 62 - 64 year olds.
The estimated effect of current benefits exceeds that of the earningsinduced increase in future benefits for 65 - 70 year olds. A plausible
implication of this result is that individuals in the older age group

discount future benefits at a rate higher than the one percent real rate

used for both age groups. Consequently, both social security's income

and

substitution

effects induce retirement in this age group.

- 39 -

It is important to note that if social security were actuarially
fair, social sedurityts two substitution effects would cancel by the

very nature of what it means for the system to be actuarially fair. In
other words, social security would have no substitution effect by its

very structure. As mentioned, it also would not change lifetime income.
Thus, an actuarially fair social security system would have no economic
effects on individual retirement decisions.

The results of this study have some interesting implications for

retirement behavior in the future. As mentioned, most people reaching
retirement age to date have experienced gains in lifetime income through

social security. Such gains were made possible for a variety of
reasons.17 However, social security has reached a point where such gains

are no longer going to occur. Workers reaching retirement age in the
next several years will be gaining little in lifetime income or breaking

even. Several studies (see note 5) have shown that younger cohorts in
the population can expect losses in lifetime income. Based on this
reversal of social security's effect on lifetime income, it is possible

to project a reversal in retirement rates in the future. Retirement
rates can be expected to level off and go down.

17 Some workers did not pay taxes in the early years of their working
career because the system had not yet begun. Even after the system
started some workers were not covered until later. When a worker
began to pay into the system the payroll tax rate and covered
earnings level were low. Also, as the system grew because of growth
in the population and extension of coverage to more workers, it was
possible to raise benefits with little or no increase in taxes. For
these reasons workers reached retirement age with a large increase in
lifetime income from social security that could be realized by
retiring.
-

40

-

The main result of this study is the empirical evidence that social

security affects the decision to retire. In a companion study
(Pellechjo, 1981b) social security's effect on how much people work even

when they decide not to retire fully is examined. Bringing the social
security earnings test into the analysis is an important factor in this

study. These studies and future research with other data should
contribute to the economics of retirement.

- 41

-

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Aziz,

Faye; Beth Kilss; and Frederick Scheuren. 1973 Current
Populations Survey -- Administrative Record Exact Match File
Codebook, Part I. Studies from Interagency Data Linkages, Report No.
8. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Social
Security Administration. Office of Research and Statistics, 1978.

Ball, Robert M. Social Security. New York: Columbia University Press,
1978.

Barro, Robert J. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 82, No. 6, November/December 1974, pp.
1095-1117.

Bayo, Francisco R.; William D. Ritchie; and Joseph F. Faber. "LongRange Cost Estimates for Old-Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance
System, 1978." Actuarial Study No. 78, Office of the Actuary, Social
Security Administration.

Blinder, Alan S.; Roger H. Gordon; and Donald E. Wise. "Reconsidering
the Work Disincentive Effects of Social Security." National Bureau
of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 562, October 1980.

Blinder, Alan S. and Yoram Weiss. "Human Capital and Labor Supply: A
Synthesis." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84, No. 3, June 1976,
pp. 449-472.

Board of Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and

Disability Insurance Trust Funds. 1980 Annual port. Committee on
Ways and Means, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1980.

Boskin, Michael J. "Social Security and Retirement Decisions."
Economic Inquiry, Vol. 15, No. 1, January 1977, pp. 1-25.

Bulow, Jeremy I. "Early Retirement Pension Benefits." National Bureau
of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 654, April 1981.

-

42

-

Campbell, Cohn D. and Rosemary C. Campbell.
"Conflicting Views on the
Effect of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance on Retirement.tt Economic
Ingu4y, September 1976.

Clark, Robert L.; Thomas Johnson; and Daniel A. Sumner. "Labor Supply
of the Elderly in a Family Context." North Carolina State
University, March 1981.

Crawford, Vincent P. and David N. Lilien. "Social Security and the
Retirement Decision." Quarterly Journal of Economics. August or
November, 1981.

Diamond, Peter and J.A. Mirrlees. "A Model of Social Insurance with
Variable Retirement." Journal of Public Economics, 1978.

Esposito, Louis and Michael Packard. "Social Security and the Labor
Supply of Aged Men: Evidence from the U.S. Time Series." U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Social
Security
Administration. Office of Policy. Office of Research and Statistics
Working Paper Series Number 21, December 1980.

Feldstein, Martin S. "Social Security and the Distribution of Wealth."
Journal of the American Statistical
Association, December 1976a.
Feldstein, Martin S. "Social Security and Saving: The Extended Life
Cycle Theory." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, Vol.
66, No. 1, May 1976b, pp.77-86.

Ferrara, Peter J. Social Security: The Inherent Contradiction. San

Francisco:

Cato Institute, 1980.

Fox, Alan. "Appendix F: Methodology for Chapter 14." In Reaching
Retirement g: Findings from a Survey of Newly Entitled Workers
1968-70. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Social
Security Administration. Office of Research and Statistics.
Research Report No. 47. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1976.

Gronau, Reuben. "The Effect of Children on the Housewife's Value of
Time." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 2, Part 2,
March/April 1973, pp. Sl68-Sl99.

-

43

-

Gronau, Reuben. "Leisure, Home Production, and Work - the Theory of the
Allocation of Time Revisited." Journal of Political Economy,
December 1977.

Hall, Robert E. "Effects of the Experimental Negative Income Tax on
Labor Supply." In Pechman and Timpane, eds., Work Incentives and
Income Guarantees. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution,
1975, PP. 115-147.

Hanoch, Giora. "A Multivariate Model of Labor Supply: Methodology for
Estimation." The Rand Corporation, R-1869-HEW, September 1976.

Heckman, James. "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply."
Econometrica, Vol. 42, No. 4, July 1974, pp. 679-694.

Heckman, James. "A Life-Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and
Consumption." Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84, No. 4, Part
August 1976, pp. Sll-S44.

2,

Hu, Sheng Cheng. "Social Security, the Supply of Labor, and Capital
Accumulation." American Economic Review. June 1979.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life
Cycle Accumulation." American Economic Review. June 1979.

Kurz, Mordecai. "Optimal Retirement Age." Stanford University,
Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences, Economics
Series Technical Report No. 336, May 1981.
Leimer, Dean R. and Peter A. Petri. "Cohort-Specific Effects of Social
Security Policy." U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Social Security Administration. Office of Policy. Office of
Research and Statistics Working Paper Series Number 20, December
1980.

Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. National Bureau of
Economic Research. New York: Columbia University Press, 1974.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Gary S.. Fields. "The Effect of Pensions on
Retirement: A Review Essay." Cornell University, February 1981.

-

44

-

Myers, R.J. "Earnings Test Under Old-Age Survivors and
Disability
Insurance: Basic Background and Experience." Social
Security
Bulletin, 1964.

Nichols, Orb R. and Richard G. Schreitmueller. "Some Comparisons of
the Value of a Worker's Social Security Taxes and Benefits." Social
Security Administration, Actuarial Note Number 95, April 1978.

Pellechio, Anthony J. "Social Security Financing and Retirement
Behavior." American Economic Review, May 1979a.

Pellechio, Anthony J. "The Estimation of Labor Supply Over Kinked
Budget Constraints: Some New Econometric Methodology." National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 387, August 1979b.
Pellechio, Anthony J. "Individual Gains and Losses from Social
Security: Calculations in 1981 According to Social Security Law and
an Agenda for Reform." February, 1981a.

Pellechio, Anthony J. "The Social Security Earnings Test and Retirement
Behavior." June 198lb.

Petri, Peter A. (Chairman). "Perspectives on Long-Range Social Security
Policy: Report of a Social Security Administration Taskforce on
Long-Range Policy Issues." August, 1980.

Samuelson, Paul A. "Optimum Social Security in a Life-Cycle Growth
Model." International Economic Review, October 1975.

Sheshinskj, Eytan. "A Model of Social Security and Retirement
Decisions." Journal of Public Economics, December 1978.

U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. Projections of the
Population of the United States: 1977 to 2050. Series P-25, No.
704, July 1977.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Social Security
Administration. Social Security Bulletin: Annual Statisitica].

pp1ement, 1977-79.

-

45

-

