                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE IMPACT OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING:
                      ILLUSION OR REALITY?


                       Richard B. Freeman

                         James L. Medoff

                      Working Paper No. 135




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          August 1981

While many individuals were most helpful in the preparation of this
paper, we are particularly appreciative of the comments and
suggestions offered by K. Abraham, S. Allen, C. Brown, G. Cain, G.
Chamberlain, J. Fay, T. Kochan, R. McKersie, K. McLoughlin, and M.
Podgursky. We are also most grateful for the helpful feedback from
participants at seminars at Boston University, the University of
Chicago, the University of Connecticut, Harvard, North Carolina
State University at Raleigh, Princeton, and the University of South
Carolina. In addition, we wish to thank G. Bialecki and C. Frazier
for their very able assistance. Our research is supported by a
National Science Foundation grant (DAR—782810)-) to the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #735
                                                            August 1981


                      The Impact of Collective Bargaining:
                              Illusion or Reality?



                                    ABSTRACT



     This paper reviews a significant body of evidence regarding the impact
of trade unionism on economic performance and seeks to evaluate antithetical
views regarding whether estimated differences between union and nonunion
workers and firms represent: illusions created by poor experiments, real
effects explicable solely in price—theoretic terms, or real effects which
reflect the non wage—related dimensions of trade unions. The review yields
conclusions on both the substantive questions at hand and the methodologies
which have been used to address their validity.
     With respect to the illusion/reality debate, the preponderance of
extant evidence indicates that union effects on a wide variety of economic
variables estimated with cross—sectional data are real. Moreover, since
the effects of unions on nonwage outcomes generally come from models which
hold fixed the level of wages and variables affected by wages, the evidence
supports the view that unions do much more than simply raise wages as an
economic monopolist. While, in this study, we do not examine interpretations
of these nonwage effects, the effects represent an empirical foundation
for the "institutional" view of unionism, which is described in Section I.
     With respect to methods for evaluating the quality of standard cross—
sectional experiments, some techniques appear more useful than others.
In particular, we find that sensitivity analyses of single—equation results
and longitudinal experiments provide valuable checks on cross—sectional
findings while multiple—equations approaches produce results which are
much too unstable to help resolve the questions of concern.


Professor Richard B. Freeman                   Professor James L. Medoff
Littauer 109                                   Littauer 115
Harvard University                             Harvard University
Cambridge, Mass. 02138                         Cambridge, Mass. 02138

(617) 495—4950                                 (617) 495—4209
      In recent years there has been an outpouring of empirical studies on

 the impact of collective bargaining on the economy. While many of these

 analyses focus on the traditional question of wage determination under

 unionism, considerable effort has also been devoted to estimating the

 effect of the institution on other market outcomes. As a result of this

 work we have a large body of new evidence regarding differences between

 union and nonunion workers and union and nonunion
                                                     enterprises along many
 dimensions.




      Can the observed union/nonunion differences be explained primarily

in terms of preunjon characteristics of firms or individuals? Is it

that all union/nonunion differences arise only because of the "union wage

effect" and are observed only when one or more price—theoretic responses

to this effect are being ignored? Or can it be that unions have important

effects on the performance of our economic system through routes ignored

in standard price theory?



     There are a number of different positions on whether union effects are

real or illusory. One belief is that the apparent union/nonunion differences

are illusory because of the way trade unions were superimposed on various

groupings of establishments or individuals. A second view is that unions

have real effects on economic performance, but that all of these effects

operate through price—theoretic routes; any effects which appear to be




                                   —1—
  inexplicable in terms   of   standard price theory are taken as illusory.

  Finally, there is the perception that unions influence outcomes through

  institutional channels and, in so doing, have important real nonwage

  effects on our economy.




       The preiinion characteristics belief that apparent union/nonunion

  differences are illusory seems to be held primarily by those who see the

 world as close enough to satisfying the conditions of perfect competition

 that, in the short run, unions are more of an epiphenomenon than a

 substantive force.1 While it is unlikely that anyone really believes that

 every apparent union effect is an apparition, the
                                                       preunion characteristics
 view lies behind many attempts to explain away particular results suggesting

 that unions have meaningful economic impacts.



      Those whose vision of what unions do comes from standard price theory

 tend to focus on what we have elsewhere called the "monopoly face" of

 unionism and believe that every real effect of unions works through price—

theoretic channels.2      Thus, these individuals tend to limit their focus to the size

and ramifications of "the union wage effect," treating any estimated union

effect which cannot be rationalized in terms of a price—theoretic response

to the wage effect as illusory, that is, as reflecting the poor quality of

the experiment at hand.



     Those in the industrial relations tradition believe that unionism

influences outcomes primarily through what are often labelled "institutional

channels" (the "collective voice/institutional response face" in our earlier

work). While this group accepts the existence of important real price—

theoretic union effects, it believes in the. reality of non price—theoretic



                                        —2--
  effects as well. In fact, the
                                      primary concern of researchers with. an

  industrial relations world view is with the flonwage effects of collective

  bargaining.



        This paper examines the arguments and empirical evidence concerning

  whether UflOfl/flOflUfliOfl differences
                                            represent illusion or reality, defined
  in accordance with either the
                                    price—theoretic or institutional views. In
  it we seek to determine the extent to which the Ufliofl/flOflUfliofl differences

 found in myriad market outcomes are:
                                              (1) illusory, explicable in terms of
  th degree of unionism among workers or firms with innately different

 characteristjcs (2) real, working through price—theoretic routes of impact;

 and (3) real, working through Institutional routes of impact.




      While we recognize that to some extent we have set up artificial polar

 cases, and that no sensible researcher would be
                                                        expected to rely solely on
 any one of the views for explaining all union/nonunion
                                                               differences, we
believe that the differences noted
                                         permeate much of the recent literature on
unionism and that the "ideal types" provide a fruitful guide to understanding

efforts to determine what unions in fact do.
                                                                                         a


     The paper is divided into four sections.
                                                       Section I summarizes the recent
empirical findings about union/nonunion differences on which the interpretative

debate focuses. The second section lays out the theoretical and econometric

explanations of the observed Ufljofl/flOflUfljOfl
                                                    differences that have been put
forth by the various camps in illusion/reality debates. Section III provides

a summary of the results of new studies which can be used to assess whether




                                        —3—
   the effects set out in Section I are best interpreted as illusory,rea1

  for price—theoretic
                        reasons, or real for reasons that can be called

  "institutiona1'! The final section presents a brief summary of our findings.



       By way of anticipation, we reach two main
                                                      Conclusions. First, unions
  and collective bargaining have substantial real effects on diverse

  economic outcomes; Union/nonunion differences appear to reflect much more

  than the poor quality of our
                                 econometric "experiments." Second, many of the
  real union effects are the result of
                                            institutional factors, which many
 economists have neglected in recent years; the price—theoretic view of

 reality seems to be much too narrow.



 I. The Evidence In Question

     It is important at the outset to lay out the union/nonunion differences

 about which illusion/reality
                                 interpretative questions have arisen.

 Accordingly, this section briefly suinmariaes the results of recent research

 concerning the impact of unionism on certain key aspects of the labor

exchange. As a guide to the discussion, Table I gives the central findings

of these studies categorized
                                by the following substantive issues:

compensation; internal and external mobility; work rules and environment;

and inputs, productivity, and profits. The reader will notice that our set of

issues is not exhaustive. We have, in particular, neglected such important

topics as the internal operation of
                                       unions, strikes, and the survival of
the organization itself, in part because these topics do not lend themselves

to the union/nonunion comparisons which form the bulk of the research on

the topics in the table. In addition, we concentrate exclusively on the

private sector. While, as noted, we have no pretence that our set of




                                      —4—
                                              Table 1

          RECENT EVIDENCE ON UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES
                                                          BASED ON CROSS—SECTIONAL DATA
         Variable
                                    Finding                       Partial Listing of
                                                                  Relevant References
  Compensation
    Wage Rates          All else (measurable) the same, union!
                                                                  Ashenfelter (1976), Free-
                        nonunion hourly wage differential is      man & Medoff (forthcoming a),
                        between 10% and 20%.
                                                                  Lewis (1980), Mellow (l981a),
             a                                                    Oaxaca (1975), Welch (1980).
   Fringes              All else the same, union/nonunion
                                                                  Duncan (1976), Freeman (1981),
                        hourly fringe differential is between     Goldstein & Pauly (1976),
                        20% and 30%. The fringe share of
                                                                  Leigh (1979), Solnick (1978),
                        compensation is higher at a given         Viscusi (1980).
                        level of compensation.
   Wage Dispersion     Wage inequality is much lower among
                                                                  Freeman (l980c), Hyclak (1979—
                       union members than among comparable
                                                                  1980), Plotnick (1981).
                       nonrnembersand totaFwage dipersion
                       appears to be lowered by u!lionisoi.
   Wage Structure      Wage differentials between workers        Ashenfelter (1976), Bloch &
                       who are different in terms of race,       Kuskin (1978), Johnson &
                       age, service, skill 1evel,and             Youmans (1971), Kiefer &
                       education appear to be lower under
                                                                 Smith (1977), Leigh (1978),
                       cnhiQCtjv   bargaining.                   Pfeffer & Ross (1980),
                                                                 Schoeplein (1977), Shapiro
                                                                 (1978).
  Cyclical             Union wages are less responsive to
  Responsiveness                                                 Ashenfelter (1976), Hammermesh
                a      labor market conditions than nonunion     (1972), Johnson (1981),
  of Wage Rates        wages.                                    Lewis (1963), Medoff (1979),
                                                                 Mitchell (1980a, 1980b),
                                                                 Parson (1968), Raisian (1979).
  Determinants of     Other things equal, the union              Dalton & Ford (1977),
  Compens at ion
                      compensation advantage is higher the       Donsimoni (1978), Ehrenberg
  Differential        greater the percent of a market's          (1979), Freeman & Medoff
                      workers who are organized. The
                                                                 (forthcoming a), Hayden (1977),
                      effects of market concentration on
                                                                 Hendricks (1975), Kahn (1978),
                      wage differentials is unclear. The         Kochan (1980), Lee (1978),
                      differentials appear to be very large      Mellow (l981b), Weiss (1966).
                      in some regulated markets. They
                      appear to decline as firm size
                      increases.
Internal & External
Mobility
  Promotions          Seniority independent of productivity Halasz (1980), Medoff &
                      is rewarded substantially more in       Abraham (l980b, 1981b),
                      promotion decisions among union members Yanker (1980).
                      than among otherwise comparable
                      nonunion employees.




                                              —5—
                                            Table 1

          RECENT EVIDENCE ON UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES BASED ON CROSS-SECTION
                                                                                DATA
         Variable
                                    Finding                     Partial Listing of
                                                                Relevant References
  Internal & External
  Mobility (Continued)
    Quitsa              The quit rate Is much lower for        Blau & Kahn (1981), Block
                        unionized workers than for similar
                                                               (l978a), Farber (OLS Results
                        workers who are nonunion.
                                                               1979), Freeman (1976, l980a,
                                                               1980b), Kahn (1977), Leigh
                                                                   (1979).
   Temporary Layoffsa    There is much more cyclical labor        Blau & Kahn (1981), Medoff
                         adjustment through temporary layoffs     (1979).
                         in unionized manufacturing firms than
                         in otherwise comparable firms that
                         are nonunion.
   Terminations          Terminations are more likely to be on    Blau & Kahn (1981), Medoff
                         a last—in—first_out basis among union
                                                                  & Abraham (l98la, 198lb).
                         employees, ceteris paribus.
 Work Rules and
 Environment
   Rules a
                        There are important differences in the
                                                                  Freeman, (l980a), Kochan &
                        prevalence and nature of various rules
                                                                  Bloch (1977), Kochan &
                        in union and nonunion settings, such
                                                                  H.elfman (1979), Medoff &
                        as those stipulating the role of          Abraham (1981b).
                        company service and the way grievances
                        are to be handled. Union work places
                        appear to be run more by rules, with
                        more rigidity in the scheduling of
                        hours and less worker flexibility.
  Management            Management in unionized cement firms
  Practices                                                      Clark (l98Oa).
                        appears to be more professional (less.
                        paternalistic or authoritarian), more
                        standards oriented, and more in touch
                        with work performance than management
                        in similar nonunion firms.
  Management            Management in unionized manufacturing
  Flex lb                                                        Freeman & Medoff (forthcoming
                        firms appears less able to substitute    b).
                        nonproduction worker hours for
                        production worker hours, but seems no
                        less able to substitute capital for
                        production labor than similarly
                        situated nonunion management.
Worker Assessment of
Jobs
  Satisfaction with  The stated level of overall job
  Job Overalla                                                   Borjas (1979), Freeman (1976,
                     satisfaction is lower, but the wage         l978a), Kochan & Helfman
                                                                 (1979), Mandelbaum (1980).


                                            —6—
                                                     Table 1

              RECENT EVIDENCE ON UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES
                                                               BASED ON CROSS—SECTIONAL DATA
             Variable.   .

                                           Finding                         Partial Listing of
                                                                           Relevant References
  Worker Assessment of
  Jobs (Continued)
    Satisfaction with          gain required to induce a job. change
    Job Overalla               is higher for union members than for
    (Continued)                otherwise comparable. employees who are
                               not members.
    Evaluation of             Unionized workers state that they are
    Rules and                                                              Duncan & Stafford (19R1).
                              more satisfied with. their wages and         Freeman & Nedoff (1982),
    Conditionsa               fringes, less satisfied with their           Kochan. & He1fmanl979)
                              supervision, and less satisfied with.        Viscusi (1980).
                              their working conditions than nonunion
                              workers. The extent to which stated
                              job security grows with. tenure. is
                              substantially greater under unionism.
                              While the probability of viewing
                              promotions as faIr declines with.
                              service among nonunion employees, it
                              increases among union members.
 Inputs, Productiyity
 & Profits
         Tirmiity             Other things equal, workers in              Allen (1979), Brown &
   of Work Force              unionized firms tend to have more
                                                                          Nedoff (1978), Farber (1979),
                              "human capitalj'
                                                                          Frantz (1976), Kahn (1979),
                                                                          Kalachek & Raines (1980).
   Capital Intensitya        Unionize.d firms in manufacturing,
                                                                          Allen (.1979), Brown &
                             construction, and underground                Medoff (1978), Clark (1980b),
                             bituminous coal appear to have higher        Connerton & Freeman & Medoff
                             capital—labor ratios than similar            (.1979), Frantz (1976).
                             nonunion enterprises.
   Productivityb             In manufacturing and construction and        Allen (1979), Brown & Nedoff.
                             in the underground bituminous, coal
                                                                          (1978), Clark (l980a).,..
                             industry in nonturbulent times.,             Connerton & Freeman & Medoff
                             unionized enterprises appear to have         (1979), Frantz (1976)
                             greater productivity than those that
                             are nonunion, all else equal. In
                             underground coal, productivity
                             appeared to be lower under unionism in
                                 turbulent years around 1975.         -




  Profitabjlj.tyb            While profit. perunit of sales appears Brown & Nedoff (.1978), Clark
                             to be the same in similar union and
                                                                    .(.l98Oa),Frantz (1976),
                             nonunion manufacturing firms, the rate Freeman & Nedoff
                             of profit per unit of capital appears.
                                                                     (forthcoming b).
                             to be lower under unionIsm.

Notes:    a)..
                 Wages or total compensation was held constant in generating this finding.
         b)      Variables reflecting price—theoretic responses were held constant as well as
                 possible in generating this finding.
                                                     —7—
   issues is all—encompassing and while our listing of relevant references is

  undoubtedly incomplete, we believe that the table provides a reasonably

  accurate picture of the empirical results in
                                                   question.



  Compensation

       The first and probably still the most widely studied issue is the

  differential between union and nonunion
                                              wages. The early literature on this
  differential was summarized in Lewis's influential 1963 book, Unionism

  and Relative Wages in the United States. Since the publication of Lewis's

 book, a number of new sources of
                                     individual—level data (such as the
 May Current Population Survey) which permit estimation of the wage effect

 have become available. With.
                                micro—data of this kind, it is possible to

 compare the wages of union and nonunion workers with similar demographic

 characteristics who are also in the
                                       same detailed industry and/or occupation.
 As Johnson (1975) has reviewed
                                  some of this work, our summary will be brief.
 The post—Lewis micro—data estimates
                                       (derived with Ordinary Least Squares (OLS))
 have generally found wage differentials noticeably above the 10 to 15

percent range given inLewis's book. However, the analyses that have looked

within more detailed cells,
                              especially those with industry as a dimension,
have tended to yield estimated differentials near the top end of the 10 to

15 percent range. This makes very good sense given that the studies

summarized by Lewis normally examined a very narrowly defined group of

workers. A comparison of the union wage effect by groups suggests larger

impacts for black as opposedto whitemen, for blue—collar as opposed to

white—collar workers, for younger as opposed to older employees, and for

the less as opposed to the more educated. In
                                                  addition, substantial differences
have been noted in the size of the
                                     differential by industry.




                                       —8--
       Another form of data which has been used in recent studies pertains
                                                                           to
  individual establishments. These data (from surveys such as the
                                                                  Employer
  Expenditures for Employee Compensation
                                             Survey (EEC)) permit the estimation
  of wage effects for production
                                     or nonproduction workers among firms of the
  same size within the same 3—digit Standard Industrial
                                                            Classification
  (SIC) industry. Estimates using these
                                             data are quantitatively closer to
  those of Lewis, yielding union/nonunion differences of '10 percent or so.

  All told, with rare exception, recent studies confirm the existence of
                                                                         a
  sizeable union/nonunion wage differential.



      While a tremendous amount of effort was devoted in the past to studying

 union/nonunion differentials in wage rates, very little attention was devoted

 to analyzing union/nonunion differentials
                                               in fringe benefits. With the
 passage of time, this allocation of resources has become less defensible

 since the share of total
                            compensation associated with voluntary fringes has
 been growing rapidly. In contrast to Rice's 1966 cross—industry analysis,

which found no union effect
                              on fringes, the recent studies cited in Table 1
have demonstrated that the "union fringe effect" is bigger, in percentage

terms, than the "union wage effect' Data from
                                                    the 1968, 1970,and 1972 EEC
indicate, for example, that holding constant the characteristics in

employees' establishments, blue—collar workers covered by collective

bargaining received fringe benefits that were about 28 to 36 percent higher

than those of blue—collar workers who were not covered (compared to a

union wage advantage of 8 to 15
                                  percent). For workers receiving the same
total compensation per hour, the fringe share of labor cost was markedly

higher in the union setting (Freeman
                                         (1981)). Looking at separate fringes, the largest
union/nonunion percentage differentials on a per hour basis are for




                                       —9—
   pensions, life, accident and health Insurance, and vacation pay.



       One   key   question to ask about the union/nonunion
                                                              wage differentials is,
  "how do they vary across
                           settings?" Recent empirical work on this subject
  has been based on the notion that
                                    union wage gains will be high where the
  elasticity of demand for labor, and hence the cost of increased relative

  wages in terms of lost members, is low. The
                                                  evidence that, at least in
  the manufacturing and construction sectors of our
                                                    economy, union wages but
 not flOfluflion wages grow with the fraction organized in the relevant product

 market is consistent with this claim; this is because a high
                                                              percentage
 organized is likely to be associated with a low demand elasticity for

 union products and thus a low demand
                                         elasticity for union members. Other
 work has concentrated on the effect
                                        of market regulation on the union wage
 effect. Ehrenberg (1979) presents evidence consistent with the claim that

 union wages are raised by the
                                  regulation of public utilities. Hayden (1977)
 argues that the sizeable impact of unionism
                                                on trucker wages (40 percent or
 so) Is attributable both to ICC regulation of the sector and to the National

Master Freight Agreement, which created industry—wide bargaining.



     Since their inception, unions in our country have been concerned with

the structure as well as the level of wage rates. The practice which
                                                                     most
exemplifies unions' efforts on this front is the
                                                    long standing policy of
pushing for "standard rates"; that is, uniform rates for comparable workers

across establishments and for given occupational classes within establishments.

Estimates presented in Freeman (l980c)
                                          show that, for blue—collar workers,
wage inequality is substantially lower among union members than among similar

nonmemijers., Consistent with this, estimates
                                                 of separate wage equations



                                      —10—
  for union and nonunion workers have
                                        found that virtually all standard wage—

  determining variables are associated with smaller
                                                      earnings differentials
  under unionism. Moreover, union
                                    wage policies appear to contribute to the

  equalization of wages by decreasing the differential between covered blue—

  collar workers andnoncovered white—collar workers. If we add the apparent

 decrease in inequality due to wage standardization and the apparent decrease

 due to reduction in the white—collar/blue.collar
                                                     differential to the apparent
 increase due to the greater
                               wages of blue—collar union workers, we find that the
 apparent net effect OUnionism is
                                      to reduce total wage ineouality.   Evidence on
 inequality of earnings across standard metropoliton statistical areas (SMSA's)

 and states and over time also shows
                                       a negative relationship between unionism
 and dispersion in pay. In short, it appears that the structure of wages in

 the United States has been compressed
                                         by the wage policies of organized labor.



     Finally, with respect to wage adjustments under varying economic

conditions, recent analyses of cyclical variation in wage rates have confirmed

the earlier finding of Lewis that the union/nonunion wage differential has

tended to be greater during economic downturns,   which   suggests that the
reduction in (the growth of) real wage rates in response to a reduction in

product demand is smaller under trade unions.     Interestingly, the work of
Johnson (1981) and Mitchell (l981a) and an analysis of Current Wage Develop-

ments establishment—level data suggest that the union wage effect grew

substantially during the l970's to a point where it is roughly comparable

to its level in the l930's.



Internal   and External Mobi]4y
    The new work on unionism has, as noted earlier, expanded the set of




                                       —11—
   Outcomes under study. One of the most important topics
                                                           receiving attention
   has been the impact of unionism on the internal and
                                                       external mobility of
   employees.



        To evaluate the effects of
                                     unionism on firms' employment
                                                                        policies (the
   awarding of promotions, the
                                 ordering of layoffs, etc. )    it   is necessary to
  have knowledge of what
                           is actually happening inside both union and nonunion
  firms. Survey evidence collected by and discussed in
                                                        Medoff and Abraham (l980b,
  l98la, l981b) and recent case studies have provided relevant
                                                               information
  concerning the role of seniority
                                   independent of performance in firms' promotion
  and termination decisions.
                                With respect to promotions, the survey data
  reveal that whereas 68
                           percent of private sector unionized employees outside
 of agriculture and construction work in settings where
                                                             senior employees are
  favored substantially when promotion decisions are made,
                                                           only 40 percent of
 the nonunion work force is
                              employed in such settings. When the analysis is
 restricted to hourly
                      employees, the estimates of concern are 68 percent for
 union members and 53 percent for the nonunion labor force. Regressions
                                                                                with
 the survey datawbich include controls for firm size, industrial
                                                                         sector, and
 geographic region yield differences similar to those just given.
                                                                          Moreover,
case studies of a number of U.S. firms tell the same
                                                           story: company service
counts more in promotion decisions
                                      in union settings.



     One of the essential tenets
                                    of the collective voice/institutional
response model is that among workers
                                        receiving the same pay, unions reduce
employee turnover and associated
                                    costs by offering 'voice" as an alternative
to "exit." Recent evidence
                               using newly available information on the job
changes of thousands of individuals and Ofl
                                              industry—level   turnover rates



                                       —12—
   shows that with diverse factors (including wages) held constant, unionized

  workers do have substantially lower quit rates than nonunion workers who are

  comparable in other respects. The reduction in quits and the accoinpanying

  increase in tenure appear to be as substantial for blacks as for whites and

  greater for older than for younger workers.



      With less ability to reduce (the growth of) real wage rates and with

 lower quit rates, unionized firms can be expected to make greater use of

 other adjustment mechanisms, such as average hour reductions and layoffs.

 Both establishment_level and individual—level data sets demonstrate that

 temporary layoffs and recalls are a more important form of labor
                                                                    adjustment
 in unionized manufacturing firms than in otherwise comparable firms that

 are nonunion. Moreover, temporary layoffs tend to be used instead of

 average hours reductions to a greater extent under unionism.    Hence, it

 appears that the layoff/recall syndrome which has received much recent

 attention is, for the most part, a unionized manufacturing (in particular,

 durables) phenomenon.



     With respect to the order of layoffs, evidence from the seniority

survey just cited reveals that among those who had witnessed work force

reductions rules protecting senior workers against being permanently laid

off before their junior co—workers are more prevalent and stronger under

trade unions. For hourly employees, 95 percent of the responses pertaining

to groups covered by collective bargaining indicated that seniority in and

of itself receives substantial weight in
                                            termination decisions, compared to
70 percent of the responses pertaining to noncovered groups. As for

flstrengthtt 68 percent of the survey responses pertaining to unionized

hourly employees stated that a senior worker would never be involuntarily

terminated before a junior worker, whereas only 28 percent of the responses




                                     —13—
  pertaining to nonunion hourly employees stated that this is so. These

  survey results could not be explained in terms of company characteristics

  and are consistent with the findings of Blau and Kahn (1981) who used

  individual—level data.



  Work Rules and Environment

       Other personnel practices and procedures also appear to be affected

 by the presence of unionism. In Clark's (1980a, 1980b) study of six cement

  firms which were recently unionized, management practices appear to have

 changed significantly with the coming of a union, in directions which can be

 labelled "productivity oriented." These observations gain credence from

 the fact that they are similar to those of Sumner Slichter, James Heals and

 E. Robert Livernagh, who conducted myriad case studies concerning the

 relationship between unionism and management behavior for their classic

 1960 opus, The ]Irnpact of Collective BargaininonManagement. It should

 be noted that, with evidence of the type which has been collected,

 it is difficult to infer whether managers were moved from non cost—

 minimizing behavior to cost—minimizing behavior or whether the trpe

 of behavior which is cost—minimizing is different in union and in

 nonunion environments.



     It would seem reasonable, given what is believed about the objective

function of the typical union, to find less management flexibility in

unionized establishments than in otherwise comparable establishments that are
nonunion.   Consistent with this view, evidence drawn primarily from the

l972 Census of Manufactur and the EEC show that within U.S. manufacturing




                                     —14—
 the ease of substitution for
                                 production labor, particularly substitution
 of nonproduction for production labor, is lower under trade unionism.
                                                                            However,
 it should be mentioned that the limited evidence does not indicate that

 unionism is associated with a lower elasticity of substitution between labor

 and capital and thus with whatever
                                      technological change is embodied in new
 capital.



Workers '   Assessment of Jobs

       Several recent studies examining the impact of unionism on the stated

job satisfaction of workers have found union workers expressing less satis-

faction, or in some instances no more satisfaction, with their jobs than

similar nonunion workers, even when compensation is not held constant. At

the same time, however, union members are also more likely to state that

they are "unwilling to change jobs under any circumstance" or "would never

consider moving to a new job" than are their "more satisfied" nonunion

counterparts, even when the wage is fixed. One interpretation of these

results is that the collective voice of unionism provides workers with a

channel for expressing their preferences to management and that this in-

creases their willingness to complain about undesirable conditions.



       Evidence has also been accumulated
                                             concerning workers' stated satisfaction
with   particular aspects of their jobs. Some of the findings most relevant to         \


the discussion at hand are: (1) union members are much more likely to
                                                                      state
that they are happy with their wages and fringes than are otherwise comparable

nonunion employees; (2) there appears to be a strong tendency for unionized

workers to state they are less happy with their supervisors and have worse

relations with them; (3) there is a tendency for unionized workers to
                                                                      report
their physical work conditions are less desirable than those reported by


                                      —15—
  unionized workers; (4) the extent to which stated job security grows with

  tenure is substantially greater under unionism; and (5) while the probability

  of viewing promotions as fair is negatively related to seniority in nonunion

  settings, it is positively related to seniority under unionism.


  Inputs, Productivityand Profits

      When unions raise wages or otherwise alter
                                                   labor costs, enterprises can
 be expected to change factor inputs and modes of organization in such
                                                                       ways
 as to raise the marginal revenue product of labor up to the point where it

 equals the new marginal cost of labor. Two of the most important ways in

 which firms could potentially do this are to hire "higher quality" workers

 and to increase their capital/labor ratios.
                                               Evidencehas been offered showing
 that blue—collar union workers do in fact have somewhat more "huma capital"

 than similar nonunion workers. With May CPS data for 1973—1975, blue—collar

 union members are found to be three to four years older than otherwise

comparable nonunion blue—collar workers, and to have slightly more education.

Separate wage equations for males and females, which differentiate workers

by schooling, age, and region, lead to the conclusion that unionized

production labor has about 6 percent more "human capital" within 2—digit

manufacturing industries (Brown and Medoff (1978)). It should be

noted, however, that an index of labor quality based on weights from wage

regressions is at best only a crude approximation to an index based on "true"

productivity weights, as is implied by evidence that a substantial fraction

of seniority/earnings differentials cannot be explained by seniority!

productivity differentials Nedoff (1977) and Medoff and Abraham (1980a, l981a)).

Moreover, it should be recognized that indices of the sort being discussed

ignore potentially very important, but not measured, worker characteristics.



    There have been a number of recent studies which have attempted to



                                    —16—
  isolate "as well as is possible with existing data" the effect of trade

  unionism on the productivity of otherwise
                                              comparable workers utilizing the

  same amount of capital. The Brown and Medoff (1978) study, based on 1972

  state—by—industry data for U.S. manufacturing, found that unionized

  enterprises had 24 percent higher productivity than otherwise comparable

 nonunion establishments within the same 2—digit SIC industries. Studies

 of particular manufacturing industries——wooden household furniture and

 cement——have also found a positive productivity differential. Allen reports

 sizeable differences in construction, using a value output measure. His

 result is supported by the findings of Mandelstaimn (1965), who avoided the

 potential problems of measuring output in dollar terms by having union and

 nonunion contractors cost out an identical project.



      That unionism can be associated with lower as well as higher producti-

vity has been documented for the U.S. underground bituminous coal sector,

where unionized mines were estimated to be 25 percent more productive than

comparable nonunion mines in 1965, but. 20 percent less productive a decade

later. One potential explanation for the observed change in union/nonunion

productivity differentials is that the "quality" of industrial relations in

that sector appeared to change over time.



     Some effort has been devoted to explaining the routes underlying the

apparent union impact on productivity. One relevant finding is that roughly

25 percent of the union/nonunion productivity differential in the manufactur—

ing sector can be explained by the union/nonunion differential in quit rates.

Other evidence suggests that a significant piece of the union productivity

effect can be explained by the union/nonunion differential in the quality

of management practices.



                                    —17—
       The association of unionism and profitability has been examined

 only recently, in part because, like labor quality and capital, profits

 are an extremely difficult variable to measure. What the available

 evidence does suggest is that while the gross profit margin (profit

 as a percentage of the value of output) is no different in unionized

 firms than in similar nonunion firms, the rate of return on capital

 is lower in unionized settings. Thus, it appears that productivity

 under unionism is not sufficiently greater than productivity in

 nonunion settings to offset the higher compensation plus the higher

 capital intensity, which would be necessary if profits per unit of

 capital were to be left unaffected.



 11. Conceptuai Explanations of the Estimated Differences

      Consider the union/nonunion differences in economic outcomes presented

 in Table 1. How can each finding be
                                         explained? Which conceptualization of
markets and unions is most consistent with the observed differences? How

can alternative theoretical perspectives be analyzed empirically?



     In this section we examine the arguments underlying the three potential

explanations of union/nonunion differences set out at the beginning of the

paper: (1) the "preunion characteristics" explanation under which union

differences are "pure illusiory explicable by theunique characteristics of

organized workersor firms; (2) the "price—theoretic" explanation, under which unions

increase the relative compensation of their members through their monopoly

power, eliciting in turn certain price—theoretic responses which explain all



                                  —18—
  other differences; (3) the "institutional response" explanation, under

  which unions have, along with their price—theoretic effects, important

  tlonwage effects.


 The Preunion Characteristics Explanation

      In many discussions of estimated associations between unionization and

 other variables, we have heard that observed union/nonunion differences only

 reflect the ?reunion characteristics of workers or firms. As the column

 headed "Potential Explanation" in Table 2 indicates, the preunion character-

 istics under discussion are work force quality, the preference structures of

 workers, firm quality, and the production functions of firms. As the table's

 second column portrays, these preunion characteristics have been offered as

 explanations of virtually every union/nonunion difference hown in Table 1.

While not a necessary condition for the view, those who offer the preunion

 characteristics explanation of union/nonunion differences generally assume

that there are no excess profits or quasi—rents in
                                                      the economy and, hence,
that systematic differences in wages or other costaffecting factors among

competing establishments in the same product market cannot exist. If they

did, the enterprise with higher (lower) costs would be driven out of

business (dominate the market). Since observed differences cannot reflect

cost differences, tley must be offset by counterbalancing forces in the

form of differences in (observed or unobserved) worker or enterprise

characterjsics. Under this view, the commonly observed union wage

advantage would be attributed to unobserved aspects of labor or firm quality

or unobserved differences in work conditions, which
                                                      require compensating
differentials of the classic type; if union workers are paid more, then




                                    —19—
                                             Table 2
               THEORETICAL EXPLANATIONS OF OBSERVED UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES

 POTENTIAL EXPLANATION
                                   OFFERED, FOR EXAMPLE, TO EXPLAIN QBSERVED OR HYPOTHESIZED
                                                  DIFFERENCES IN:
 Preunjon Characteristics
   Quality of work force          Wage rates; fringes; wage dispersion; quit rates; producti-
                                  vity.
   Workers' tastes
                                  Fringes; cyclical responsiveness of wage rates; role of
                                  seniority in promotions and terminations and other rules;
                                  quit rates; temporary layoffs; physical working coridi—
                                  tions; job satisfaction.
   Quality of firms
                                  Wage rates; fringes; quit rates; certain rules; manage-
                                  ment practices; management flexibility; productivity;
                                  Profitability.
  Firms' technologies
                                  Physical working conditions; productivity.
Price—Theoretic Responses
  Substitution between workers    Cross—market union compensation differentials; producti-
  of different quality
                                  vity; profitability.
  Substitution between capital    Cross—market union compensation differentials, producti-
  (or other nonlaborinpt          vity; profitability;
  and labor
  Subst-±tutjon between -
                                 Wage rates; fringes; cyclical responsiveness of wage rates;
  compensation and non—
                                 temporary layoffs; rules; physical working conditions.
  compensation quality of jobs
  Postunion sorting              Postunion quality of work force; postunioflworkers'
                                 tastes (and, thus, the differences listed above under
                                 preunion quality of work force and iréunjânorker'
                                 tastes),
  Survival of firms
                                 Postunjon quality of firms;; postunion firms' tech-
                                 nologies (and, thus, the differences listed above under pre—
                                 union quality of firms and preunion. firms' technologies).
Institutional Resyonses
  New means for preference
  revelation and aggregation     Fringes; wage dispersion; cyclical responsiveness of
                                 wage rates; quit rates; role of seniority in promotions
                                 and terminations and other rules;
                                                                   temporary layoffs;
                                 physical working conditions; job satisfaction; management
                                 practices; productivity; profitability.
 More channels for
                                 Quits; job satisfaction; productivity; profitability.
 complaints, suggestions, and
 other relevant information
 Increased pressure for
                                 Productivity; profitability.
 cost—minimizing behavior




                                            —20--
  their pay "advantage" solely reflects compensation for more human capital

  or less desirable nonwage dimensions of the job.



       Column 2 in Table 2 reveals the
                                         following logical problem with using
  the preun,foncharacterjsti
                                argument to explain a large number of union/
  nonunion differences: in several instances the analysis leads to contradic-

  tory statements about the direction of the differences
                                                           prior to unionization.
  For example, one way of explaining lower quit rates at unionized firms is

 to posit that union workers quit less than nonunion workers at given wages

 because they are not as potentially productive in the outside market as

 otherwise comparable nonunion employees.    However, this runs counter to the
 preunibn characteristics explanation of higher union wages and productivity,

 that unionized workers are innately better.
                                                Similarly, if, with wages fixed,
 unionized workers quit less, a logical deduction might be that, for whatever

 reason, unions happen to be located at better plants.     However, this runs
 counter to the compensating differential
                                            explanation of the union/nonunion

wage differential, that unionized work places are worse than those that are

nonunion. Because preunion. characteristics arguments are usually invoked

to explain observed differences in outcomes one at a time, these logical

problems have not received adequate consideration
                                                     among adherents of the
preunion characteristics view of the set of observed union/nonunion

differences.




     The ;preunibrn characteristics analysis runs into a second logical

problem with respect to the mechanism by whIch unionized workers or firms

can be expected to have any particular set of p      n{hn characteristics. Put
most strongly, if unions have no real effects on economic variables, there




                                     —21—
  is no reason to expect them to locate
                                          or survive among workers or firms with
  any given characteristic. This suggests that,by itself,an
                                                              explanation of all
  observed union/nonunion differences in terms of differences in preunion-

  characteristics of workers or firms is exceedingly tenuous; it relies on

  post hoc ergo propter hoc arguments about the locus of unionism. It could

 be that unions happen to organize high wage workers or firms, low quit em-

 ployees, high productivity firms, work places with bad conditions, and so on,

 without having any real economic effects.    However, there is, as far as we
 know, no mechanism that would produce such a locus of organization under

 the null hypothesis that unions have no real effect on any of the specified

 variables.




      Finally, there are two questions which must be asked of those who hold

 the prednion characteristics view of all observed union/nonunion differences:

 "If all union effects are illusory, why do workers join unions?" and "Why

do employers oppose them (in many cases with vigor)?"



ThePrice_Tepr(p                Face) Explanation
     In the monopoly model of unionism, unions are assumed to raise wages

above competitive levels in the organized sector. This creates higher costs

of production in organized firms. How can these firms survive?



     One possible answer to this question is that unions organize the

entire relevant product market so that unionized firms face no nonunion

competition. If production costs are higher for all establishments in a

sector, the sector's output and employment will be lower than in the

absence of unionism, but the sector will survive.




                                    —22—
        Another possible explanation is based on the assertions that product

 markets are not perfectly competitive and/or that firms in a given industry

 have different cost structures (for reasons unassociated with unionism), which

 permit companies to make excess profits and/or quasi—rents. In this world,

 even if labor costs per effective labor unit rose as a result of unionism,

 firms could remain in business. As long as the increased unit labor costs

 came at the expense of excess profits and/or quasi—rents, but not at the

 expense of normal profits, the enterprises would not go out of business.

 Thus, this view stresses the idea that unions are likely to survive where

 we find limited entry possibilities for firms, where entry takes time, and/

 or where some enterprises have cost advantages over their competitors.3



       The price—theoretic arguments just given imply that unions are likely

to be located where their gains induce small price—theoretic responses in

the form of either factor or product market substitution; i.e., where the

demand elasticity for labor is relatively low. It is likely, in turn, that

the comparisons of union/nonunion differences overstate, to some extent at

least, the potential impact of unionism on currently unorganized labor, inasmuch as

the set of price—theoretic responses relevant to today's unorganized are

likely to be larger than the responses relevant to those who became unionized

in the past.



       While the monopoly modelof unionism sees union/nonunion differences

which are explicable in price—theoretic terms as real, there is one variant

of the model under which the differences border on being labelled "illusory."

This   variant relies heavily on the "postunion sorting" of workers with
different innate abilities and tastes. It    grants   the possibility that


                                      —23—
  unions can cause wages to rise but then adds that these increases will be

  met by essentially costless offsetting responses in labor quality or work

  conditions. For the labor quality
                                       response to accomplish the offset, the
  elasticity of substitution between different
                                                 groups of workers must be
  infinite over the period of concern. If so, an initial union wage effect,

  defined in terms of an average labor unit working at a work place with

 average .noncoinpensation characteristics, will lead firms to substitute

 higher quality for lower quality labor until the entire initial wage effect

 is eliminated, and thus will bring about a sorting of workers in terms of

 their quality. For the work conditions response to effect the offset, the

 firm must be able costlessly to let work
                                             place quality deteriorate. If so,
 the firm would let work conditions worsen until the entire wage advantage

 has been "paid for" by poorer nonwage job characteristics. In this world,

 when the dust settles, the only real observed differences between union and

 otherwise comparable nonunion firms will be a difference in the uncorrected

 (for differences in labor quality and the quality of work conditions) wage

differential, a difference in work force quality, a difference in the

quality of work conditions, and a difference in any ratio defined in terms

of non quality—corrected labor units.4



     Analogous responses by employers can also turn apparent union nonwage

effects into a mere sorting of workers
                                         by tastes. Consider, for example,
what might happen if unions were to raise fringes relative to wages in an

establishment. Workers with strong preferences for fringes, who might be

expected to seek those fringes in their current firms, would seek employment

in the union sector. Unionized firms
                                       would attract fringe lovers, and would
devote a larger share of each compensation dollar to fringe benefits than would




                                      —24—
  other firms, even though the aggregate expenditures on fringes might be

  unchanged in the economy.



        In short, in this framework unions can have real immediate effects;

  but these effects are posited to erode
                                            away through essentially costless
  adjustments so that any differences observed over a longer run might properly

 be   called "illusory."

 The Institutional Response Explanation
       Economists in the industrial relations tradition view the observed
 union/nonunion   differences from yet another perspective: in terms of

 "institutional responses" to union—induced changes.



       The institutional response explanation differs from those considered

 earlier in that it is based on the premise that, for a variety of reasons,

 the economy differs from the Pareto optimal world in which only standard

price—theoretic responses are possible. Several reasons are often cited

for such divergence between the real world and the economic model. First,

while many firms (individuals) seek to maximize profits (utility), they do

not achieve the optimum in the relevant period.     Second, there are important
public goods and externalities which are found, among other places, where

people work. Third, there are important barriers to exit and entry in external

and internal labor markets and other markets of less immediate concern.

Fourth, there is imperfect information in internal and external labor markets

and in other markets as well. Fifth, firms making excess profits and

quasi—rents are found in many industries. Sixth, some firms (individuals)

may be satisfied with less than an optimum, as emphasized by Simon (1955)




                                     —25—
 in his model of "satisficing" behavior. In various related guises this

 view of the world has been the basis of a number of views about the labor

 exchange, such as: the internal labor market view (Doeringer and Piore (1971)),

 the X—efficiency view (Leibenstein l966)), the idiosyncratic exchange

 view (Williamson, Wachter, and Harris (1975)), and the collective voice!

 institutional response view. What is most important about these views is

 that they suggest that understanding the effects of trade unions requires

 analyses of, among other things, the internal operations of firms, relevant

 organizational issues, the provision of various public goods at work places,

and the quality and quantity of information flows.



     The belief that labor in internal and external labor markets is, at

least to some extent, immobile is very important to the institutional

response view. In a world where there is not perfect exit and entry in labor

markets and workers cannot express fully their preferences by "voting with

their feet," there are opportunities for unions to influence economic be-

havior through means not generally recognized in standard price—theoretic

analyses and possibly to increase efficiency and social welfare as well.



     In light of the discussion of labor immobility, it should be noted that

a union can increase both the rate of compensation and the number of its

members if it organizes finns with monopsony power. While monopsony is

usually presented as an extremely rare event in labor economic texts —

"Today we have very few one company towns" —— the tendency for workers to

be tied to the same firm for many years (for whatever reasons) is consistent

with the belief that elements of monopsony are omnipresent. The point is

that as long as firms face upward sloping labor supply curves, which is




                                    —26—
 quite likely given the costs to employees of switching jobs (embodied in

 unvested pensions, rights accruing with seniority, etc.,) and to employers

 of finding and training new employees, the firm can act like a monopsonist

 (equating marginal revenue product with the marginal, as opposed to the

 average, cost of labor). This creates a situation in which unionism can

  increase employment and social welfare by raising wages (see Viscusi (1980)).



The Price—Theoretic/Institutional Debate Over What Is Real

     Most researchers try to control for the potential price—theoretic

routes of union impact in estimating union/nonunion differences in nonwage

variables. Hence, as indicated by the notes to Table 1, many of the union!

nonunion differences under discussion cannot be explained in terms of

measurable price—theoretic variables. For instance, the substantial union!

nonunion differential in quit probabilities exists even when individuals'

wages and fringes are held constant. Or to choose another example, the union!

nonunion producivity differentials discussed above were estimated with

models which controlled for labor quality and capital intensity.



     Analysts in the industrial relations tradition interpret the existence

of significant union effects, above and beyond measured price—theoretic

routes, as real——reflecting the nature of the economy's basic institutions.

These individuals believe that the key task for research on trade unions

involves gaining a better understanding of the origins, operations, and

interactions of the institutions, since the non price—theoretic actions of

finns and unions matter greatly in determining economic performance.



    Devotees of the standard price—theoretic model perceive the union!




                                    —27—
  nonunion differences quite differently; they see these differences as illusory——

   the result of the poor quality of the empirical experiments which can be

   conducted. In their eyes, nonwage union/nonunion differences are only

  observed because the relevant price—theoretic routes have not been captured.



      In sum, there is a clear and very important split among those who

 believe that unions have some important real impacts:    one group

 says that only the wage matters; the other says that while the wage matters,

 it most certainly is not all that matters.



 From the Conceptual to the Econometric

      Each of the conceptual views just discussed has implications for how

 one would approach observed union/nonunion differences
                                                          econometrically.
The preunion characteristics perspective would push us toward searching

for observed or unobserved differences which existed between individuals or

firms before they were unionized. Alternatively, the price—theoretic view would

 lead us toward searching for important price—theoretic stimuli or responses which had

 not been captured by our models or with our data and which could be causing the

 estimated union/nonunion differences. Finally, the institutional response framework

 would encourage us to seek important institutional factors with the potential to

 explain estimated union impacts not explicable in terms of measurable price—

 theoretic variables. This section provides a general nontechnical summary of

 the potential econometric issues which arise in empirical work on unions and

 the ways the issues are approachea.




     At the outset, it is important to recognize that the econometric

problems of concern occur because the observed union/nonunion differences




                                       —28—
  do not ëome from the "ideal" experiment
                                               needed to estimate the effects of

  unions (at this point in time) on economic outcomes. This experiment would

  involve unionizing a randomly chosen nonunion individual 6r firm, while

  holding all else of relevance in the world fixed, and observing the

  resultant changes.



        Unfortunately, most of the statistical "experiments" we conduct depart

 from the ideal for two reasons.      First, we cannot hold all the relevant

 factors perfectly fixed when we compare unionized individuals, or firms to

 themselves when they were nonunion. Second, it is unlikely that individuals or

 firms with similar measured characteristics became unionized on a random basis.



 Potential Econometric Explanations and Assessments of Their Validity

            The real reason you have obtained those union/nonunion
            differences is that you have omitted (niismeasured, not
            observed) a key variable which is correlated with union-
            ization, and that variable is .

            But you have the wrong causality. It is not that union-
            ism causes .   . .; it
                                 is that . . . causes unionism.

            It seems obvious that your results are due to selectivity;
            there is an unobserved factor out there which affects
            whether or not workers are unionized and the market outcome
            of concern.

                                          —
                                              Frequently   heard assertions at
                                              seminars   throughout the country.

       There are   three key econometric problems that can arise. ii doing empirical
work on the impact of unionism (or any factor) on economic outcomes:
omitted, mismeasured, or unobserved variable bias; simultaneous equations
bias; and sample selection bias. Each. of these potential reasons why esti-

mated union/nonunion differences might be spurious arises because of the

aforementioned lack of an ideal experiment.



                                        —29—
      These potential problems have been appealed to in attempts to explain

 the observed union/nonunion differentials depicted in Table 1. Those

whose priors come from the preunion characteristics view have used the

 three potential forms of bias to argue that the observed differentials in

Table 1 are illusions. Those whose priors are based on the price—theoretic

view have used the biases to offer econometric explanations of union/

nonunion differentials observed after measurable price—theoretic effects

have been netted out. In contrast, those in the institutional response

camp tend to believe that the observed relationships between unionism and

other variables are real and merit further investigation concerning their

existence and locus across specified institutional settings.



     There   are various methods for dealing with each of the potential bias
problems   which arise in analyses of cross—sectional data. Heuristically,

these methods can be divided into three broad categories:    (1) Approaches

which probe the cross—sectionairesults through various forms of Usensitiljjty!!

analysis designed to see how results might be "driven" by the poor quality

of the experiment. In this category we include such techniques as: expanding

the list of controls, using the omitted variable bias formula, imposing

coefficients on mismeasured variables, and using the variance/covariance

matrix   of coefficients to examine the sensitivity of results to alleged
experimental   problems. Given outside information on, for example, the
relationship between the omitted   variable and included variables or on

the degree of measurement eror in the variables of concern or on the likely

magnitude of selected coefficients, estimates can be made of the likely

impact of omitted, mismeasured, or unobserved variables. By making




                                      —30—
 particularly strong assumptions or picking particularly large (or small) values

 of the relevant correlation coefficients, one can "stack the deckt' against the

 estimated union effect and thus get a good notion of its strength.        (2) Tech-

 niques which seek to treat the alleged experimental problem through complex

 systems of equations in which both the relevant variables and/or their exact

 functional form are used to identify the "true" union impact. Such techniques

 can be used to deal with unobserved or mismeasured variables but are most commonly

 used to treat the simultaneous equations and sample selection problems. The

methodology is to postulate a "true" model which enables one to deal with

the alleged experimental problem and to solve the resultant equations to obtain
the coefficient of concern. (3) Approaches which seek to obtain new and better
quality    data designed specifically to deal with particular experimental problems,

especially measurement error andomitted variables.


      A very different approach to the three types of problems described is

to apply a different experimental design to the problem of estimating union

effects by examining longitudinal (before/after) rather than cross—sectional

data. Longitudinal information provides what is perhaps the most direct way

of dealing with the essential cross—sectional data problem —— that we are

comparing different people or firms rather than conducting the ideal experiment

described earlier. If one obtains longitudinal data in which omitted, mis—

measured, or unobserved variables are constant over time, one can obtain

estimates of union effects purged of biases due to these problems. Similarly,

by enabling us to compare outcome variables before and after unionization,such

data provide the proper recursive structure for dealing with       both   the "union

causes" versus "causes fljQflj5t question and the problem of cross—sectional
selectivity bias.

      It   is important   to recognize, however, that longitudinal studies are
themselves   subject to potential experimental problems not unlike those with

cross—sectional data. One potential difficulty is that when persons change jobs,

                                        —31—
    other relevant variables are also likely to change, such as occupation or industry

    or tasks at work, which may be omitted, mismeasured, or unobserved in the

    analysis. Another potential problem is that classical measurement error bias

    may become more severe because the systematic parts of variables are

    differenced away. Third, since only a limited number of persons are likely

    to change union status in a given period of time, longitudinal studies may

be prone to a sample selection problem not unlike that in cross—sectional

    studies. Longitudinal calculations reveal the effects of changing union

    status on the position of workers who change: if those persons differ in

some fundamental way from other workers, the results may not generalize to

the entire population. Whether the selectivity of union and nonunion

changers is an important phenomenon and, if so, in what way it affects

results are unclearapriori.5



        Recognizing the problems of longitudinal analyses does not of course
•




vitiate the fact that before/after data provide a distinct and real set of

potential experiments which can go a long way toward dealing with the potential

difficulties with cross—sectional work discussed above. By following the same

individual or firm over time as it changes status from nonunion to union or

vice versa, one is able to control in a more natural way for all missing or

unobserved variables which do not change over time. The longitudinal data

are an invaluable complementary form of information to the more widely used

cross—sectional data.



III. Illusion or Reality? Econometric Probes

         Much recent work on unionism has used the econometric techniques

alluded to earlier to probe the union/nonunion differentials summarized in

Table 1. What have been the results of these efforts to obtain better




                                        —32—
 estimates of the "true" union effect on economic outcomes? To what extent

 are the Table 1 differences "moved" by sensitivity probes which use new data

 or information to evaluate the effect of omitted, mismeasured,or unobserved

variables in a specified study? How sensitive are the thupirical results to

probes which rely on extensive cross—sectional modeling in which unionization

is taken as endogenous, for reasons of either simultaneity or selectivity?

What are the results of panel or longitudinal studies designed to deal with

the potential "experimental" problems with cross—sectional studies? In short, what

does the evidence say about possible ways of answering, and about possible

answers to, the frequently heard seminar assertions regarding the potential

problems with the cross—sectional analyses of the impact of collective

bargaining?



     In this section we review the relevant econometric studies which address

these important questions. Our review yields the following two key con-

clusions. First, the econometric probes do not invalidate the findings summarized

in Table 1 by attributing all or the vast bulk of observed differences to

the inadequacies of the experimental comparisons. Studies which probe the

sensitivity of cross—sectional findings to omitted, mismeasured or unobserved

variables show that while these experimental problems appear to bias union

coefficients somewhat, they are far from the sole explanation of the ordinary

least squares regression results. Studies which use longitudinal data to

deal with the problems of unobserved factors, simultaneity, or sample

selectivity tend to yield lower estimates of union effects than do OLS

studies using cross sectional information, but they also fai1 to. eliminate the




                                     —33—
 bulk of estimated impacts. Studies which seek additional data regarding the

 potential causality of union effects through surveys of firms also tend to

 find real union impacts on behavior.



     Second, studies which use systems of equations with cross—sectional data

 to "correct for" potential simultaneous equations and sample selection bias

provide very little insight into whether the Table 1 union/nonunion differences

are real or illusory. The models employed rely on "restrictions" or

"exclusions" which are far from convincing. Moreover, the results show great

instability in the face of seemingly small changes in the model or the sample

analyzed. In some cases these techniques yield union effects much below

those obtained with OLS; in others they yield effects much above those from

OLS; in yet others the systems of equations give about the same results as does

OLS. In a surprisingly large number of cases, these techniques yield results

so implausible on a priori grounds as to be dismissed out of hand. While

this instability and implausibility does not demonstrate that the OLS union/

nonunion differences are unbiased, itdoes indicate that the system of

equations methodology does nOt offer a reliable and useful way of improving

on these estimates.



     We consider next the evidence regarding these two conclusions. We

review first the results of efforts to probe cross—sectional findings

with sensitivity analysis, better data designed to deal woth omitted

variables, and systems techniques. Then we review the growing body of

evidence which uses longitudinal experiments to check on the

cross—sectional findings.




                                     —34—
 Probing the Cross—Sectional Evidence

      Table 3 summarizes some recent efforts to assess the validity of cross—

 sectional findings using one or more of the methods discussed in the preceding

 section. For each study the table shows: the type of bias being focused on,

 the econometric technique employed, the variable analyzed, the data used, the

 key empirical results, and the appropriate references. While our listing is

 undoubtedly incomplete, we believe it is broadly representative of the pattern

 of results in extant work. Because of the initial concentration of quantitative

 analyses on wages, the table is top heavy with the results of econometric

probes into the union wage effect.



     The first and undoubtedly the most widely used technique for dealing with

data inadequacies is to test the sensitivity of results to the inclusion of

detailed industry or occupation controls in the data set under study.

Addition of such controls in some sense leads to finer experiments by

focusing on union effects within more detailed groupings. Alternatively, to

the extent that missing or mismeasured variables differ across the relevant

sectors, inclusion of a large number of variables can be justified by

pointing out that they help control for those variables. Even when one

might argue that exclusion of detailed controls is theoretically "correct,"

it is useful to know whether these variables "matter." In many studies attempts

are made to obtain information on the posited missing variables at an

industry level and to add those variables in place of the dummy controls. This

provides a means of evaluating what industry dummies in fact stand for, but

offers a weaker test of the extent to which results stand up to addition of

numerous covariance controls-.



                                     —35—
                                              Table 3
   EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC
                             PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES USING CROSS-SECTIONAL DATAa
  Issue and Technique
                              Data Set                     Result                      Reference
                                   Sample
 Omitted, Mismeasured, or
 Unobserved Variable Bias
 Enter additional dummy   ges; quits;            Addition of various dummies for       Diverse
 variable(s), or other    layoffs;               2— and where possible 3—digit
 variables to obtain                                                                   studies.
                          dispersion;            Census or SIC industry or for
 finer comparisons        productivity; etc.     occupation can reduce but not
                             Diverse             eliminate estimated union!
                                                 floflufliofl differential; similar
                             Diverse            results from adding average
                                                characteristics using industry
                                                figures and from adding vari-
                                                ables capturing workplace
                                                characteristics.
Set coefficient on
                             Productivity       Union coefficient is reduced          Brown &
mismeasured variable
at predetermined             Census of          substantially by forcing esti-        Medoff
level                                           mated coefficient of capital!          (1978).
                             Manufactures;
                             CPS                labor variable to equal an
                                                upper bound of capital's
                             All workers in     share of value added in
                             manufacturing      Census of Manufactures data
                             indug tries        set, but still implies that
                                                unionized estalishments are
                                                moderately more productive
                                                (by a lower bound of 6%).
Use omitted variable         Quits
formula to discern                             Correcting for omitted fringe          Freeman
                             CPS PSID;         benefits variable and mis—             (1980b).
likely bias                                    measured alternate earnings
                             NLS Older en;
                         NLS Younger Men;
                                               variable can most likely
                                               reduce large union coefficient
                         All Workers           by no more than 1/4.
                         Productivity          Capturing true labor quality is        Clark
                         Cement company        unlikely to greatly reduce the         (1980a,
                         data                  union productivity effect in           1980b).
                         Production            cement.
                         workers

Collect new data
                         Productivity          Physical output data for cement     Clark
                         Oernent Company       plants and coal mines obtained      (1980a,
                         data;                 to deal with problems of dis-       1980b),
                         Jndergrouià1          tinguishing output variation        Connerton,
                         bituminous coal       from price variation indicate       Freeman, &
                         miiie data            that the fact that the earlier      Nedoff (1979).
                                               union productivity studies used
                         roducjoñ              a value measure cannot explain
                        workers                the estimated positive union
                                               effect; in addition, these data
                                               point to the importance of the
                                               quality of labor—management re-
                                               lations as a mediating factor in
                                               the union—productivity relationship.
                                              —36—
                                            Table 3
  EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES USING CROSS-SECTIONAL DATAa

Issue and Technique             Variable,
                                                          Result                     Reference
                                Data Set,
                                 Sample
                            Role of Seniority   Union/nonunion differences in the    Medoff &
                            per se              relationships between seniority        r
                                                                                     Pb ah am
                                                and both terminations and promo-     (1980b,
                            Surveys .qf         tions cannot be explained in         l98la).
                           companies            terms of an unobserved union!
                           All orkers           nonunion differential in the re-
                                                lationship between seniority and
                                                contribution to firm.
Construct unobserved       Fringes              Magnitude of union coefficient       Freeman
variable model                                  i sensitive to precise modej         (1981).
                           EEC
                                                for unobserved establishment
                           Production           characteristics, but qualitative
                           ôrkers               conclusion that unions are asso-
                                                ciated with higher fringe
                                                benefits is not.
Simultaneous Equations
13 las
Replace a union variable   Wages                Union/nonunion wage differential     Pencavel
with a predicted                                declines for 49 manufacturing        (1970)
union variable
                           E&E Census
                                                industries from 37% with OLS to
                           All workers
                                                27% in a 2—SLS model.
                                                Union/nonunion wage differential  Ashenfelter &
                                                declines for 2—digit SIC manu-    Johnson
                           E&E; Census          facturing industries from 46% OLS (l972)
                           Aill Workers         to 19% or 4% in 2—SLS models and
                                                to —9% in a 3—SLS model.
                           Wages; quits         Both wage and quit differentials   Kahn (l977)
                                                grow substantially (in absolute
                           E&E Census           value) with data for 3—digit SIC
                           Pro duet ior         manufacturing industries, when
                           workers              2—SLS replaces OLS; the wage
                                                differential rises from 50 to 80%.
                           Wages                Wage differential reduced from 11%   Schmidt &
                                                to 6% by fitting a system of equa-   Strauss (1976),
                           E0                   tions in which the estimated union   Qlsen (1978),
                           All workers          coefficientbis unbiased by           Schmidt 1978).
                                                assumption.
                           Wages; quits         Wage differential rises with         Farber
                                                selectivity correction from 32%      (1979).
                           ITLS Young Men
                                                to 51%; differential in quit
                           Au    wàrkers        probability switches from signi.-
                                                ficanttegatiye (—.487)to near
                                                significant positive (.878).

                           Wages                With selectivity, adjustment,        Leigh (1980b).
                           NLS Young Men        union differential rises from 22/
                                                38% to 28/105% for young and
                           All workers          ,nidd1e—aged black employees and
                                                from 25/13% to 37/46% for young
                                                and middle—aged white employees.

                                            —37—
                                               Table 3
 EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES USING CROSS—SECTIONAL DATAa

Issue and Technique         Varab1e,
                                                          Result                    Reference
                            Data Set,
                                Sample
                         Wages                   Results vary with data set and    Cain et al,
                         •CPS detailed
                                                 model, with estimated differenti- (1980);
                        occupätion data          als moving, in many cases quite   McLaughlin
                                                 substantially, in both directions (1980);
                         l:jospital wo'rkers     (presented in Table 4).           Podgursky.
                                                                                    (1980).
                         Wages                   Differential increases from        Duncan &
                        rSlD;  ich±gr
                         Time Use Survey
                                                 19% to 24% with union made
                                                 endogenous on work conditions.
                                                                                    Stafford
                                                                                    (1980).
                         ll workers
Sample Selection Bias    Wages                   Coefficients in separate          Duncan &
Add an inverse Mills                             union and nonunion equations
                                                                                   Leigh
ratio term to outcome    NLS Older Men           are only moderately affected      (l980)•
equation or estimate                             by addition of inverse Mills
a system which explicitly11 workers              ratio; estimated union/nonunion
recognizes correlation                           differential rises moderately.
between selection and
Outcome equation

                        Wages                    Sizeable wage differential        Lee (1978).
                                                 declines slightly (from
                         S EO
                                                 18% to 16%) with selec-
                        Operatives               tivity correction.
                        Wages                    Estimated union wage differ-      Neumann
                        PS ID                    ential rises significantly        (1977).
                                                 to 40% from its OLS value
                        All     workers          of 13% in one calculation
                                                 and modestly in another
                                                 (from 6% to 9%).

                        • Wages                  Results vary with data set        Cain et al,
                        CPS detailed             and model with estimated dif-     (1980),
                        occupation data          ferentials moving, in many        McLaughlin
                                                cases quite substantially,         (1980)
                        Hospital workers        in both directions to large        Podgursky
                                                positive or large (in absolute     (1980).
                                                value) negative (see Table 5
                                                for specific results).


                        Wages                   Sizeable increases in wage dif—    Feldman,
                        CPS detailed            ferential for nurses aides (to     Lee, and
                        occupation data         89%); moderate increases for       Hoffbeck
                                                health aides and technical         (198O)
                        Health care             workers; decline to —6% for
                        employees               nurses.



                                               —38—
                                          Table 3

 EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES INTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES USING CROSS-SECTIONAL DATA
                            Variable,                                     .
Issue and Technique
                            Data Set,
                                                      Result                     Reference
                             S amp 1 e

                          Wages              Union coefficient in wage           Sloan &
                          Survey of Hospital equation goes from insignificant    Elnicki
                          Directors of       positive (OLS) to insignificant     (l979)
                          Nursin             negative (2—SLS).
                          ur S es

                          Turnover           Percentage reduction in turnover    Becker
                      .
                                             associated with unionism is large   (1978)
                          spital survey      (50%) even when 2—SLS is used to
                          data
                                             correct for selectivity.
                          Health ca
                          workers



Notes: aThe following abbreviations are used throughout this table and the remainder of
        the paper for data sources: CPS represents the Current Population Survey, E&E re-
        presents Employment and Earnings, EEC represents the Expenditure for Employee Compen-
        sation survey., NLS represents the National Longitudinal Survey PSID epreseflts
        the Panel Study of Income Dynamics survey., and SEO represents the Survey of Eco-
        nomic Opportunity, and for statisticaL techniques: OLS represents ordinary least
        squares, 2—SLS represents two—stage least squares, and 3—SLS represents three—stage
        least squares.

       bThis result is reported in the Schmidt response to Olsents piece, which pointed
        out a flaw in the original Schmidt & Strauss model.




                                           —39—
       In most cases in which additional controls are added to analyses,

 either by augmentation of data sets with industry—level variables or byinclusion

 of numerous industry or 'occupation dummy variables, the greater refinement

 of the comparison set reduces the estimated impact of unionism. But this

 occurs only up to the point of, say 1— or 2—digit industry or occupation

 controls. Additional controls appear to have only a modest effect on

 the estimates. Consider, for example, the effect of adding industry

 controls to the equations estimating the effect of unionism on the usual

hourly pay of private, male wage and salary workers using 1976 May CPS data. With

a standard log—linear hourly earnings functional form which includes race, years of

education, age minus years of education minus six and its square, three region

dummies, and ablue—collar dummy variable, the effect of adding industry

controls on the estimated coefficient of the union membership dummy (member

=   1) is shown below.

           Industry Controls          Estimated Union Member Coefficient
                                                In May 1976 CPS
                                                (Standard Error)

           None                                       .29
                                                     (.01)
           1—digit Census (20)         .
                                                      .21
                                                     (.01)
           2—digit Census (45)                        .19
                                                     (.01)
           3—digit Census (200)                       .18
                                                     (.01)
                                                                                 \


As is common in such sensitivity probes, the reductions (in absolute value)

in union coefficients approach zero very quickly as the number of industry

dummies grows, and the estimated union/nonunion difference of concern does

not vanish.




                                    —40—
      Addition of other variables designed to reflect union/nonunion

 comparisons by holding fixed work place conditions likely to cause

 compensating differentials yields similar results: union/nonunion wage

 differentials diminish but do not disappear. The most sizeable reduction,

 obtained by Duncan and Stafford (1980), showed that addition of variables

 relating to the nature and intensity of work to a ln (wage) equation reduced

 a union coefficient estimate of .29 to .19. Other studies by Brown (1980)

and Leigh (1981), however, show no such relation between union/nonunion

differentials and characteristics of work places.



     There have been a limited number of studies which have sought to

evaluate the effect of measurement error or omitted variables on estimated

union/nonunion differentials. In their study of productivity, Brown and

Medoff (1978) probed the extent to which the coefficient on unionism could

be explained by classical measurement error in the capital/labor ratio by

exploiting the fact that with the Cobb—Douglas production function, under

profit maximization, the coefficient of this ratio should equal capital's

share of value added. Because the OLS estimate of the coefficient was

below capital's share and because unionization and capital/labor ratio are

positively correlated, they found that mismeasurement of the capital

intensity variable may have substantially biased upward the estimated impact

of unionism on productivity. However, even when the coefficient of the

capital/labor variable was forced to equal an upper bound estimate of

capital's share, there remained a nonnegligible positive union productivity

effect. In a study of quits, Freeman (l980a, 1980b) used the omitted

variable bias formula to assess the sensitivity of the apparent union effect

on quits to the omission of fringe benefits from the analysis and to




                                    —41—
 measurement error in alternative wages. The formula was applied using

 information from other data sets in conjunction with strong assumptions

 designed to yield lower bound estimates of the union effect. The lower

 bound estimates showed a significant and large effect about half as

 large as the initial OLS impact. In another study, dealing with omitted

 variables, Clark (1980a, 1980b) examined the likely effect of omitted labor

 quality on the union/nonunion productivity differential. Using a formula

 describing how labor quality enters the production process, and exogenous

information on possible quality changes during the period since his sample

of cement plants had gone from nonunion to union, he concluded that only a

small piece of the differential he had originally estimated could be

explained by this uncaptured work force dimension.



     There have been some recent efforts to generate new data sets to deal

othitted oTinismeasured variáble problems. To determine whether union

effects on productivity, measured by value added, might be due to union

effects on the price rather than the output component of value added, Connerton,

Freeman, and Nedoff gathered data on tons of coal, while Clark gathered

data on tons of cement. The coal study found sizable positive union

productivity effects when industrial relations in the sector were good but

negative effects in a period of poor industrial relations. The cement

study found positive union effects on physical output per worker in that

industry. To determine whether union/nonunion differentials in the extent

to which seniority reduces the probability of termination and increases the

chance of promotion could be explained by an unobserved union/nonunion

differential in the relationships between company service and current contri-

bution, Nedoff and Abraham (1981b) asked companies to compare the termination




                                    —42—
 and promotion probabilities of senior and junior employees whose performance

 was equal. Based on 561 responses, it was concluded that the greater importance

 attached to seniority per se under unionism could not be explained in terms

 of an uncaptured differential in the way performance and seniority were

 related.




      Finally, the recently developed unobservablestt models (see Chamberlain

 (1977)) were used by Freeman (1981) to assess the possibility that part of the

 estimated unton impact on fringes was due to an omitted firm characteristic. The

 analysis showed that the extent to which the OLS differential could be

 attributed to unobserved firm differences depended greatly on the way the

model was constructed. When it was assumed that there was no within—firm

spillover from blue—collar unionization to white—collar fringes, the original

fringe differential was reduced substantially by the firm—effects correction.

However, when a within—firm spillover was allowed, which seems to be the

more reasonable assumption, the original differential was not lowered by

the correction. Hence, any conclusion concerning the impact of unobserved

firm effects on the union/nonunion fringe differential depends crucially on

one's a priori logic concerning the "true" unobservable model to be used.



Simultaneous Equations

     Several analysts have sought to explore the causality of observed

union effects using simultaneous equations models in which unionism is endo—

genous, i.e., determined by the equations in the system. In the outcome equa-

tion(s) the actual union variable is replaced by a predicted variable.

Identification of the system is obtained either by exclusion of one (or

more) variables from the outcome equation, but not from the unionism



                                    -43-
 equation, or on the basis of different functional forms for the two equations.



     The first analyses using the simultaneous equations technique focused

 on industry aggregates. Both Ashenfelter and Johnson (1972) and Pencavel

 (1970) showed that, depending on the particular model employed, a large

positive OLS union/nonunion wage differential in U.S. manufacturing was

substantially reduced; Ashenfelter and Johnson estimated a differential of 46 per-

cent with a single equation (OLS) model, a differential of 19 percent with

one two—stage model, a differential of 4 percent with another two—stage

model, and a differential of —8 percent with a three—stage model. The more

recent work on manufacturing by Kahn (1977), who used 3-digit SIC data,

whereas the previous researchers used 2—digit data, but followed the same

general procedure, generated quite different results: substantial increases

(in absolute value) in both the union wage and quit effects upon correcting

for the endogeneity of unionism. Kahn's estimated wage differential rose

from 50 to 80 percent when he changed his technique from OLS to two—stage

least squares and his estimated quit effect also rose noticeably. Hence,

seemingly small changes in the models employed and in the degree of data

aggregation have yielded very different results with systems designed to

correct for potential simultaneous equations bias in analyses of aggregate

cross—sectional data.



     A widely divergent pattern of results has also been obtained when roughly

similar simultaneous equations madeIs hav been estimated with similar bodies

of individual—level data. Schmidt (1978), relying on functional form for

identification, reported a decline in the effect of unionism fromlOpercent

to 4 percent with SEU data (his two equation model was not, however,



                                   -44-
 needed to obtain unbiased estimates, since it assumed away the correlation

 that gives rise to the bias problem). On the other hand, Duncan and

 Stafford (1980) showed an increase in the estimated coefficient of unionism

when unionism was made endogenous in their model which focused on work

 conditions, as did Leigh (1980a). Applying a simultaneous equations

model with both a wage and a quit equation' to the young men NLS data,

Farber (1979) obtained an increase in the union wage effect while at the

same time switching the sign on the standard quit effect from negative to

positive, the opposite of Kahn's quit result. Farber found his results

somewhat puzzling. Overall, in the regressions cited in Table 3 (including

those from Cain, et al. presented in detail in Table 4), there is an

alarming amount and pattern of instability when actual unionism is replaced

by predicted unionism; in somewhat more than half the cases, the estimated

union coefficient rises, counter to expectation, often to rather large

values, while in many cases in which the coefficient declines it becomes

negative.



     While most authors have not discussed the sensitivity of their findings

to minor changes in specification, the statements of those who have indicate

that the instability discussed above is not a purely cross—researcher

phenomenom, since a given individual working with a given data set appears

likely to find that slight changes in specification lead to large changes in

results. For example, Duncan and Stafford(1980, p. 367) wrote that "the

estimated union coefficient [is] sensitive to the exogenous variables omitted

from the [wage] equation." Similarly, Mitchell (1980, p. 204) stated: "In

general simultaneous—equation estimates require assumptions concerning which

variables are exogenous and which serve to identifyparticular equations.




                                   —45--
                                                    Table 4
 RESULTS OF "WISCONSIN" REGRESSIONS WITH CPS DATA IN WHICH UNIONISM IS TREATED AS A PREDICTED
               ENDOGENOUS VARIABLE OR IN WHICH THERE IS A SANPLE SELECTION TERN

      Group                  OLS Union       Union Effect                Union Effect With
                              Effect        With Predicted              Inverse Mills Ratio
                                               Unionism

 Cain,et al. (1980)b                      Percentage Wage Differentiala
                                             (level of significance)
 Hospital employees
   —privated nonpro-              6                 64                              31
    fessional workers       (.10)                 (.06)                         (.05)

                                                                                .
   -private, regis-         —15                     16                              —6

    tered nurses           (>.l0)            (>.lO)                            .l0)
   —government, nonpro-
                                              •
                                                    95                               16
    fessional workers       (.07)                 (.06)                        (>.10)

   —private,                —20                     31                               4
    technicians             (.10)            (>.lO)                            (>.lO)

  —government, regis-         3                    —24                               1
   tered nurses            (>.10)            (>.lO)                            (>.lO)

  —private ,   licensed       16                    13                              28
   practical nurses                          (>.lO)                            (>.10)
                                                   —84                           —72
  —government,              —io
   technicians            (>.1O)             (>.lO)                            (>.1O)

  —government, licensed    20                      55                               21
   practical nurses     (>.lO)                    (.07)                        (>.10)
McLaughlin (1980)c —                      Percentage      Wage Differentia1a
Hospital employees                                      (t—statistic)
                                      -


  —private nonpro-            6                    36                               22
   fessional workers      (1.74)             (1.69)                            (1.30)

  —private, regis—           3                     16                               6
   tered nurses            (.66)              (.46)                             (.22)
 —government, nonpro—     4                         5                           —22
  fessional workers   (1.41)                  (.07)                            (.51)
                             0                    —57
 —government, regis—                                                            -27
  tered nurses            (.00)             (1.37)                             (.77)

POdgursky (1920)d
Private sector               10                   —72                           —63
Production workers        (3.0)             (4.3)                          (4.0)




                                                     —46—
                                             Table 4

                                           (Continued)

    RESULTS OF "WISCONSIN" REGRESSIONS WITH CPS DATA IN WHICH UNIONISM IS TREATED AS A PREDICTED
                  ENDOGENOUS VARIABLE OR IN WHICH THERE IS A SAMPLE SELECTION TERN

)tes:

   aThese differentials give the estimated percentage amount by which the wages of union mem-
    bers exceed those of otherwise comparable nonunion employees. Although the data were
    transformed where necessary to yield differentials, the original t—statistic or level of
    significance (depending on what the author presented) is given.

   bme data set used to derive these estimates is a pooled file of 1973—1976 Nay CPS micro—
    data. The dependent variable for each occupational group in the particular government!
    nongovernment sector was the real hourly wage rates of individual hospital workers. Re-
    gressors in the OLS Union Effect model included a zero—one union status dummy variable as
    well as a vector of personal characteristics, region of country, size of SNSA, year, and
    sub—occupation group. In the Union—Effect—With—Predicted—Unionism model, predicted union
    status (provided by a probit computation) replaced the zero—one union status variable. In
    the Union—Effect—With—Inverse—Mills—Ratio model, the hazard ratio was added as a regressor
    to the OLS Union Effect model. Interactions of the union status dummy variable with vari-
    ables for race, year, and full—time/part—time status were included in each model. The
    significance level refers to the combined effect of the set of union and union—interaction
    variables.


   CThe data set used and the variables included in the models are essentially the same as in note
    b above, except that part—time workers were excluded. The only important difference in
    the specification is that interactions terms were not included as additional regressors in
    the McLaughlin regressions. In fact, the McLaughlin results are virtually identical to
    the Cain, et al. specifications without the interaction terms.

   dThe data set used was the March, 1971 CPS. The dependent variable in these regressions
    is the log of annual earnings of full—time, full—year, nonfarrn, private sector production
    workers. In addition to a zero—one union status dummy variable and a percent—of—industry
    unionized variable, regressors included a vector of personal characteristics, region
    of country, size of SNSA, industry, and industrial concentration.




                                               —47—
 Experiments by this author suggest that changing assumptions can produce

 wide variations in results ranging from negative union wage effects to

 ridiculously large positive effects.1'



      Perhaps the most far reaching work on the stability of models which

 replace a union variable by a predicted value, in the context of a model in

 which unionism is taken as endogenous, has been done at the University of

 Wisconsin by Cain; et al. (1980), McLaughlin (1980), and Podgursky (1980).

 Their findings for the wage differential, summarized in Table 4, show that

 the same simultaneous equations model, estimated with data for comparable

 employee groups, yields results which swing back and forth over a highly

implausible range (from —84 percent to 95 percent).6 The Podgursky results,

which show the union/nonunion wage differential swinging from a positive 10

percent with OLS to a most certainly absurd negative 72 percent using a

two—stage least squares procedure, are particularly striking as they relate

.;to one of the groups most frequently studied in the literature.



     We conclude that the highly sensitive results obtained with both aggre-

gate industry and individual—level data sets when unionism is "predicted" raise

serious questions about the usefulness of the simultaneous equation methodology

for analyses of what unions really do. The technique appears to be trying

to squeeze out of the data more than the data contain; it does not, in our

view, provide a reliable way of addressing the illusion/reality question.



Sample   Selection
     The recently popular technique for dealing with potential sample




                                    —48—
 selection bias——adding an inverse Mills ratio term to oucoie regressions,

which corrects for the potential bias under certain assumptions (see Heckman

l976)——has been used in a number of analyses of the union/nonunion wage dif-

ferential. In the first such piece, Lee (1978), using exclusion of variables

as well as functional form for identification, reduced slightly the OLS wage

differential for operatives (from 17 to 16 percent) with data from the SEO.

Leigh (1980b), fitting models very similar to those used by Lee,

analyzed NLS data for both older and younger men. He found that wage dif-

ferentials were increased, rather than decreased, by the selectivity adjustment in

both samples. In several cases they were increased by extremely large amounts;

in three of six sets he presented, the selectivity—adjusted percentages were at

least three times as large as the OLS estimates. Another very substantial

increase in estimated wage differentials was obtained by Neumann (1977);

with PSID data for 1974 his adjusted estimate was 40 percent while his OLS

estimate was 13 percent. However, when Neumann used average data for 1968—1974,

the difference was much smaller: 9 percent versus 6 percent. Overall, the

results from adding sample selectivity "correction" terms to wage regressions

appear to be as unstable and divergent as those obtained with simultaneous

equations "corrections." Studies that differ only slightly in specification,

data, or group covered show wide differences in the impact of the "corrections"

on OLS results.7



    Work focusing on the wage differential in a givensector, hospitals,

also does not yield stable or seemingly plausible results. Becker (1978)

and Sloan and Elnicki (1979) found that selectivity adjustments reduced

estimated union coefficients, whereas the results in Table 4 from Cain, et al.

(1980) and McLaughlin (1980) for various groups in this sector show as many




                                   —49—
 increases as decreases in the union coefficient upon addition of the inverse

 Mills ratio to regressions using the same survey data and model. In yet

 another study, Feldman, Lee, and Hoffman (1980) obtained increases in the

union wage effect for several occupations in the health sector but obtained

decreases in the union wage effect for nurses when they corrected for

selectivity.



     Podgursky's (1980) work with the CPS files provides yet additional

evidence which calls into question the usefulness of the inverse Mills

ratio technique for analyses of union/nonunion differentials. In his

work on private sector production workers, an initial positive OLS

differential of 10 percent (significant at the .01 level) becomes a highly dubious

negative 63 percent (again significant at the .01 level) when an inverse

Mills ratio term is added to a wage equation.



     What is one to make of the aberrant results obtained with the simulta-

neous equations (predicted unionism) technique and with the inverse Mills

ratio technique for examining whether observed union/nonunion differences

are real or illusory? We believe that the empirical results just presented

strongly suggest that there is little to be learned from using either of

the two techniques for analyzing the impact of unionism. Unfortunately,

there seems to be no obvious tIbestt way to identify the systems of concern

and the results obtained seem to be highly sensitive to the one chosen, as

well as to the data and sample with which it is used. While the problems

addressed by the techniques may be real, the econometric solutions offered

can do little to solve them with extant cross—sectional data. Econometric

manipulations of these data do not appear to be a good substitute for




                                    —50—
 better data, for experiments more suitable to answering the problems of

 concern, or for genuine institutional or theoretical knowledge about the

 interactions between union, employers, and workers.



 Longitudinal data

      The results of some recent studies of union effects that exploit the

 before/after nature of longitudinal data sets to obtain estimates of the

 effect of unionism on the same person or firm are summarized in Table 5. As

before, there are more results on wage rates than on other outcomes of concern.

The wage studies, which ask "How does the wage of a worker change when he/she

goes from union to nonunion status or vice versa?". ieldestimates of union

wage effects which, while lower than those obtained in comparable

 cross—sectional analyses, are of sizeable and significant magnitude

supporting the claim that unionism does indeed raise the wages of individuals.

In contrast to the attempts to deal with the problem of causality and

selectivity with systems of equations, in no case does a longitudinal

analysis result "blow up."



     The magnitude of the difference between longitudinal and cross—sectional

estimates of union wage effects varies somewhat by study. Chamberlain found that

 the effect of unionism estimated with the longitudinal data in the young men

NLS was about six—tenths as large as the effect estimated with cross—sectional data.

Mincer found the longitudinal effect roughly two—thirds as large as the

cross—sectional effect. Mellow's analysis of the Nay—Nay matched CPS tapes,

by contrast, obtained a longitudinal effect that was about 40 percent of

that estimated in CPS cross—sectional regressions. One possible explanation

of the greater difference between the CPS results and other results is




                                   —51—
 that in the CPS, unlike in the other surveys, workers do not typically

 respond for themselves, raising the possibility of greater measurement

 error in the union variable using the CPS than using the other surveys. As

noted earlier, classical measurement error can be expected to become a more

 serious problem in longitudinal than in cross—sectional data. Finally, with

respect to wages, Duncan and Stafford and Leigh have presented figures on

the change in wages for workers who switch union status and those who

remain union or nonunion. These figures, given in Table 5, provide several

interesting comparisons which illuminate the nature of the longitudinal

experiment. From them one can compare the wage changes of workers who were

nonunion in the first period and became union members in the second period

to the wage changes of workers who were nonunion in both periods or to the

changes of those who began as members but left their unions or to the

changes of workers who were unionized in both periods. A similar set of

comparisons can also be made for workers who began as union members but

left their union. Each comparison provides an answer to a different question

concerning the impact of unionism on wage rates. For present purposes,

it suffices to note that in all relevant comparisons, the results in Table 5

show a substantial union wage impact of a magnitude somewhat smaller than,

but consistent with, the Table 1 findings.



     Longitudinal data have also been used to study the union effect on

quits, productivity, and work conditions. With respect to quits and producti-

vity, the results confirm the cross—sectional findings. Longitudinal

analysjs of quit behavior in a pooled PSID sample yields estimated coeffi-

cients on the union variable roughly equal to those obtained in cross—sectional

analyses, indicating that the lower quits of union workers cannot be explained




                                    —52—
                                             TABLE 5

               EVIDENCE OF ECONOMETRIC PROBES iNTO UNION/NONUNION DIFFERENCES

                                  USING LONGITUDINAL DATA


  VARIABLE,
  DATA SET,                                 RESULT                              REFERENCE
    SA}iP LE




Wages                     Changes in wages from going union to non—       Chamberlain (1980)
                          union (UN) as opposedto remaining union
NLS Young Men             (UU) and of going nonunion to union (NU) as
                          opposed to remaining nonunion (NN) are about
All workers               six—tenths as large as the comparable
                          cross—sectional differentials.

Productivity              NU change is roughly the same                   Clark (1980a, 1980b)
                          as the comparable cross—sectional
Cement company data       differential.

Production workers


Wages; Work Condi—        Change in wages:                                Duncan & Stafford
tions                     UN7%;:NU55%;                                    (1980)
                          UU 33%;NN 4O%.               -

PSID; Michigan Time       Estimated UN change in "choice of work"
Use Survey                is positive while NO change is negative.
                          Estimated UN changes in "freedom to
All workers               increase work hours" is near zero while
                          NU change is negative and substantially
                          so in absolute value.


Quits                     Quit differential in longitudinal              Freeman (l978b)
                          study is roughly the same as in
PSID                      comparable cross—sectional studies.


All workers


Wages; Work              Change in wages:                                 Leigh (1980a)
Conditions               UN 45%; NU 118%;
                         IJU 71%; NN 81%.
NLS Young Men            Estimated UN change in 'progress at work"
                         is positive while NO change is negative.
All workers              Estimated UN change in "job pressures"
                         is negative while NO change is positive.
                         Estimated UN change in "job pace" is
                         positive while NO change is zero.


                                              —53—
                           Table 5

                          (Continued)

  VARIABLE,
  DATA SET,               RESULT                          REFERENCE
   SANPLE



Wages         Wage differential of about              Mellow (1979)
              8% in longitudinal analysis
May CPS       compared to 19% in cross—
              sectional analysis.
All workers


Wages         UN and NU changes are about             Mincer (1980)
              two—thirds as large as the comparable
PSID; NLS     cross—sectional differential.
Men




                             —54—
 by an unobservable variable labeled "innate propensity to quit.?' With

 regard to productivity, Clark (1980a) found only a modest diminution in

 his estimated effect of unionism on productivity in the cement industry

 when he went to a before/after sample.8 With respect to work conditions,

 the results are somewhat less clear. Duncan and Stafford (1980) found a

 decline (increase) in the quality of certain work conditions when workers

joined (left) unions in the PSID whereas Leigh (1980a) found no such

 effects in the NLS.




     Overall, the longitudinal analyses suggest that much of the cross—

sectional union/nonunion differentials presented in Table 1 are real rather

than illusory. Since, as noted earlier, it is likely that there are some

potential problems with analyses which estimate union impacts by focusing

on marginal as opposed to average workers, we endorse neither the longitudinal

noz the crs—sectjona1 results as the answer. However, the fact that

they regularly point in the same direction is reassuring.



IV. Concl.usion

     This paper has reviewed a significant body of evidence regarding the

impact of trade unionism on economic performance and sought to evaluate

antithetical views regarding whether estimated differences between union and

nonunion workers and firms represent: illusions created by poor experiments, real

effects explicable solely in price—theoretic terms, or real effects which

reflecttha nonwage—related dimensions of trade unions. The review has

yielded conclusions on both the substantive questions at hand and the

methodologies which have been used to address their validity.




                                    —55—
      With respect to the illusion/reality debate, the preponderance of

 evidence indicates that union effects on a wide variety of economic

 variables estimated with cross—sectional data are real. Diverse

 econometric probes into these findings and examination of longitudinal

 as well as cross—sectional data have supported the reality of the union

 impact on economic performance. While magnitudes of coefficients have

 been altered by the probes, in almost no case has the evidence been explained

 away as due solely to the poor quality of the relevant econometric experi-

 ments. Moreover, since the effects of unions on nonwage outcomes generally

 come from models which hold fixed the level of wages and variables affected

by wages, the evidence supports the view that unions do much more than

simply raise wages as an economic monopolist. While,.. in this study, we have

not examined interpretations at these nonwage effects, the effects represent

an empirical foundation for the institutional view of unionism described in

Section I.




     With respect to methods for evaluating the quality of standard cross—

sectional experiments, some techniques appear more useful than others. In

particular, we have found that sensitivity analyses of single—equation

results and longitudinal experiments provide valuable checks on cross—

sectional findings while multiple—equations approaches; produce results which

are much too unstable to help resolve the questions of concern.



     Our conclusions seem to have three messages for future research on

trade unionism. First, the operating assumption that trade unions have

important and real wage and nonwage effects is strongly supported by the

extant evidence. Second, the search for a valid answer to the question of




                                    —56—
what unions do should involve more than just manipulating existing data

with sophisticated techniques; it should have at its heart the collection

of new evidence concerning the functions and operations of trade unions

and their interactions with firms and employees. Third, the illusion!

reality question should be asked not only of empirical results on the impact

of collective bargaining, but also of the efforts used to probe these

findings.




                                  —57—
                                     Footnotes


 'Those who hold this view generally also explicitly or implicitly assume
  that there are no quasi—rents due to cost advantages unassociated with
  unionization, as discussed at greater length on p. 19 below.

 2See Freeman and Medoff (1979).

       related possibility is that unions organize enough new firms in a competi—
     tive industry to offset the demise of existing firms whose costs were raised
     by unionism. In this scenario, the relevant capital market condition is
     that firms earn a normal expected rate of return over their lifetimes.

 4We ignore the case of an infinite elasticity of substitution between labor
  and other factors, since this would imply that we would not observe union-
  ized work forces to compare with those which are nonunion.

 5
 Several arguments can be advanced regarding the possible problems involved
 in infering union effects for the population from what happens to a sample
 of changers. To see the first, consider wages. To the extent that
 voluntary job changing is viewed as an investment in mobility, there is
 likely to be a tendency for both union and nonunion job changers to
 experience the same percentage wage gains, as both would change only if
 they could earn the appropriate return. This would bias comparisons of the
 differences in the wage growth of union—to—nonunion and nonunion—to--union
 changers toward zero. One would most likely get better estimates by
 looking solely at changers who left their firm involuntarily for reasons
 unrelated to their individual actions (e.g., those whose firms went out
 of business). Another point is that observed wage changes of union—status
 changers depend on where the changers fell in the relevant wage distribu—
 tion. If union or nonunion changers came disproportionately from either
 end of the distribution of concern, the estimated wages changes would not
 reflect the overall mean differential.

6Specifically, counting the number of cases in Tables 3 and 4 in which actual
 unionism was replaced by predicted unionism shows eight instances in which
 union coefficients declinedfrom0LS levels, four to negative values, and
 twelve in which the coefficient rose compared to OLS values, five of which
 reached levels in excess of 40 percent.

7Specifically, counting the number of cases in Tables 3 and 4 in which a
 selectivity correction term was introduced shows ten instances in which
 union coefficients declined frcin OLS levels, six to negative values, and
 eleven in which the coefficients rose compared to OLS values, two of which
 reached levels in excess of 40 percent.

8Brown and Medoff gathered data by 2—digit industry for 1929 and 1953 to
 use with data on unionization in these two years found in Lewis (1963, pp.
 289—290) in an eUort to capture. productivity before and after unionization.
 They regressed the change in in (value added/labor) on the change in in
 (capital/labor) and the change in fraction unionized. With only 20



                                      —58—
observations they could not estimate the union productivity effect with
any precision. The estimated coefficient on the change in fraction—
unionized variable ranged from negative to positive depending on the data
used and the assumptions made.




                                 —59—
                                      References


    Allen, Steven G. "Unionized Construction Workers Are More Productive." (Mimeo-
       graph, 1979).
    Ashenfelter, Orley. "Union Relative Wage Effects: New Evidence and a Survey
      of Their Implications for Wage Inflation." (Mimeograph, 1976).
    _________________ and George E. Johnson. "Unionism, Relative Wages, and Labor
      Quality in U.S. Manufacturing Industries," International Economic Review, XIII,
      (October, 1972), 488—507.
    Becker, Brian. "Hospital Unionism and Employment Stability," Industrial Relations,
      XVII (February,1978), 96—101.
    Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence N. Kahn. "The Exit—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor
      Market: Some Additional Evidence."(Mimeograph, 1981).
    Bloch, Farrell E. and Mark S. Kuskin. "Wage Determination in the Union and Non-
      union Sectors," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXI (January, 1978),
      183—192.                                                                 -

    Block, Richard N. "The Impact of Seniority Provisions on the Manufacturing         Quit
   Rate," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXI (July, 1978 ), 474—481.
 Borjas, G.J. "Job Satisfaction, Wages, and Unions." Journal of Human Resources
   XIV (Winter, 1979), 21—40.
 Brown, Charles. "Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market," Quarterly Joutnal
   of Economics, XCIV (February, 1980), 113—134.
_________________ and James Hedoff. "Trade Unions in the Production
                                                                                Process,"
   Journal of Political Econ, LXXXVI (June, 1978), 355—378.
Cain, Glen G., Brian E. Becker, Catherine G. McLaughlin, and Albert E. Schwank.
   "The Effect of Unions on Wages in Hospitals." (Mimeograph, 1980).
Chamberlain, Gary. "Are Brothers As Good As Twins?" In P. Taubman, ed., Kino—
   metrics: The Determinants of Soclo—Economic Success Within And Between Families.
   Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1977, pp. 287—298.
________________            "Nti1tiiariate:fleg±essibn MódelsTbr Tariel Data" (Mimeograph 1981).
Clark, Kim B. "The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study,"
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXIII (July, l980a), 451—469.
-                .   "Unionization and Productivity: Micro—Econometric Evidence,"
     Quarterly
            Journal of Economics, XCV (December, l980b), 613—639.
Connerton, M., R.B. Freeman, and J. L. Medoff. "Productivity and Industrial Rela-
  tions: The Case of U.S. Bituminous Coal." (Mimeograph, 1979).
Dalton, James A. and E. J. Ford, Jr. "Concentration and Labor Earnings in Manu-
  facturing and Utilities," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXI (October,
  1977), 45—60.
Doeringer, P. B. and N. J. Piore. Internal Labor Marlets and Manpower Analysis.
  Lexington, Mass.: Heath, 1971.
Donsimoni, Marie—Paule Joseph. "An Analysis of Trade Union Power: Structure and\
  Conduct of the American Labor Movement." Ph.D.
                                                  Thesis, Harvard University, 1978.
Duncan, Greg J. "Earnings Functions and Nonpecuniary Benefits," Journal of Human
  Resources,XI (Fall, 1976), 462—483.
______________ and Duane E. Leigh. "Wage Determination in the Union and
  Nonunion Sectors: A Sample Selectivity Approach," Industrial and Labor
  tions Review, XXXIV (October, 1980), 24—34.
______________ and Frank P. Stafford. "Do Union Members Receive Compensating
  Wage Differentials?" American Economic Review, LXX (June, 1980), 355—371.
Ehrenberg, Ronald, Thé Regulatory Process Wand Tãb0r Ethmings, N.Y.: Academic 1rss jS97L
Farber, Henry S. "Unionism, Labor Turnover, and Wages of Young Men. (Mimeograph,
    1979).
Feldman, Roger, Lung—Fei Lee, and Richard Hoffbe&k. "Hospital Employees! Wages
  and Labor Union Organization." (Mimeograoh. 1980).
Frantz, John. The Impact of Trade Unions on Productivity in the Wood Household
  Furniture Industry. Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard College, 1976.
                                        —GO—
 Freeman, Richard B. "Individual Mobility and UnionVoice in the Labor Market,"
   Amer:ican
           Economic Review, LXVI (May, l97®, 36l—3E8.
 _________________• "Job Satisfaction as an Economic Variable," American
   Economic Review, LXVIII (May, l978a), 135—141.
 __________________• "A Fixed Effect Logit Model of the Impact of Unionism on
   Quits."     (Mimeograph, 1978b).
                          •    "The Effect of Unionism on Worker Attachment to Firms,"
   Journal of Labor Research, I (Spring, l980a ), 29—61.
 ________________ . "The Exit—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor   Market, Unionism, Job
   Tenure, Quits, and Separations," Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCIV (June,
   l980b) 643—673.
 _________________ • "Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages, Industrial and
   Labor Relations Review, XXXIV (October, l980c), 3—23.
 _________________         Effect of Trade Unionism on Fiinge Benefits," Industrial
   and Labor Relations Review, XXXIV (July, 1981).
                      and James L. Medoff. "The Two Faces of Unionism," The
   lic   Interest,
                 LVII (Fall, 1979), 69—93.
                     and                 . "The Percent Organized Wage Relationship
   for Union and Nonunion Workers," Review of Economics  and
   coming a).                                                Statistics, (forth-
                     and                '. "Substitution Between Production Labor
   and Other Factors in Unionized and
                                      Nonunized Manufacturing," Review of Economics
   and Statistics, (forthcoming b).
                     and                .  What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic
   Books, 1982.
 Goldstein, Gerald and Mark Pauly. "Group
                                           Health Insurance As A Local Public Good."
   In R. Rosett, ed., The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Servi
   New York: National                                                     Secto.
 Halasz, Peter. "What Lies Behind the
                                      Slope of the Age—Earnings Profile." Senior
   Honors Th:esis, Harvard College, 1980.
Rammermesh, Daniel. "Market Power and
                                       Wage Inflation," Southern Economic Journal,
  XXXIX (October, 1972), 204-212.
Hayden, James F. "Collective Bargaining
  ster Power in the Regulated
                                        and Cartelization: An Analysis of Team-
                              Trucking Industry. Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard
  College, 1977.
Heckinan, James D. "The Common Structure of
                                            Statistical Models of Truncation,"
  Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for
  Such Models." Annals of Economics and Social Measurement v,
Hendricks, Wallace.                                               (1976), 475—492.
                      Labor Market Structure and Union Wage Levels," Economic
    g4r, XIII (September, 1975), 401—416.
                     ..
                              "Conglomerate   Mergers and Collective Bargaining," Industrial
  Relations,  XV (February, 1976), 75—87.
Ryclak, Thomas. "The Effect of Unions
  kets,"                                on Earnings Inequality in Local Labor Mar-
            ustria:La     Labr.Relaçions  Review, XXXIII (October, 1979), 77—84.
                   Unions and Income Inequality: Some Cross-State
  Industrial Relations, XIX (Spring, 1980), 212—215.              Evidence,"
Johnson, George E . "Economic Analysis of Trade Unionism," Amerjcax Economic
  Ry.jew, LXV (May, 1975), 23—28.
______________ ."changés Over Time in th Union/Nonunion Wage Differential in The
  United States" (Mimeograph, February l9Kl).
____________ and Kenneth Youmans. "Union Relative Wage Effects by Age and Education"
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXIV (January 1971), 171—179.



                                              —61—
 Kahn, Lawrence N., "Union Impact: A Reduced Form Approach", The Review of
   Economics and Statistics, LIX (November, 1977) 503—507.
 _____________   "The Effect of Unions on the Earnings of Nonunion Workers",
   Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXI (January 1978) 205—216.
                     "Unionism and Relative Wages: Direct and Indirect Effects,"
    Industrial and Labor Relations Review, XXXII (July, 1979), 520—532.
 Kalachek, Edward and Frederic Raines. "Trade Unions and Hiring Standards,"
   nal of Labor Research, I (Spring, 1980), 63—75.
 Kiefer, Nicholas and Sharon Smith, "Union Impact and Wage Discrimination by Region,"
   Journal of Human Resources, XII (Fall, 1977), 521—534.
 Kochan, Thomas A. CollectiveBargaining and Industrial Relations. Homewood, Ill.:
   Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 1980.
  ________________ and Richard N. Block. "An Interindustry Analysis of
                                                                         Bargaining
   Outcomes: Preliminary Evidence from Two—Digit Industries," Quarterly Journal
   of Economics, XCI (August, 1977), 431—452.
  ________________ and David E. Helfman. "The Effects of Collective
                                                                     BaraIning on
   Economic and Behavioral Job Outc'omes", in Research in Labor Jconomics, Vol IV,
   Greenwch: JAI Press, forthcoming 1981.
 Lee, Lung—Fei. "Unionism and Wage Rates: A Simultaneous Equations Model with
   Qualitative and LLmited Dependent Variables," International Economic Review, XIX
   (June, 1978), 415—433.
Leibenstejn, Harvey. "Allocative Efficiency vs. 'X—Efficiency,'" American
  Economic Review, LVI (June, 1966), 392—415.
 Leigh, Duane E. "Racial Discrimination and Labor Unions: Evidence froni the NLS
   Sample of Middle—Aged Men," Journal of Human Resources, XIII (Fall, 1978), 568—



 _.
   577.
                .  "Unions and Nonwage Racial Discrimination," Industrial and Labor
   Relations Review, XXXII (July, 1979), 439—450.
                  "Do Union Members Receive Compensating Wage Differentials?"
                                                                              (Mimeo-
   graph, l980a).
 ________         "Racial Differentials in Union Relative Wage Effects: A Simultan-
   eous Equations Approach," Journal of Labor Research, I,    (Spring, 1980b), 95—
   114.
 Lewis, H. Gregg. Unionism and Relative Wages in the United States. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press, 1963.
                    "Interpreting Unionism Coefficients in Wage Equations." (Mimeo—
   graph, 1980).
Mandelbaum, David. "Responses to Job Satisfaction Questions as Insights Into
  Why Men Change Employers," Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard College, 1980.
 Mandelstamin, Allan B. "The Effects of
                                          Unions on Efficiency in the Residential
    Constructi,n Industry: A Case Study," Industrial and Labor Relations
   XVIII (July, 1965), 503—521.                                               Review,
McLaughlin, Catherine G."The Iipact of Unions on HospitaL Wages." Ph.D. Thesis,
  University of Wisconsin—Madison, 1980.
Medoff, James L. "The Earnings Function: A Glimpse Inside the Black Box."
   (Mimeograph, 1977).



          -          "Layoffs and Alternatives Under Trade Unionism in U.S. Manufac-
   turing," American Economic Review, LXIX (June, 1979), 380—395.
                   and Katharine C. Abraham. "Experience, Performance, and Earnings,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, XCV (December,. l980a), 703—736.
__________________ and .___________________ i. "Years of Service and Probability of
  Promotion." (Mimeograph, l980b).
                   and      .                   "Involuntary Terminations Under Explicit
  and Implicit Employment Contracts." (Mimeograph, 1981a).


                                     —62—
Medoff, James L. and Katharine C. Abraham. "The Role of Seniority at U.S. Work
  Places: A Report on Some New Evidence." (Mimeograph, 1981b).
_______________ and _____________________. "Are Those Paid More Really More
  Productive?: The Case of Experience," Journal of Human Resources, (Spring,
  1981c), 186-216.
Mellow, Wesley. "Unionism and Wages: A Longitudinal Analysis," Review of
  Economics and Statistics, LXIII (February, 1981a), 43—52.
                 "Employer Size and Wages." (Mimeograph, l981b).
Mincer, Jacob. "The Economics of Wage Floors0"
                                               (Mimeograph, 1980).
Mitchell, Daniel J.B.. "Some Empirical Observations of Relevance to the Analysis
  of Union Wage Determination," Journal of Labor Research, I (Fall, 1980), 193—215.

                         Unthns, Wages, and Inflat:ien. Washington: The Brook:ings
   Institution, 1980b.
Moore, William J. and John Raisian.    "Cyclical Sensitivity of Union/Nonunion
   Relative Wage Effects," Journal of Labor Research, I (Spring, 1980), 115—132.
Neumann, George. "Union Wage Differentials and the Decision to Join Unions,"
   (Mimeograph, 1977).
Oaxaca, Ronald L. "Estimation of Union/Nonunion Wage Differentials Within Oc—
  cupational/Regionial Subgroups," Journal of Human Resources, X (Fall, 1975),
  529—536.
Olsen, Randall J. "Comment on 'The Effect of Unions on Earnings and Earnings on
   Unions: A Mixed Logit Approach," International Economic Review, XIX (February,
   1978), 259—261.
 Pencavel, John. An Analysis of the Quit Rate in American Manufacturing Industry.
   Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section, 1970.
 Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Jerry Ross. "Union—Nonunion Effects on Wage and Status Attain—.
   ment," Industrial Relations, XIX (Spring, 1980), 140—151.
Pierson, Gail. "The Effect of UnionSti-engths:on the. US
                                                              Phi1lis. Curve'"
  American Economic Review, LVIII (June, 1968), 456—467
Plotnick, Robert. "Trends in Male Earnings Inequality"
                                                        (Mimeograph November, 1980)
Podgursky, Michael John. "Trade Unions and Income Inequality." Ph.D. Thesis, Uni-
  versity of Wisconsin—Madison, 1980.
itaisian, John. "Cyclic Patterns in Weeks and Wages," Economic Inquiry, XVII
  (October. 1979),. 475—495.
Rice, Robert G. "Skill, Earnings and the Growth of Wage Supplements," American
  Economic Review, LVI (May, 1966), 583—593.
Schmidt, Peter. "Estimation of a Simultaneous Equations Model with Jointly
  Dependent Continuous and Qualitatiye Variables; The Union—Earnings Question
  Revisited," International Economic Review, XIX (June, 1978), 453—465.




                                   —63—
  Schmidt, Peter, and Robert P. Strauss. "The Effect of Unions on Earnings
    and Earnings on Unions: A Mixed Logit Approach", International Economic
    Review, XVII (February, 1976) 204—212.
  Schoeplein, Robert N. "Secular Changes in the Skill Differential in Manufactur—
                     "Industrial and Labor Relations
                                                     Review, XQ( (April, 1977),
  Shapiro, David. "Relative Wage Effects of Unions in the Public and Private
    Sectors, Industrial and Labor Relations
                                            Review, )OI (January, 1978),
    Simon, Herbert. "A Behavioral Model of Rational
                                                      Choice," Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, LXIX (February, 1955), 99—118.
    Sllchter, Sumner, James Healy, and E. Robert Livernash. The Impact of
      Collective Bargaining on Management. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
      Institution, 1960.
   Sloan, Frank and Richard A. Elnicki, "Determinants of Professional Nurses'
      Wages " in
                 Research in Health Economics, Vol. I, Greenwich: JAI Press,
      1979, pp. 217—254.
   Solnick, L.M. "Unionism and Fringe Benefit
                                                Expenditures," Industrial Relations,
     XVII (February, 1978), 102—107.
  Viscusi, W. Kip. "Wealth Effects and Earnings Premiums for Job Hazards," Review
     of Economics and Statistics LX
                                      (August 1978), 408—416.
                      "Union Labor Market   Structure, and the Welfare Implications of
     the Quality of Work , " Journal
                                     of Labor Research I (Spring 1980), 175—192.
  Weiss, Leonard. "Concentration and Labor.
                                              Earnings," American Economic Review, LVI
     (March, 1966), 96—117.
  Welch, Stephen W. "Union—Nonunion Construction
                                                    Wage Differentials," Industrial
     Relations, XIX (Spring, 1980), 152—162.
Williamson, 0.E., M. L. Wachter, and J.E.
                                            Harris. "Understanding the Employment
   Relation: The Analysis of Idiosyncratic
                                             Exchange," The Bell Journal of
   Economics, VI (Spring, 1975), 250—278.
 Yankër, Robert H. 'Productivity Versus
                                          Seniority: What is the Determining Factor
    in Regard to Wages and Promotion?
                                        Senior Honors Thesis, Harvard College, 1980.




                                     —64—
