                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           IMPLICATIONS OF CORPORATE CAPITAL STRUCTURE
                 THEORY FOR BANKING INSTITUTIONS


                         Yair E. Orgier

                     Robert A. Taggart, Jr.


                      Working Paper No. 737




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          August 1981




This paper was written while the first author was Visiting
Professor of Finance at Northwestern. We are grateful to
Northwestern's Banking Research Center for financial support and to
Lemma W. Senbet for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                                          NBER Working P a p e r # 7 3 7
                                                                                                August, 1981




                            I m p l i c a t i o n s of C o r p o r a t e C a p i t a l S t r u c t u r e
                                     Theory f o r Banking I n s t i t u t i o n s



                                                        ABSTRACT




        T h i s p a p e r a p p l i e s some r e c e n t a d v a n c e s i n c o r p o r a t e c a p i t a l s t r u c t u r e

t h e o r y t o t h e d e t e r m i n a t i o n of o p t i m a l c a p i t a l i n b a n k i n g .         The e f f e c t s of

c o r p o r a t e and p e r s o n a l t a x e s , government r e g u l a t i o n , t h e t e c h n o l o g y of

p r o d u c i n g d e p o s i t s e r v i c e s and t h e c o s t s of b a n k r u p t c y and a g e n c y p r o b l e m s

a r e a l l d i s c u s s e d i n t h e c o n t e x t of t h e U.S.          commercial b a n k i n g s y s t e m .

The a n a l y s i s s u g g e s t s e x p l a n a t i o n s f o r why commercial b a n k s t e n d t o h a v e

r e l a t i v e l y l e s s c a p i t a l t h a n n o n f i n a n c i a l f i r m s , why commercial bank

l e v e r a g e h a s t e n d e d t o i n c r e a s e o v e r t i m e and why l a r g e banks t e n d t o h a v e

r e l a t i v e l y l e s s c a p i t a l t h a n s m a l l banks.


                                                                                    Y a i r E. O r g l e r
                                                                                    F a c u l t y of Management
                                                                                    Leon R e c a n a t i G r a d u a t e S c h o o l
                                                                                    of B u s i n e s s A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
                                                                                    Tel-Aviv U n i v e r s i t y
                                                                                    Tel-Aviv I s r a e l



                                                                                    R o b e r t A. T a g g a r t , J r .
                                                                                    J.L. Kellogg Graduate School
                                                                                    of Management
                                                                                    \?orthwestern U n i v e r s i t y
                                                                                    E v a n s t o n . ILL 60201
                 Implications of Corporate Capital

             Structure Theory for Banking Institutions



     The determination of an optimal capital structure for commercial

banks has for many years stirred discussion and controversy among scholars,

bankers and regulators. Numerous studies (Peltzman [16], Pringle [17],

Mingo [14], Santomero and Watson [19], Taggart and Greenbauni [22], and

Buser, Chen and Kane [41, to name a few) have explored theoretical and

empirical aspects of bank capital, but the underlying issues have not been

conclusively resolved.

     At the same time the issue of optimal capital structure has seen a

resurgence of interest in the corporate finance literature. In recent

years, the effects on corporate capital structure of the tax system

(Miller [12]), agency costs (Jensen and Meckling [91, Smith and Warner [21]),

and bankruptcy costs (Haugen and Senbet [8]),as well as the combined

effects of these factors (DeAngelo and Masulis [5], Barnea, Haugen and

Senbet [1]), have all come under scrutiny.

     While these studies in corporate finance have by no means resolved

all the issues either, progress has been made and it seems worthwhile to

analyze the implications of these advances for commercial bank capital

structure. To be sure, several previous papers (Taggart and Greenbaum

[22], Fama [7], and Buser, Chen and Kane[4], for example) have taken the

view that banks are corporations and are thus susceptible to corporate

capital structure theory. The full range of recent developments in this

theory, however, has not yet to our knowledge been brought to bear on the
                                —2—




bank capital decision.

     The purpose of this paper is to analyze the implications for commer-

cial banks of the new developments in capital structure theory.

Specifically, we evaluate and attempt to explain the marked difference

in leverage between banks and nonfinancial institutions on the basis of

differences in the fundamental characteristics of their financial liabili-

ties and in the level of regulation and supervision to which they are

subject.    The same framework will be used to analyze the differences in

leverage between large and small banks.

     In Section 1 below we briefly review recent work in corporate finance

theory on the capital structure effects of taxes and agency costs. In

Section II we discuss the effects of the interaction between the tax system

and the production function for financial services on commercial bank

capital structures. In Section III we analyze the nature of bankruptcy and

agency costs in banking and their potential influence on bank capital.

Finally, in Section IV we summarize and draw conclusions from our analysis.



 I. Taxes, Agency Costs and Capital Structure in Corporate Finance Theory

      Until just a few years ago, there appeared to be an evolving consensus

 among corporate finance scholars that the primary determinants of the opti—

 mal capital structure for a firm were corporate taxes and bankruptcy costs.

 Because interest payments are tax—deductible and dividend payments are not,

 debt financing was viewed as having a tax advantage over equity, and in

 the absence of any offset, debt would be the dominant form of financing.

 Increased use of debt, however, entails an increased risk of bankruptcy,

 which in turn imposes costs on the firm. Not only is the bankruptcy
                                —3—




process itself costly because of legal and negotiating costs, but even an

imminent threat of bankruptcy may be costly because it disrupts normal

relationships with suppliers and customers and may force changes in the

firm's investment and financing plans. The prevailing view, then, was

that an optimal capital structure is reached when the present value of

tax savings from an additional dollar of debt is just offset by the present

value of marginal bankruptcy costs.' Furthermore, since the nature of

bankruptcy costs and the firm's susceptibility to them are specific to

the individual firm, these costs were viewed as the primary determinants

of differences in capital structures among a cross section of firms.

     This prevailing view has been increasingly challenged, however. It

has been argued that bankruptcy costs are not sufficiently important either

empirically (Warner [23]) or theoretically (Haugen and Senbet [8], to

offset the tax saving from debt. Moreover, Jensen and Meckling [9], have

pointed out that if tax savings are the only advantage to debt, then equity

should be the dominant form of financing in the absence of corporate taxes.

Since this implication is clearly refuted by pre—1913 empirical observation,

they have constructed an alternative theory based on the notion that an

owner—manager of a firm must enter into costly agency relationships with

outside security holders)be they londholders or shareholders. Finally,

Miller [12] has questioned the importance that has been attributed to the

tax—deductibility of interest. He has argued that once personal taxes on

both ordinary income and capital gains are considered, the individual

firm's capital structure may be a matter of indifference at a market

equilibrium.
                                —4—




     Since Miller's argument and the agency cost theory play an important

role in our ori analysis, it is useful to review their essential features.

To take the simplest version of Miller's model, consider a world of cer-

tainty in which investors choose among corporate bonds, paying an interest

rate R, tax—exempt bonds, paying an interest rate R, and corporate stock.

Investors pay taxes on income from corporate bonds at the rate tb where

tb may differ across individuals in different tax brackets. Income from

corporate stock, on the other hand, like that from tax—exempt bonds, is

assumed to be free of personal taxes. In addition, corporations pay taxes

on profits at the rate t.

     If a corporation retires a dollar of debt it saves R in interest

payments, so that R(l_tc) can be channeled (after taxes) to its

shareholders. Since shares are tax—exempt, the opportunity cost of income

from shares is R, and shareholder wealth would be unchanged by this

operation as long as R(l—t ) = R .    Value—maximizing firms will thus have a
                          c     0

perfectly elastic supply of debt at the interest rate level R =
                                                                  Ro/(l_tc)
because debt and equity can be freely substituted for one another at this

level without affecting the firms' market values.

     The aggregate demand for corporate bonds by investors, on the other

hand, will rise with R. As long as tax arbitrage operations are prohibited

(or at least made costly), corporations as a whole will be able to sell

more bonds only by driving up interest rates sufficiently to coax investors

in successively higher tax brackets to hold them. The resulting equili-

brium has been depicted by Miller (1977) with the diagram shown in Figure 1,
                                                  *
in which the aggregate amount of corporate debt, B is determinate.
                                      —5—




     *
 B       is that level of debt sufficient to drive the interest rate on corporate

 bonds up to R/(l—t). Once that aggregate amount of debt has been issued,

 however, any individual firm will be indifferent to further changes in its

 capital structure.

          Any costs associated with corporate debt, such as bankruptcy costs

or agency costs, can also be incorporated in this framework,       as has been

done by Barnea, Haugen and Senbet [1]. Since bankruptcy and agency costs

make sense only in the presence of uncertainty, however, all rates of re-

turn must now be interpreted as certainty equivalents. Increased use of

debt not only increases the chance of default, but as a consequence it

exacerbates the incentive problems that arise between bondholders and

shareholders. This, in turn, requires increasingly costly negotiation

and monitoring activities, and the level of interest rates at which the firm

is indifferent between debt and equity financing will no longer be constant.

Rather, as the agency costs of debt rise relative to those of equity, the

interest rate on corporate debt must fall relative to the cost of equity

(here, the certainty equivalent of the tax—exempt bond rate) in order for

the firm to be willing to supply an additional dollar of debi.2 The

equilibrium amount of corporate debt will thus be as depicted in Figure 2.

Here there is again an optimal amount of corporate debt in the aggregate,

but unlike the case considered by Miller there will also be an optimal

capital structure at the firm level. Agency costs are firm—specific, and

thus the interest rates at which different firms would be willing to Supply

a given amount of debt will differ. The aggregate supply curve of corpor-

ate bonds must be thought of as a horizontal sum of individual firm supply
                                  —6—




curves. Supply and demand at the aggregate level determine the interest

rate on corporate bonds, and given this rate individual firms determine

their optimal capital structures.



II. Taxes and Commercial Bank Capital Structure

A. A Simple Miller—Type Model of Bank Capital

    With these developments in corporate capital structure theory in mind,

we now turn to the capital decision in commercial banks. For the sake of

clarity we will first analyze the impact of tax consideratiors alone on

this decision, deferring until the next section any discussion of agency

problems. e begin with a simple model analogous to that of Miller [l2.

     Assume that there is no uncertainty. Commercial banks finance them-

selves by issuing either equity or a single type of deposit, which we will

think of as a savings deposit. As in Miller's model, banks pay corporate

taxes,but the return to investors on their equity is exempt from taxes at

the personal level. The return, R, on bank deposits has two components.

The first is explicit interest,         which is taxable to investors at the

rate tb For the time being we assume that RD is unrestricted by re-

gulators (that is, we assume away regulation Q).4 The second component

of R is some amount, S, of services (per dollar of deposits) that are not

taxable to investors. Each unit of services might be thought of as a

package of bookkeeping, liquidity and safekeeping services, and the value

of these services to the marginal depositor will be denoted by V(S).5
It is also assumed for simplicity that banks levy no explicit charge

upon depositors for these services.

     The cost to an individual bank of providing these services depends

on the quantity of services provided per dollar of deposits and on the
                                  —7—




bank's deposit level. Cost curves for individual banks may then be

summed horizontally to obtain an aggregate cost curve, C =   C(S,D),
where S is the level of services per dollar of deposits and D is the

aggregate deposit leveL The deposit market is competitive and, for

simplicity, the quantity of services per dollar of deposits is taken to

be fixed. The more realistic situation in which service levels and ser-

vice charges are allowed to vary is considered further in Section LI.B.

      Investors in this model may choose between corporate equity, tax—

exempt bonds and bank deposits.6 The focus here will be on the trade-

off between deposits and equity holdings, which, like tax—exempt bonds,

bear a return of R. The demand curve for deposits represents the level

of gross return, R, on deposits necessary to induce investors to hold a

given quantity, D, of deposits. It is implicit that as holdings of de-

posits increase, holdings of equity are reduced. Since the demand curve

is thus the locus of combinations of R and D for which the marginal inves-

tor would be just willing to substitute deposits for equity, this investor's

marginal after—tax return on deposits, R(l_tb) + V(S) must be equal to

the return on equity,R,anywhere along the curve. Hence at any point

on the curve, both




          R=R.D+V(S)                                                      (1)




and       RD(1_tb) + V(S) =   R                                           (2)




must hold. Eliminating RD from (1) and (2) gives
                                                     —8—




                     R
              R =     °.       — v(S)\                           .
                                                                                   (3)
                    l—t                       'J-—t1
                                              '
                         pb                       pb


Note that without the service element, which is unique to bank deposits,

V(S) =   0,   and the above equation is identical to Miller's demand curve.

      As with the taxable bonds in Miller's model, banks can issue more

deposits by paying a higher rate, R, so as to appeal to investors in

successively higher tax brackets. The slope of the demand curve is thus




      dD
                R-V(S)_\( dt'\                   -     ( tb          '\(
                                                                           dV(S)
                                                                            dD
                                                                                   (4)

                (l_tb)2)   dD)                             (l_tb)I



where dt1b/dD is positive. The first term in (4) is thus positive as

long as RD is positive (see (2)). Since the marginal value of services

would be expected to decline as investors receive more of them, we would

also expect the second term to be positive and thus the demand curve will

have a positive slope.

      Expression (4) may be further interpreted by noting that if the en-

tire return on deposits were paid in the form of explicit interest, we

would have


                                          /      1
                     I         R
                                     .
                                     \( dt
                                         I       pb          .
                                                                                    5
              dD               j \2fl dD
                          '1
                               tbl
If   the decline in the marginal value of services, dV(S)/dD, is not too

large as more deposits are issued, then expression (4) will be smaller

than expression (5). That is, the gross return need not rise as much to
                                        —9—




 attract more depositors in expression (4), because a part of that return

 comes in non—taxable form. Expression (5) by contrast, is exactly

 analogous to Miller's model, in which the interest rate is "grossed up"

 to pay the taxes of successively higher tax—bracket investors.

      A bank's supply curve for deposits represents the levels of R

necessary to induce the bank to substitute various amounts of deposits

for equity. Since the cost of equity is R, the height of the supply

 curve is that level of R such that the after—tax marginal cost of deposits

 is equal to R. That is, we must have simultaneously



            R =
                  RD + V(S),



and RD(l-tc) + C(S,D)(l—t )/D = R                 ,                      (6)


or, eliminating RD,



                               C(S,D)
            R =
                  l-t   -               + v(S)                           (7)


Again,   without the service element this equation is identical to Miller's

supply curve. The shape of the supply curve depends largely on the costs

of providing services. The intercept is at



                        -
           R =
                  l-t       C(S,O)/D    + V(S),                          (8)




and the slope (assuming no individual bank perceives that it has any
                                         —10—




effect on V(S) is



                  =   —              .                                           (9)


Hence the slope will be positive negative or flat, depending on whether

the marginal cost of producing services per dollar of deposits is falling,

rising or constant. Moreover, if there is a range of deposits over which

marginal costs decline, the bank would be willing to increase its explicit

interest payments in order to attract these additional deposits.

     The resulting equilibrium in the deposit market is depicted in

Figure 3. As in Miller's model, the equilibrium aggregate amount of bank
             *
deposits,   D ,   is      determined by the intersection of supply and demand.

Unlike Miller's model, however, the costs of producing deposit services

are specific to individual banking firms and thus, apart from the case of

constant returns to scale, the industry equilibrium will also imply an

equilibrium output of deposits for each bank.

     Several implications for the relative degree of commercial bank

leverage may be drawn from this model. First, to the extent that payment

of part of the gross return on bank deposits in the form of non—taxable

services tends to flatten the deposit demand curve, banks will be more

highly levered than if their total return were paid in the form of

taxable interest.7 This is depicted in Figure 4.

     Second, the imposition of various regulatory costs on banks will

shift the supply curve and, ceteris paribus, will tend to reduce bank

leverage. A reserve requirement of r per dollar of deposits, for example,

acts as a tax upon banks for supplying deposits. Raising a dollar of
                                  —11—




loanable funds through deposits will now entail an effective cost of

R/1—r and the supply curve will now be given by


                  R(l—r)
                   o
            R —              CS,D) +
                   l—t
                      c



That is, imposition of a reserve requirement on deposits results in a

parallel downward shift in the supply curve, which consequently reduces

the equilibrium degree of commercial bank leverage.

       Finally, the degree of bank leverage will depend on the extent of any

range of economies of scale in the production of deposit services. Generally,

the sooner the range of increasing marginal costs sets in, the sooner the

supply curve will intersect the demand curve and the lower will be the

equilibrium level of deposits. In the presence àf entry regulation,

moreover, the same applies at the individual bank level. In a fully com-

petitive regime competition would drive out all inefficient producers of

deposit services and in equilibrium only banks with identical minimum

average costs could survive. If regulation erects entry barriers for

the lower—cost producers, however, other banks will remain in business,

but their equilibrium capital structurwill be different from those of

the lower—cost banks. This situation is depicted in Figure 5, in which

supply curves for banks A and B are shown.8 The industry supply curve is

the horizontal sum of all individual bank supply curves, and the intersec—
                                                *
tion   of industry demand and supply determines R , the equilibrium gross re-

turn on deposits. The optimal degree of leverage for each individual bank

is then determined by the level of deposits on its own supply curve corres—
            *
ponding to R .   Degrees of leverage will differ in general among banks.
                             —12—




In particular, if marginal costs of producing deposit services turn upward

for smaller banks at lower degrees of leverage than for bigger banks,

smaller banks will tend to be less highly levered.9



B. Extensions of the Simple Model

     Perhaps the most obvious way that the model of ection lILA.

might be extended is to take account of the variety of liabilities ordinarily

issued by commercial banks. Rather than confining themselves to a single

type of deposit, banks simultaneously issue demand deposits, NOW accounts,

passbook savings deposits and large and small scale time deposits of

varying maturities. In addition, many banks make use of more conventional

debt financing. The primary differences among these liabilities are the

varying combinations of services and explicit interest that they represent.

     Conventional debt and large—scale CD's, for example, pay investors a

return that is largely in the form of explicit interest with minimal

service packages. These liabilities would be most like the corporate bonds

analyzed in Miller's model, and the same basic principles would apply. In

the absence of bankruptcy or agency costs, tax considerations alone would

dictate a horizontal supply curve for these liabilities, and their equili-

brium quantity would be determinate at the aggregate level, but not at the

level of the individual bank.

     The other types of deposits are distinguished primarily by the service

packages they offer, with checking accounts representing the most service—

intensive variety. Essentially, these different types of deposits, as well

as the different minimum balance versus fee arrangements available within

deposit categories, represent attempts to separate the demand curve for

deposits, as described in Section II.A., into a number of separate markets,
                               —13—




each appealing to different depositor characteristics. A deposit account

with no explicit interest payments but large quantities of "free" services

per dollar of deposits, for example, would appeal to both high tax bracket

investors, because of the non—taxable nature of the return, and investors

with high demands for these services. Deposit accounts with high explicit

interest payments and separate charges for services, on the other hand,

would appeal to both low tax—bracket investors and investors with low

demands for services.

     Further interpretation of banks' attempts to appeal to different de-

positor clienteles is provided if we think in terms of an overall demand

for deposits that subsumes the various categories of accounts. Referring

to Figure 4 and starting from the vertical axis, we could imagine the first

increment of depositors as being willing to accept an account with low

explicit interest and a minimal service package. Such an account would be

acceptable to both depositors in very low tax brackets and/or those with a

very strong desire for services. The next increment of depositors might

be attracted by a slightly higher explicit interest payment, while the

succeeding increment might be attracted by a slightly better service

package. If moving up the demand curve in this fashion entails variations

in both services and explicit interest, we would expect the demand curve

to be flatter than if only explicit interest could be varied. In the model

of Section II.A., additional depositors could be attracted only by raising

    but some of these depositors could have been attracted with smaller

increments in the total return R if the service component were also

variable. The greater is banks' ability to tailor deposits to both the

differing desires and tax brackets of investors, then, the flatter will be
                               —14—




the overall demand curve and the greater will be the equilibrium degree

of leverage for banks in the aggregate.1°
     The variety of interest payments and service packages offered by

banks would be determined on the supply side by both regulatory restric-

tions and technological feasibility. A ceiling on rates, such as

Regulation Q, for example, would tend to encourage greater offerings of

free services, but then the authorities may feel compelled to restrict

amounts or types of services as well. Removal of ceilings would tend

to encourage somewhat higher interest rates and greater use of service

charges.11 In terms of technical feasibility, the absence of all

action costs or technological constraints might encourage banks to offer

a different deposit contract to each and every customer, depending on

his tax status and his desire for services.12 Since such extreme

differentiation is infeasible, however, banks will trade off the extra

profits from further differentiation against the costs of creating and

keeping track of additional account categories.

     The introduction of these different types of accounts complicates

the details of the analysis and may bring to bear additional factors that

are specific to individual banks on the determination of optimal capital

structure. Nevertheless, the general character of the resulting equili-

brium would still be the same as that described in the model of

the preceding section. Supplies and demands would determine a constella-

tion of gross rates of return on deposits and other liabilities of all types,

and in equilibrium no bank would have any incentive to shift its liability

mix. Cost conditions associated with the production of services (which

may exhibit a considerable degree of jointness across different categories
                                  —15—




of deposits), reserve requirements against the various deposits and the

shapes of the demand curves would be the primary determinants of the

relative liability proportions.

     Another extension of the basic model of the preceding section involves

the role of deposit insurance. If we think of safety as one of the

services banks provide to their depositors, we can view deposit insurance

as a substitute for the production of safety by banks themselves. In the

absence of deposit insurance, one would expect the benefits of diversifica-

tion, both with respect to asset risk and withdrawal risk, to give larger

banks an advantage over smaller banks in the production of safety)3

This would in turn imply that smaller banks would be less highly levered

in equilibrium than larger banks. In Figure 5, for example, the supply

curve for the smaller banlç A, might turn down sooner, because as A becomes

more highly levered it is forced to invest in less risky assets in order

to provide its depositors the same degree of safety. This in turn forces

down the rate it can offer to depositors to raise more deposit funds. The

larger bank B, on the other hand reaps diversification benefits and this

allows it to be more highly levered.

     With deposit insurance, however, the smaller bank's disadvantage in

this respect is reduced. As long as its fee for insurance is a constant

percentage of deposits, the smaller bank's supply curve will tend to

flatten out, and the existence of insurance will thus tend to narrow the

gap between the degree of leverage of large and small banks. The

magnitude of this effect also depends on the proportion of large unin-

sured deposits out of total liabilities. While small banks usually do not

have many uninsured deposits, their existence would tend to widen the

leverage gap of large and small banks. Deposit insurance, of course,
                                     —16—




also has a number of incentive effects on bank behavior as well as

effects on the costs of bankruptcy and liquidation. These will be dis-

cussed in more detail in Section III.

     A further extension of the basic model of Section II.A. entails

noting that bank equity is not in fact fully tax—exempt. If equity is

subject to an effective tax rate t
                                        i
                                        ps
                                           , where
                                                     <
                                                   0 —    i<— t pb
                                                         tps    i
                                                                     ,   then the
equation of the supply curve for deposits becomes



          R =        Ro          -      C(S,D)   + V(S).                            (11)
                (l-t)(l-t1)



The higher is t1 ,   the   effective tax rate on stock returns for the mar—
               Ps
ginal purchaser of corporate stock, the higher is the intercept of the

supply curve. In turn, a parallel upward shift in the supply curve will

tend, other things equal, to increase the degree of commercial bank

leverage. Higher dividend payments by commercial banks, then, will tend

to increase the effective tax rate on stock returns and will be associated

with greater leverage. Our model offers no explanation, however, of

bank dividend policy.

     Finally, it should be noted that the role of the supply curve in our

analysis is valid even in the absence of taxes, as long as the costs of

producing bank services are lower than V(s) .       This may explain the re-
latively high leverage ratios in commercial banks that existed already at

the beginning of this century. For instance, the ratio of capital to

total bank assets was roughly 20 percent between 1900 and l915 As taxes

were gradually increased, there was a parallel rise in bank leverage so
                                —17-




 that the ratio of capital to total assets for all U.S. commercial banks

 was 7.4 percent at the end of 1980.16 While this increase in bank

 leverage can be attributed to other factors,such as increasing bank re-

 gulation and supervision, it is clear that the tax system had an important

 role in this development.




III. Bankruptcy Costs, Agency Costs and Commercial Bank Capital Structure

    Jensen and Meckling [9]    list three categories of costs associated

with debt: bankruptcy costs, the perverse incentive effects associated

with highly levered firms, and the monitoring costs engendered by these

incentive effects. In commercial banking, the form and magnitude of all

three types of costs are intimately bound to the system of bank regulation

and particularly the deposit insurance system. We will treat bankruptcy

costs first and then turn to incentive and monitoring costs.

     There is a general presumption that the probability of bankruptcy

is lower in banking than in other industries. The reasons for this

assumption are twofold: first, the degree of regulation and supervision

by bank regulatory agencies is probably stronger than in any other industry,

and it is expected that this tight control may reduce undue risks that

could lead to bankruptcy. Second, it is widely believed that at least

the largest banks will not be allowed to fail in order to avoid poten-

tially serious damages to the monetary system. While there is no formal

or even informal support for this assertion, the resolution of large bank

failures in the 1970's through assumption (takeover) rather than payoff

(liquidation) reenforces this belief. Consequently, large uninsured de-

positors could be expected to be less concerned about bankruptcy than
                               —18--




 corporate bondholders in other industries, and this may contribute to a

 reduction of indirect bankruptcy costs.

     Direct bankruptcy costs are also likely to be lower for commercial

banks than for nonfinancial corporations. In analyzing this issue it is

helpful to make a distinction between liquidation and bankruptcy as was

suggested by Haugen and Senbet [8]. Clearly, the cost of liquidating

financial assets is lower than the cost of liquidating most real assets

due to the existence of relatively efficient capital and money markets
                       17
even at the local level. As far as direct bankruptcy costs are concerned,

it can be argued that the existence of a specialized liquidation division

within the FDIC is likely to reduce the various search, legal, bookkeeping

and other costs and fees related to actual bankruptcy. In addition, the

FDIC has coercive powers to impose a reorganization plan upon a failed

bank, typically by having some other bank assume the failed bank's deposits.

To the extent that this reduces negotiating costs and problems of one or

more groups holding out on a reorganization plan in an attempt to increase

their share of the proceeds, it may be that less damage is done to the

going concern value of banks in bankruptcy than to other types of firm.

The presence of deposit insurance also contributes to making deposits

more perfectly substitutable across banks, and this may ease the transition

problems associated with finding new management and maintaining continuity

in existing customer relationships. For these reasons, marginal bankruptcy

costs for a given degree of leverage may be less in the presence of banking

regulation and the deposit insurance system than for nonfinancial firms,

and banks may thus have a tendency to maintain higher degrees of leverage

than these firms.
                              —19—




     Turning to the resolution of incentive problems, it is again

apparent that the deposit insurance system plays a key part. It has

been widely recognized (see Scott and Mayer [20], or Merton [11], for

example) that the availability of deposit insurance at a fee that does

not vary with the bank's risk of bankruptcy will exacerbate the perverse

incentive problems associated with highly levered firms. Without any

offsetting measures by the FDIC, in fact, banks would be likely to raise

very little equity at all.

    Buser, Chen and Kane [4] have argued, however, that the FDIC's regula-

tory authority, and in particular its ability to deprive a bank of future

profits inherent in its charter, acts as an implicit risk—related deposit

insurance premium. That is, short—term losses in an excessively levered

bank could result in a temporarily negative net worth (in accounting

terms) which, in turn, would force the FDIC to reorganize or liquidate the

bank even if the present value of future profits is positive. Optimal bank

capital is determined, therefore, by a tradeoff between tax savings and the

implicit costs of regulatory interference.

    Two points may be made concerning the Buser, Chen and Kane argument.

The first is that it may be applied to a more broadly construed notion of

agency problems, and this strengthens the prediction that banks will not

be totally levered. Smith and Warner [21], have categorized four types of

perverse incentives that a firm's shareholders may have to act against the

interests of bondholders: substitution of riskier assets after the debt

contract has been agreed upon, excessive payment of dividends, assuming

liabilities of equal or higher priority to that of existing creditors, and

underinvestment in profitable future opportunities. Each of these problems
                               —20—




arise because the debt contract is not renegotiated even when the firm

takes actions that would affect the market value of the debtholders'

position. Thus the asset substitution, dividend payment and claim dilution

motives arise because of opportunities to shift wealth from debtholders to

shareholders. Similarly, the underinvestment incentive arises because the

shareholders wish to avoid enhancing the debtholders' wealth at their own

expense. If debt contracts were continuously renegotiated as the firm

changed any of its policies, however, the value of the debt would be insula-

ted from the effects of these changes, and shareholders would be motivated

to take only those actions that enhance the net present value of the

entire firm.

    In commercial banking, the FDIC becomes the main claimant in the event

of bankruptcy and it is thus in the FDIC's interest to take steps that will

reduce the bank's incentive to erode the value of its position. Such steps

include monitoring the risk of the bank's assets as well as its capital

position, and in extreme cases closing the bank if the FDIC's position is

unduly threatened. Thus, regulation and supervision of banks by the FDIC

take the place of monitoring activities that might otherwise be undertaken

by the bank's creditors. If the costs imposed on banks by this supervision

increase as the risk of bankruptcy increases, as suggested by Buser, Chen

and Kane, then the FDIC's activities also serve the same role as contin-

uous renegotiation with debtholders. The bank's incentive to substitute

assets, pay excessive dividends or dilute the debtholders claim by, say,

reducing capital is reduced because any of these activities will cause im-

plicit penalties to be imposed by the FDIC. By the same token, if the

bank is implicitly rewarded by a lessening of these costs for adopting
                                 —21—




 policies that bolster the value of the FDIC's claim, it will not have

 an incentive to underinvest in profitable future opportunities. In all,

 the FDIC's regulatory and supervisory activities can serve as a mechanism

 by which the costs of agency problems and bankruptcy are transmitted back

 to a bank's shareholders, and thus they help explain why a bank would not

 find it optimal to be totally levered.

    The second point to be noted about this argument, however, is

 that it can cut two ways. While it may explain why commercial

banks are not totally levered, it may also help explain why banks are

nevertheless more highly levered than most types of firms. As has been

noted above, the FDIC's activities are a substitute for analogous privately—

produced monitoring and contracting activities. The FDIC's supervisory

authority and its cooperation with other bank regulatory agencies may

make these monitoring activities more efficient and more effective than

would be possible among purely private creditors.   Furthermore, to the

extent that any of these monitoring costs are absorbed by society at large

through the regulatory system, rather than the private parties to the

deposit contract, greater leverage by banks may be encouraged.

    To put the general thrust of this section into the context of the

analysis of preceding sections, it is useful to refer back to Figure 2.

The Buser, Chen and Kane argument implies that the supply curve of deposits

will have some downward slope because of the regulatory costs imposed on

banks at higher degrees of leverage. Nevertheless, the nature of the

FDIC's activities suggests that the downward slope of this supply curve

will be more gentle than that of the supply curve for ordinary debt by

a nonfinancial corporation. Hence we would expect that bankruptcy and

agency cost considerations, similar to tax considerations, point to higher

degrees of leverage for banks than for other types of firms.
                                  —22—




IV.    Summary and Conclusions

      The theory of corporate capital structure that has evolved in recent

years provides a useful framework for analyzing bank capital structure.

There are, however, several fundamental differences between commercial

banks and nonfinancial firms that contribute to a large disparity in their

degree of leverage.

      The first major distinction between commercial banking and other in-

dustries is the nature of bank liabilities. Banks raise most of their

funds in the form of deposits that offer different combinations of inter-

est and services such as liquidity, safety, and bookkeeping. Since the

cost of producing these services is tax deductible to the banks but the

benefits from the services are tax free to the depositors, deposits have

an obvious tax advantage over corporate bonds. Moreover, the production

function of bank services is likely to have economies of scale properties

that will further increase the aggregate equilibrium amount of outstanding

deposits. Since service production costs are bank—specific, the resulting

equilibrium will also determine optimal leverage for individual banks.

      The second major difference between commercial banks and nonfinancial

firms is the regulatory environment. Banks are probably more closely re-

gulated and supervised than any other industry. This environment reduces

both the probability and cost of bankruptcy for commercial banks. Moreover,

the special function of deposit insurance creates a unique role for the FDIC

as a major principal (in addition to shareholders) in all insured banks. The

substantial regulatory and supervisory powers of the FDIC relative to

private creditors of nonfinancial firms are likely to reduce agency costs.

For instance, periodic bank examinations represent a monitoring device that
                                   —23—




may   reduce   asset substitution and other actions that could be taken by

shareholders at the expense of depositors.

      The combined effect of the tax—free service component in deposits

and the reduced agency costs due to tougher regulation helps to explain

the consistently higher degree of leverage observed in banks vis—a—vis

nonfinancial firms. Moreover, the same framework could explain the fact

that large banks traditionally have lower capital—to—asset ratios than

small banks. This observation can be attributed to higher costs of pro-

ducing bank services and to a higher perceived probability and cost of

bankruptcy. The latter may be due to the greater incidence of liquidation

for small failed banks compared with large bank failures.
                     R                                              0emand for
                                                                    corporate
                                                                    bonds




    *
R       = R /(l—t )
           C     C                                                  Supply of
                                                                    corporate
                                                                    bonds



                 R
                     0




                                                                B




                                      FIGURE 1


                         The Equilibrium Amount of Corporate
                         Bonds in the Absence of Agency Costs
                                                        Demand for
                                                        corporate
                                                        bonds




R/ (1—ta)


       *
      R



      R                                                 Supply of
       0
                                                        corporate
                                                        bonds



                                         *
                                     B              B




                         FIGURE 2


             The Equilibrium Amount of Corporate
            Bonds in the Presence of Agency Costs
                        R


                                                                            for
                                                                     deposits


R
        — c(S,O)   + v(s)
l—t
    C


                                                                     Supply of
                                                                     deposits


                        R
                            0




                                                                 D




                                            FIGURE 3

                                Equilibrium Output of Deposits
R



                                                 for deposits
                                          if all of R is paid
                                          in the form of
                                          taxable interest

                                          Demand for deposits
                                    —when some of R is in
                                          the form of non—
                                          taxable services
R
0
                                          Supply of deposits




                               *
                              D       D




                   FIGURE 4

    Payment of Part of R in the Form of
    Non—Taxable Services Rather Than
    Taxable Interest Moves Equilibrium
    Deposit Level from D to D*
                        *'
R                               R                                     R

                                                                                   D

*                                   *
R                               R


    I
           SA
                                                          SB
                                                                      R*(P:/
    I


                        D/v                                    D/v                          D/v
        D* I
         A, VA                                          DB/V              Dr/v I


               Bank A                         Bank B                       Industry
           FIGURE 5A                         FIGURE 5B                    FIGURE       5C




                                             FIGURE 5

                              Determination of Optimal Leverage for
                          Individual Banks, Given Industry Equilibrium
                             Footnotes



1.   See Robichek and Myers [18] or Kraus and Litzenberger [10] for expo-

     sitions of this theory. It is this theory that underlies the model of

     optimal bank capital structure in Buser, Chen and Kane [4].

2.   In keeping with Barnea, Haugen and Senbet [1], we assume for simplicity

     that equity entails no agency costs. If that assumption were relaxed,

     the suppiy curve for debt would have a higher intercept and at least

     in the initial range,a more gentle downward slope, because up to

     some level) issuance of debt and retirement of equity would serve to

     reduce total agency costs.

3.   Barnea, Haugen and Senbet [1], also emphasize that tax arbitrage

     operations (such as borrowing at the taxable rate and purchasing tax—

     exempt bonds) must be prohibited or at least made costly to investors

     in order to maintain the upward slope of the demand curve for corporate

     debt. We implicitly make this same assumption in our analysis in

     Section II.

4.   The impact of constraints on    will be discussed further in Section II.B.

5.   Commercial banks are not absolutely alone, of course, in their ability

     to offer such services. Money market mutual funds and thrift

     institutions, for example, compete with banks in providing such services,

     and to the extent that they do, the basic analysis of this section

     applies to them as well. Nevertheless, largely because of regulatory

     restrictions on other institutions, banks are unique in terms of the

     precise range of services that they offer.
 6.   In the more realistic case in which investors could also choose

      corporate bonds, financial intermediary liabilities, and other in-

      vestment vehicles, all securities markets would equilibrate simultan-

      eously and the shape of the demand curve for deposits would reflect

      the availability of these substitute instruments. Our analysis in

      this section may best be thought of, then, as a mode.l of equilibrium

      in the banking industry that is implicitly imbedded in a general

      equilibrium model.

7.    As indicated in expression (4), whether or not the slope of the demand

      curve is flatter when part of R is paid in the form of non—taxable

      services depends on how the marginal value of these services changes

      with the deposit level. The demand curve without services could not

      lie everywhere below the demand curve with services, for then banks

      would never provide services. There may be some point, however, where

      the demand curve with services crosses, and hence is steeper than, the

      demand curve without services. As long as this point occurs beyond
       *
      D in Figure 4, the provision of services will tend to increase bank

      leverage.

8.    The horizontal axis in Figure 5 is Dlv, or deposits relative to the

      value of the bank. This yardstick is used to emphasize differing de-

      grees of relative leverage. Since the total size, V, of each bank is

      held constant throughout the preceding analysis, changing the axis to

      D/V does not necessitate any fundamental alterations.

9.    This implication is generally in accord with empirical observation

      for commercial banks in the U.S. For instance, the average capital!

      assets ratio for national banks with total assets over five billion
     dollars was 4.75 percent in 1978 compared with a ratio of 8.49

     percent for national banks with assets less than 10 million dollars

     (see Dince and Fortson [6], p. 51). This finding is also consistent

     with empirical studies of bank costs, which generally report at

     least some range of economies of scale

10. This flittening of the demand curve because of the greater flexibility

     that varying types of accounts offer to depositors is analogous to

     the flattening of the demand curve for bonds that occurs in Barnea,

     Haugen and Senbet [1], when the possibility of tax arbitrage is in-

     troduced. By combining bond purchases with tax arbitrage operations,

     individual investors, in effect, tailor the bonds to their own

     portfolio needs, and thus the increases in interest rates necessary

     to induce investors to purchase additional bonds are smaller than if

     tax arbitrage operations were prohibited.

11. It should be noted, however, that in the face of personal taxes a

     complete "unbundling" of services on deposits is unlikely. Because

     services are not taxable to investors, we would always expect banks

     to find it profitable to offer some amount of "free" or at least

     subsidized services and correspondingly reduced interest payments,

     even if the banks could offer any interest rate they wished.

12. This is similar to Black's [2] notion that in a frictionless world

     each investor would hold his own corporation for tax purposes. Thus

     "every corporation has a clientele of one investor, and chooses its

    capital structure to fit that investor's needs."

13. Implicit here is the notion that depositors place a value on bank—

    produced safety, for which "homemade" diversification does not provide
     a perfect substitute, as it does, say in standard corporate

     finance discussions of conglomerate mergers or firm diversification.

14. The association between higher dividends and higher personal tax

     rates on stock implicitly assumes that tax arbitrage operations,

     such as described by Miller & Scholes [13], are costly for investors.

15. See Orgier and Wolkowitz [15], Figure 5.1 (p. 90).

16. Federal Reserve Bulletin, [3], Table 1.25 (p.A17).

17. The same, of course, holds for rionbank financial institutions, which

     are also typically more highly levered than nonfinancial corporations.
                             References



 1.   Amir Barnea, Robert A. Haugen and Lemma W. Senbet, "An Equilibrium

      Analysis of Debt Financing Under Costly Tax Arbitrage and Agency

      Problems," Journal of Finance 36 (June 1981).

2.    Fischer Black, "Taxes and Capital Market Equilibrium Under Uncertainty,"

      Working Paper No. 21B, University of Chicago, May, 1973.

3.    Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve

      Bulletin 67 (April, 1981).

4.    Stephen A. Buser, Andrew H. Chen and Edward J. Kane, "Federal Deposit

      Insurance ,Regulatory Policy, and Optimal Bank Capital," Journal of

      Finance 36 (March, 1981), pp. 51—60.

5.    Harry DeAngelo and Ronald W. Masulis, "Optimal Capital Structure

      Under Corporate and Personal Taxation," Journal of Financial Economics

      8 (March, 1980), pp. 3—29.

6.    Robert R. Dince and J. C. Fortson, "Bank Examination, Capital

      Adequacy and Risk," The Bankers' Magazine 163 (May—June, 1980),

      pp. 49—54.

7.    Eugene F. Fama, "Banking in the Theory of Finance," Journal of Monetary

      Economics 6 (January, 1980), pp. 39—57.

8.    Robert A. Haugen and Lemma W. Senbet, "The Insignificance of Bankruptcy

      Costs to the Theory of Optimal Capital Structure," Journal of Finance

      33 (May, 1978), pp. 383—93.

9.    Michael C. Jensen and William H.Meckling, "Theory of the Firm:

      Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure," Journal

      of Financial Economics 3 (October, 1976), pp. 305—60.
 10. Alan Kraus and Robert Litzenberger, "A State—Preference Model of

       Optimal Financial Leverage," Journal of Finance 28 (September, 1973),

      pp. 911—22.

11. Robert C. Merton, "An Analytic Derivation of the Cost of Deposit

      Insurance Loan Guarantees: An Application of Modern Option Pricing

      Theory," Journal of Banking and Finance 1 (June, 1977), pp. 3—11.

12. Merton H. Miller, "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance 32 (May, 1977),

      pp. 261—75.

13.   ________________________ and Myron S. Scholes, "Dividends and Taxes,"

      Journal of Financial Economics 6 (December, 1978), pp. 333—64.

14. John J. Mingo, "Regulatory Influence on Bank Capital Investment,"

      Journal of Finance 30 (September, 1975), pp. 1111—21.

15. Yair E. Orgier and Benjamin Wolkowitz, Bank Capital (New York:

      Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1976).

16. Sam Peltzman, "Capital Investment in Commercial Banking and its

      Relationship to Portfolio Regulation," Journal of Political Econ

      78 (January, 1970), pp. 1—26.

17. John H. Pringle, "The Capital Decision in Commercial Banks," Journal

      of Finance 29 (June, 1974), pp. 779—95.

18. Alexander A. Robichek and Stewart C. Myers, "Problems in the Theory

      of Optimal Capital Structure," Journal of Financial and Quantitative

      Analysis 1 (June, 1966), pp. 1—35.

19. Anthony M. Santomero and Ronald D. Watson, "Determining Optimal Capital

      Standards for the Banking Industry," Journal of Finance 32 (September,

      1977), pp. 1267—82.
20. Kenneth E. Scott and Thomas Mayer, "Risk and Regulation in Banking:

     Some Proposals for Federal Deposit Insurance Reform," Stanford Law

     Review 23 (May, 1971), pp. 857—902.

21. Clifford W. Smith, Jr. and Jerold B. Warner, "On Financial Contracting:

     An Analysis of Bond Covenants," Journal of Financial Economic.s 7

     (June, 1979), pp. 117—61.

22. Robert A. Taggart, Jr. and Stuart I. Creenbaum,"Bank Capital and

    Public Regulation," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 10 (May, 1978),

    pp. 158—69.

23. Jerold B. Warner, "Bankruptcy Costs: Some Evidence," Journal of

    Finance 32 (May, 1977), pp. 337—47.
