NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TERMINATIONS PREMIUM IN MORTGAGE COUPON RATES:
EVIDENCE ON THE INTEGRATION OF MORTGAGE
AND BOND MARKETS

Patric H. Hendershott
Kevin E. Villani
Working Paper No. 738

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

August 1981

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

in

NBER Working Paper #738
August 1981

The Terminations Premium in Mortgage Coupon Rates:
Evidence on the Integration of Mortgage and Bond Markets

ABSTRACT

During the last three years mortgage rates have risen relative to
yields on comparable maturity bonds. The questions addressed in the present
paper

are what is the extent of this increase and to what is it attributable?

We find the increase between early 1978 and early 1981 in coupon rates on
GN14A mortgage pools relative to the" rate on a comparable portfolio of

Treasury bonds to be about 100 basis points. We attribute the increase
to a rise in the terminations premia built into mortgage coupon rates.
The premia Is the price borrowers are charged for the option to repay the
mortgage when it is to their benefit (to refinance if interest rates

decline). This price has risen in response to an increase in interest
rate uncertainty. Our empirical results suggest that the increase is
due to both greater uncertainty regarding the inflation premium in
interest rates and the lesser weight the monetary authorities give to
interest rate stability in their deliberations.

Patric H. Hendershott
Krannert Graduate School of Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN l17907
(317) 1l.91.J21
Kevin E. Vlllani
Department of Housing and Urban Development
Office of Economic Analysis
11.51

7th Street, S.W.

Washington,

D.C. 2011.10

(202) 755-5980

August 1981
The Terminations Premium in Mortgage Coupon Rates:

Evidence on the Integration of Mortgage and Bond Markets*

Patric H.

Hendershott

and Kevin E. Villani

Ohio State University and HUD

Financial markets have behaved somewhat differently in recent years

than in the previous quarter century. Two

changes

are particularly

relevant to this paper. First, interest rates have been more volatile
generally. Second, while all interest rates have risen to unprecedented
levels, mortgage rates have increased by more than rates on other

securities of comparable maturity. This contrasts markedly with the
previous quarter century, when mortgage rates were typically described

as "sluggish." We suspect that the second of these two phenomena
follows from the first. Mortgage rates contain a terminations premium
to compensate lenders for expected reductions in effective yields
relative to quoted coupons owing to borrowers prepaying at a faster
or slower rate, depending on which is to their economic benefit (and

to the detriment of the lender). An increase in interest rate uncertainty
increases expected reductions due to the terminations option and

raises the terminations premium in mortgage coupon rates. That is, the
coupon rate adjusts to maintain parity between the expected effective
yields on mortgages and securities without call options.
There are two pieces of evidence that interest rate uncertainty has

increased

in recent years. First, the importance the Federal Reserve

attached to interest rate stability was substantially reduced in late
l97'9 and 1980. One indication of this was the increase in the targeted
band for the federal funds rate from less than a percentage point In

* An

earlier version of this paper was presented at a joint session of the
Annual Meetings of the American Economic and Finance Associations,
September 1980.

-2-

1978 to percentage points on October 6, 1979 and as much as 7 percentage
points in 1980. Second, the standard deviation of one-year inflation
forecasts of the participants In the Livingston survey rose above two
percentage points for

the

first time in 1979-80. Given a relationship

between interest rates and inflation, uncertain inflation Implies uncertain
interest rates.

Two specific questions are addressed in the present paper. First,
how much have mortgage coupon rates (more specifically, that on newlyissued GNMA. pools) risen relative to a comparable maturity portfolio

of Treasury securities? Second, Is the increase reasonably attributed
to a rise in the terminations premium owing to an increase in interest

rate uncertainty or must an explanation appeal to other factors? To
answer these questions we first calculate the terminations premia Implied
by coupon rates and prices on newly-issued pools of GNMA securities
over the past several years under the assumption that the mortgage

market is fully integrated with capital markets generally. The
resulting "options premia" are then examined for their plausibility
(related empirically to reasonable proxies for interest rate uncertainty).

The first three sections of the paper provide a framework for

performing
pools

the calculations. The sections include a method of valuing

of level-payment mortgages when termination rates are certain,

a discussion of the impact of interest rate outcomes on termination
rates,

and

a

description of methodologies for measuring the terminations

premium in mortgage coupon rates. Basically, the premium is the difference

between the pool coupon rate and the internal rate of return on a portfolio
of Treasury securities with cash flows identical to those of the mortgage

-3pool

are

after netting out payments for the terminations option. Premia

calculated in Section IV for the LO months from

January

1978

to

April 1981 and are related empirically to proxies for interest rate

uncertainty. A summary

concludes

the paper.

I. The Value of Mortgage Pools When

The

Termination

Rates are Certain

formula for the scheduled payment on a level-payment mortgage

with an initial principal of X dollars is:
(1.1) PAYS

ix(l+i)M/[(l+i)M_l],

where M is the maturity of the loan (the period over which the loan is
amortized), and I is the mortgage coupon rate. The scheduled outstanding

principal at time t on this mortgage is:

(1.2) PRS — xr(l÷i)M -

The above expressions hold whatever unit
The decline over time in the

mortgages

of

time

is chosen.1

scheduled principal of level-payment

results exclusively from amortization. The cash-flow generated

by a portfolio or pool of mortgages will be greater than this by the amount
of the servicing fee which is a percentage of the outstanding principal.
Also, expost cash flow will exceed scheduled cash flow if any mortgages prepay.

1These expressions also hold for variable-rate and renegotiable mortgages

If

interest rates are expected to be unchanged in the future.

-4-

Let

denote the fraction of the N loans, each of value X, in the pooi

that will terminate at time t and s be the servicing fee (the c superscript

indicates that the values are viewed as certain). The total payment on
the mortgage pool in period t contingent on

(1.3) T1V1PAY =

(-s)NPRIN

t-1
where

=
T

+

is then:

(l-)rPAY5

I because all mortgages are terminated by

and

period N. That is, the payment is simply the principal termination, less
the servicing fee, plus the scheduled payment (interest plus amortization)
on the remaining principal outstanding.

Now consider an existing pool k periods after origination where
is the fraction of the N mortgages in the original pool that are still

outstanding. The fraction of mortgages that will terminate in each period
t subsequent to k is defined as kt and the cummulative n-action of
t -1

mortgages that will be terminated by time t-l is denoted by

=

j=k
The total payment in time t
k-i

(contingent

on kt on a portfolio of mortgages

periods old is then:
(1.4) kPAYt =

(k_s)rPR1

+

(1_k)QkNPAY

The value of this mortgage pool is simply the discounted present

value of the total payments or

"

—5—

C

M

kTMPAYC
t

t=k÷l (1+ytk) -

Because these payments are known with certainty, the appropriate discount
rates are the yields on risk-free pure-discount securities of the matching

maturity.2 That is, it-k is the yield on a riskiess pure discount bond
of maturity t-k. Although such yields are not directly observable
in the securities markets as coupon rates, capital markets will implicitly

determine a unique spectrum of these yields, which when plotted form

a yield curve.3
Even though the cash flows of the pool are certain, interest-rate
uncertainty could affect the value of the pool through its effect on the

discount rates. The yields on pure discount default-free securities
might contain interest-rate risk or term prernia if the marginal investor
is averse to the risk that future rates might differ from those currently

anticipated. The magnitude of these premia will reflect the degree of
uncertainty. Thus, for example, "flat" interest rate expectations might
generate an upward sloping yield curve, where the degree of slope reflects
the uncertainty of future interest rates and investor aversion to this
uncertainty .

Because our focus is on the impact of interest-rate

uncertainty on the relative values of mortgage pools with certain and

2Garbade (1980) calculates kVC from equation (1.5), discounting mortgage
cash flows based on some multiple of FHA experience by the term structure
of Treasury yields. rkVC is described as "the market value" of a portfolio
of Treasury securities having the same (but certain) cash flows as the
mortgage pool. Next he determines the single"internal rate of return"
for the given kV° and cash flows. Finally, he adds a premium to this rate
just sufficient to equate the discounted present value of these cash flows
to the observed market price of GNMA pools. Garbade does not develop an
interpretation of the premium.

en
the yield curve is
the single t
Guttentag's (l97) internal rate of return.
flat,

in

(1.5)

is Curley

and

-6-.

uncertain

cash flows, we shall assume, for ease of exposition and with rio

loss of generality, that term prenila are zero and thus that

inrplies

curve

a flat yield

constant interest rate expectations.

While prices for securities are generally quoted as a percent of par
value, we
at time

shall

express prices as a fraction of par. Thus the price

k of a portfolio of securities is:

(1.6)

kv/(k.

That is, the quoted price at time k is the market

value

at time k as

a fraction of the principal still outstanding at time

Taxes have been ignored in the above analysis. This is permissible if
either:
(1) the pool is trading at par so there is no need to distinguish
between capital gains and interest income which are taxed at differential
rates or (2) the marginal investor in the pool is a tax-exempt institution.
If neither of these conditions holds and if one knew the tax rate of the
marginal investor, then the differential tax treatment of gains and
interest could be accounted for directly.

-7-

II.

Interest Rates and

Terminations

Rates

The terminations rate for mortgages is akin to the mortality rate
for

life insurance companies. A "niorta].ity" table has

in

fact been

calculated for FHA experience.5 Termination rates are often expressed
as some multiple, say 200
experience

percent,

of actual (and projected) FH& repayment

for mortgages issued during a given period. Most generally

t

l00(1x)

(2.1) X

ioo(l_
t-l
where

(i-ø)
of a

=

"
j=l

the fraction of the pool still outstanding

that is repaid in a given period ()

pool with

period

. Thus

is

x percent of the fraction

actual FHP experience that would be repaid in that same

100
/(l4T

100

The terminations schedule on a mortgage pool is defined in terms of

all the terminations rates. The schedule is a random variable that depends
in a rather complex way on the initial subjective (joint conditional

Bayesian) probabilities that an individual mortgage will terminate in
each subsequent future period. We define the "most likely" terminations
schedule as the collection of termination rates that are giien the highest
initial subjective probabilities.

The timing of mortgage repayments is irrelevant to the
valuation of pools only if (1) the yield curve is flat and (2) the

mortgage pool is trading at par. Consider two pools, both carrying

5See Herzog (1981,

p.

21) for the latest available table.

-8-

equal to the current

issue coupon. If the yield curve is
upward sloping, indicating that future interest rates are expected to be
coupons

new

higher, then faster repaying pools will be valued above
slower

downward sloping.
faster

the yield curve is
On the other hand, even if the yield curve is flat,

repaying pools. And the converse is true if

and slower repaying pools with equal coupons will be valued

differently if this coupon differs from the current new issue coupon.
For example, if the new-issue coupon exceeds that on the existing pools,
then both existing pools will trade below par, with the slower paying
pool

being further below par.
The fact

be

that

the terminations rate is

not known a priori would not

of concern if these rates were unrelated to economic variables and

investors were indifferent to this uncertainty. One could simply project
the "most likely" rates from past experience and calculate the value of'

mortgage pools from equation (1.5) based on these rates.6 Unfortunately,
mortgage terminations reflect the exercise of the borrower's option which is
generally related to the observed course of interest rates.7 Moreover,

as we wiU indicate in the following section, the systematic relationship
between interest rates and termination experience causes investors to
care about the uncertainty of termination rates.

6This is the procedure followed in some studies, e.g., Cater and Lloyd (1980).

7For evidence on this point, see Curley and Guttentag (1971i.).

-9-.

The dependency of mortgage terminations on interest rates operates

through three channels. First, the willingness of homeowners to sell their
houses depends on current mortgage rates relative to the rate on their

existing mortgages. For example, if rates are currently high, then homeowners
will be reluctent to forego the implicit capital gains they have on their

existing mortgages. Reduced mobility means fewer mortgage terminations.
Second, even if homeowners do sell, in some cases the mortgage will be

assumed by the new buyer. All FRA/VA mortgages are assumable, and, while
the standard deed of trust for conventional mortgages generally does not

allow assumptions, some obviously occur. More assumptions imply fewer
terminations. Third, even when no house sale occurs, the existing mortgage
can be terminated. If mortgage rates decline below the coupon rates on
existing mortgages by enough to outweigh the costs of refinancing, including
closing costs, repayment penalties and additional points charged the

borrower, then mortgages will be terminated and refinanced at the current
existing low rates.

The data in Table 1 support dependency of termination rates on the

spread between past and current mortgage coupon rates. These data
are termination rates for mortgages issued in particular years (endorsement
years) cuznmulated through the third and sixth years after issue (the policy

years less one). The two sections in the table distinguish between
periods when early termination is less likely (mortgage rates in subsequent

8Consumers have used a variety of devices such as wrap around" mortgages
and land sales contracts to assume. The economics of due on sale clauses
is described in detail in an April 1981 HtJ1) report to Congress; the legality
of these and other creative financing mechanisms will eventually be ruled
on by the Supreme Court. Also, variable rate mortgage contracts typically
allow assumptions.

-10-

years rose relative to the issue rate) and. more likely (the reverse).

The selection of years does not, of course, hold the expost pattern of
mortgage rates precisely constant relative to the issue rates, but it is
close enough to reveal the expected pattern of slower terminations of
mortgages originated during the troughs of the interest rate cycle (upper
half of table) and faster terminations of mortgages originated during the
peaks of the interest rate cycle (lower half of table).9

III. Uncertain Inflation and Mortgage Coupon Rates

While the most likely terminations schedule is a useful concept,
the above discussion suggests that there is a large array of schedules
that might occur with significant probability, at least one for every

inflation-interest rate senario. Moreover, each senario implies a
different set of discount rates (y's). Assume that there are N viable
inflation-interest rate senarios that are expected to occur with
N
probabilities p 1, p2 ,
where
1. Denote the total mortgage
,
N
j=i

... p

p =

payment and discount rate vectors associated with the jth senario (and
its terminations schedule) by TMPAY(j) and y(j), respectively. Then,

the value of a pool of mortgages in the uncertainty case can be expressed as

9The few apparent anomalies in the table are explained
by differences in
subsequent movements in interest rates. For
example,
the
acceleration
between the third and sixth years in terminations of mortgages
issued in
1957-58 is likely due to the decline in mortgage rates in
the
early
1960s relative to the level
existing in 1957-58, and the slow early
termination of l971 issues relative to 1970 issues is due to the minor
decline in mortgage rates in 1975-76
versus the sharp decline in 1971-72.

-11-

Table 1
for Section 203(b) 30-Year Home Mortgages %

Year of Endorsement (Should Terminate Late)

Policy Year
Less One

1957-58

1971-72

1961+_65

3

1.7

6.3

9.7

6

19.7

15.0

3O.4

1977

16.2

Year of Endorsement (Should Terminate Early)

1960-61

1970

1974

3

8.6

19.5

16.2

6

25.9

37.4

40.7

-12-

N

M

kTMPAY(j)t

(3.1)

j=1

t=k±l 1+y(J)tk

By substituting kVU from equation (3.1)

into

equation (1.6), we obtain

an expression for the efficient market price of mortgage contracts.

Conceptually, one could test for market efficiency by conaring this to
observed prices. Empirically, this requires knowledge of the market's
subjective probabilities of various interest rate scenarios (the y(j)'s)
and the relationship between ex post interest rates and cash flows

(the TMPAY(j)'s). Because we do not currently have such information,
such a test is beyond the scope of the current paper.
With TMPAY and y based on the in (most likely) inflation-interest rate

outcome and p = 1, equation (3.1) reduces to (1.5). Comparison of these
expressions is instructive. A higher than most-likely inflation rate
lowers the present value of a given payment stream relative to
the most-likely rate by raising the discount factors, while a

lower than most-likely inflation rate raises the present value. When
the payment stream is independent of the inflation-interest rate
outcome, one would expect klftl =

That is, mortgage values --

kV

like

for the same mortgage coupon rate.

security values generally -- would be

affected by deviations in observed inflation-interest rate outcomes from
those originally expected, but not by changes in the degree of uncertainty

-

regarding

these outcomes. However, the payment stream and thus mortgage

values are not independent of these outcomes. A higher than most-likely
inflation rate reduces mobility by creating capital gains on existing

mortgages and increases the assumption of existing mortgages by buyers when

moves do occur. The lower termination rate magnifies the decline in present
value caused by higher discount rates. A lower than most-likely inflation rate
increases mobility by reducing existing capital gains and encourages

refinancing of existing mortgages. Now, however, the higher termination
rate mitigates the rise in present value caused by lower discount rates.

Because of the asymmetric variation in termination rates, kV"
for mortgage pools based on the same mortgage coupon rate.

kv -

will

10

Further,

be disproportionately greater the larger is the variability

of expectations regarding inflation and thus the greater both the
likelihood of and resultant loss from adverse terminations.11
The terminations option allows borrowers to repay at faster
(refinancings) or slower (assumptions) rates, depending upon which is
to their economic advantage (and thus to the lender's disadvantage).
Borrowers will have to pay for this option either once in the form of a
front-end fee when the mortgage is issued or annually in a higher

coupon. When the front-end fee is employed, the price of the option is

10Dunn and McConnell (l981a) have calculated kv and kVU under some hypothetical
assumptions regarding interest rates. First, a yield curve generating
function is posited and a level of interest rate (yield curve) uncertainty
is specified. Then (3.1) is evaluated under the assumption that the
mortgage pool will be terminated if the new is sue mortgage rate falls
below the coupon rate of the pool. For the certainty case, no "optimal"
terminations are allowed (suboptixna]. terminations are assumed to follow
100 or 200 FHA experience.)
11Conceptually, the difference in price should be the present value of the
expected losses. In our earlier paper (1980), we provided several models
to determine both the probability that the option will be exercised
at a given point In time and the magnitude of the loss if it is.

- 114-

known.

When the higher coupon

method is

utilized, computation of the

annual premium would seem to be a straight-forward application of equations
(1.5)

and (3.1)

for the case of newly-issued mortgage pools (k =

Equation (3.1) is solved for 0V, and then equation (1.5)
determine
coupon

the coupon rate that would

equate

.

to

is

0).

employed to

This

that is required in the certainty case. The difference

is the
between the

actual coupon and the certainty coupon is the annual premium of the

terminations

option.12 Unfortunately, there are no mortgages with certain

termination rates, i.e., equation (1.5) cannot be utilized.

Nevertheless, it is possible with one key assumption to obtain
estimates of the terminations premium in GNMA coupon rates. The assumption
is that the only difference in the eyes of investors between a GNMA
and

pool

a comparable maturity portfolio of U.S. government bonds is the

uncertainty regarding the timing of the cash flows (the term.iriation schedule)
of the pool. Given that the incomes from the pool and the portfolio
are taxed similarly and are subject to the same zero default risk, this
assumption

would seem to be a reasonable working hypothesis. With this

assumption, the bond

terminations
on

portfolio

schedule, and

the pool and the

the

is equivalent to a mortgage

pool with

a certain

difference between the actual coupon rate

"effective" coupon

on the bond portfolio is the

terminations premium.

A comparable maturity bond portfolio has cash flows that are equal
to those on a mortgage pool (based on the most likely terminations schedule)

after netting out the terminations option premium in

the

mortgage coupon.

The default premium in the coupon rate can be calculated similarly.
First, equation (3.1) is solved for 0V on the assumption that all payments
will be made on schedule. Second, the 's are altered to reflect expected
defaults; the left-side of (3.1) is set equal to the value obtained
assuming no default; and the coupon, jd, is solved for. This is the
coupon including the default premium. The premium is d

-15Define

a new-issue bond portfolio of value

as

M

B =

where

kj =k÷1'

is the portion of the portfolio maturing in period j and '

= 1.

The total (principal plus interest) payment on the portfolio in period t,
assuming zero default and call risk, is

(3.2)

TBPAYt =

where y is

that

Note

the

+ Ejyi)p,

coupon rate in period o on a par bond with maturity j.

Y the yield on a pure discount security of maturity j.

The most likely payment on a mortgage in period t, after netting out the options
price in the mortgage coupon, p, is obtained from substitution of (1.1) and
(1.2)
(3.3)

into (1.3):

(m..S)[(l+I...P)M

Dl

T}4PAYt =

-

(1÷j.)tJ

+

14

(l+i-p) - 1
where the most likely terminations rates () have replaced the certain

terminations rates ().

A bond portfolio that is comparable to a mortgage

pool with expected net payments TMPAY' is one in which the

(3.lt)

for

are chosen such that

TBPAYt = TMPAY(1÷y)V3

all t. The

(l+y)h/3

factor adjusts for the fact that mortgage payments

-16-

accrue roughly 1/3 of a semi-annual

period

prior to the payments on the

bonds; y is the one-period rate ecpected to exist in the tth period.14
Equation (3.L) represents M-k equations that, along with the identity

.= 1,

determine M-k v's and p for the given q5'5,

Actually,

it

is possible to solve for p without

yt, a, k'k' and 1.

determining the V 's.

Substitution of (3.3) into (1.5) and the result into (1.6) yields, after

canceling PRIN and X which are equal for newly issued pools (k

0)

and incorporating the mortgage payment timing adjustment,

(3.5)

P=

.
t=k÷l

+
"t

Given the 's, a, 1, the y's, and k' this equation can be solved for p.
We note here that the appropriate discount
risk-free pure discount securities of the

rates are still the yield.s on

matching maturity because the

cash-flows are, after adjusting for terminations

uncertainty, risk-free

equivalents (recall that GNMA securities are default free). The terminations

premium approach avoids the "coupon bias" problem inherent in alternative
treatments [see Kaufman and Morgan (1980)].

In general, mortgage payments are received at the end of the
month. Thus
the total payments for a six-month
period are received, on average, 3
months into the period, not at the end.
Because GNMA, pools pay on the
15th day of the following month, "the" semi-annual
as occurrIng 1/3 of' a period prior to the payments payment can be viewed
on the bonds.

14l is determined from the yields on pure

discount bonds as (1+yt)t/(l÷yti)t_1_ '•

-17-

IV. Calculation of the Terminations Premium

Before reporting

the results, a few words about the sources and

measurement of the data are in order. The period investigated is the
110 month span covering January 1978

the yields

are

on pure

discount

to

April 1981. The discount rates

bonds calculated from the decompounded

yields computed by McCulloch (1975).15 The mortgage prices and

point

coupons

are those on GNI4A

pools

16

trading closest to par.

The time

interval employed is six months; thus N = 60 for 30 year mortgages.
The

premia

are calculated by solving equation (3.5).

Three different terminations schedules are tested. The first two

simply 100 and

are
1957

(Herzog,

200%

experience

on FHP

mortgages

originated since

1981, p. 21). The third attempts to incorporate the

impact of differences between pooi coupon rates and new issue coupon rates
on the most likely

terminations

schedule.

Specifically, the schedule varies between 100

and

200%

FH over

time,

depending on the difference between par (unity) and the price of the pool.17

When the pool is at par, investors are assumed to expect the pool to
terminate at 200% FHA.

When the pool is at 0.9 (the lowest price in our

sample is 0.911), investors are assumed to expect 100%

FHA terminations.

t-k
1 -1/3
Because the point yields are instantaneous decompounded, (l+y )
(1+y )

15

equation (3.5) is replaced by e(t_c)1t_Yt/3

in

We thank Huston McCulloch for

supplying us with these data.
16

The prices are averages of the bid and ask quotes from the Wall Street Journal
for the first day of the month that the prices appeared in the Journal.

171n one calculation Dunn and McConnell (l981b) assume that the prepayment
probabilities Et/(1_T)J "decay exponentially as the riskiess interest
rate at that time rises above the security's coupon rate •"

(p.

18)

-18-

More precisely, we determine x in equation (2.1) from

=

- 800.

Figure 1 contains plots of o based upon the three terminations
schedules, denoted 100, 200 and VAR

(for

variable). Because the three

series are closely related we shall discuss the VAR series only. The
o's are very law for the January 1978-September 1978 period, averaging

only 5 basis points. They rise to an average of 25 basis points in the
October 1978-May 1979 period, to Ls7 basis points in the June-September

1979 period, and on to 97 basis points in the October 1979-April 1980

interval. A final increase, to an average of l21 basis points, occurs
in

the July-October 1980 period, with a high of l5Ii basis points in

August. The last six observations show a decrease to 102 basis points.
We argued above that the primary determinant of changes in the

inations

term-

premium is changes in uncertainty regarding future interest rates.

Given the well-established re1atonship between inflation rates and interest
rates since 1951, the future course of interest rates is heavily dependent
on future inflation rates, as well as monetary policy and other factors
that influence real interest rates.18 In the introduction to this paper,
two pieces of evidence were given for the belief that interest-rate
uncertainty had risen, namely the recent increase in inflation uncertainty
and the reduction in October 1979 in the importance the Federal Reserve
attaches to interest rate stability.

(1975) and (1977) is most closely associated with the view that
nominal interest rates have largely been due to changes in the
inflation rate. Hendershott (1981) indicates that this was not the case
the quarter century prior to 1951. For evidence that real interest
have varied significantly since 1951, see Wilcox (1981).

movements in

in
rates

0
H

050

000

050

100

150

200

BasiL3

—

Points

78.00

Figure 1;

FHA

200

I

FHA

Calculated Terminations Premia in

79.50

G1A Coupon Rates

79.00

80.50

81.00

-20-

An

of

available measure of inflation uncertainty is the standard deviation

one-year inflation forecasts of the participants in the Livingston

investment survey. The one-year inflation forecasts are measured in early

June and early December of each year. The

standard

deviation of these

forecasts (in percentage points), beginning with December 1977 and
proceeding through December 1980, are 1.15, 1.37, 1.39, 2.09, 1.79,
2.ui3, and 2.01. The values for June are assumed to hold until the next
December, and the December values are assumed to be maintained until the
next June.

Specification of a continuous variable to reflect the emphasis
(perceived by market participants) the monetary authorities have placed

on interest rate stability is difficult. Our basic procedure is to
examine the width of the target range

for

the Federal funds rate stated

in open market directives.19 Unfortunately, the range is likely to reflect
the authorities' perception of interest-rate uncertainty as well as the

weight the authorities attach to interest-rate stability. For example,
while the range of the targeted Federal funds rate varied only between
0.25 and 0.75 percentage points during the mid 1977 to September 18, 1979
period of relatively stable interest rates, the width of the range given
at the March 18-19, 197I open market meeting, when short-term rates were

rising sharply, was a full 1.5 percentage points. Thus it would be a
mistake to attribute every small change in the width of the band to a
change in the weight given to interest-rate stability.

19The directives are published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin about 90 clays
after the open market committee meets.

-21-

Two

major changes in the width of the band occurred in late 1979

arid, early 1980. On

October

6, 1979,

the band was raised from 0.5 to

1+.O percentage points. (The largest previous width was the 1.5 percentage

points cited above.) Simultaneously the Chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board announced a change in the implementation of monetary policy whereby

stability

in

the growth

of

monetary aggregates, rather than nominal interest

rates, would be emphasized. It seems apparent that the

market's perception

of interest rate uncertainty should have increased at this time.

20

The band. stayed at Lo percentage points until March 18, 1980, when it was

increased to 7.0. At the next meeting (April 22, 1980) the band was
lowered to 6.0, and it varied between this and 5.0 percentage points

through the end of our estimation period. Because interest rates were
quite volatile arowid the March 18 meeting - -

the

weekly average funds

rate increased by 3 percentage points between the weeks ending on March 1
arid March 29, the increase in the band to 7.0 percentage points may not

have reflected a change in policy. To test for the impact of the monetary
policy shift, two dummy variables are tested. The first is zero before
October 1979 and one thereafter; the second is zero before March 1980
and one thereafter.

The regression equations reported in Table 2 support our conjecture
that changes in uncertainty regarding inflation and real interest rates

determine the terminations premia. The equations explain 90 percent of
20

It is noteworthy that the federal funds rate was not especially volatile
at this time. The weekly average funds rate had increased by only 3/14
percentage points over the previous five weeks and increased by only 9
basis points the follcwing week.

FH(

Note:

of

176

(7.1)

1.0

0.390

(10.7)
o.i8

(6.5)

11.6.1

(7.5)

(8.2)

-36.5

li.9.6

0.370

(6.2)

(12.11)

I7.3

(6.8)

Shift, October 1979

Monetary Policy

0.350

Std. Dev. of
Expected Inflation

-33.2

-28.8
(10.2)

Constant

0.33

(6.5)

13.1

17.0
(7.5)

(6.2)

10.5

Shift, April 1980

Monetary Policy

.919

.905

.919

12.5

iL1.

11.9

SEE

The premia and standard deviation of expected inflation are measured in basis points. Standard
errors
regression coefficients are reported in parentheses beneath the coefficients.

Mean Values

Variable

200%

100% FHA

Schedule

Terminations

Table 2: Explanation of the Terminations Premia Based on
Three Different Terminations Schedules, January 1978-April 1981

2.07

2.21

2.15

DW

f)

-23-

the

variance in the calculated premia, which is somewhat surprising

given both the crude proxies for the expected variances in inflation and
in real interest rates and the potential errors in the measurement of

the premia (errors in the measurement of the 's and yts)• All regressors
enter with the expected positive signs and are significantly greater than

zero at the 95 percent confidence level. The 2's and the closeness of
the Durbin-Watson ratios to 2 are consistent with the view that no major
explanatory variables have been omitted.

The three equations tell basically the same story. When the standard
deviation

of expected inflation was just below unity, the terminations

premia was roughly zero in the pre-October 1979 world. A percentage

point increase in this standard deviation raises the premium by nearly
35 to 40 basis points. The October 1979 shift In monetary policy away

from

narrow interest rate targets raised the premia by nearly 50 basis

points, and an apparent further downgrading of the importance of interest
rate stability in April 1980 increased the premia by another 15 basis
points.

21

of the square of the standard deviation of expected Inflation
and the difference between the price of the pool and par did not raise
the explanatory power of the relationship.

V. Conclusion
The cost
Treasury

financing housing has risen

of

borrowing in

5

Treasury

basis

securities

points in the

to the

cost of

recent years. The difference between the coupon

rates on par value, government-insured GNMA

of

relative

mortgage pools and

with identical expected cash flows

first half of

1978 to 125

basis

a portfolio

rose from

points in the middle

of 1980, declining only slightly to 100 basis points in early 1981. To
some this might

suggest excess profits to be made; to others, a need

for the expansion of

Interpretation

federal secondary mortgage market

activities.

Neither

is necessarily correct.

Mortgage coupon rates include terminations

premia to compensate

lenders for expected reductions in effective yields owing to borrowers

repaying faster when interest rates decline and slower when they rise.
Both the likelihood of adverse (to the lender) terminations and

of

them

this

increase with uncertainty regarding future

interest

the

cost

rates, and

uncertainty has risen in recent years. The rise reflects both

greater uncertainty about the inflation premium in Interest rates and a
reduction in the importance the monetary authorities attach to interest

rate

stability. If the relative rise in mortgage coupon rates reflects

solely an increase ii the terminations premia in response to greater interest
rate uncertainty, then there are neither extraordinary opportunities for
profits

nor substantial market imperfections for correction.

Differences

between GNMA and Treasury coupon rates were calculated

for three alternative mortgage termination schedules. If the mortgage
market is fully integrated with bond markets, then these differences

are simply terminations premia. The differences in coupon rates were then

-25-

regressed on proxies developed for interest rate uncertainty. The results
are consistent with the view that the measured premia are, Indeed, terminations
premia (up to a random measurement error), and thus that the market for

integrated with bond markets. If this is so, there
no extraordinary profit opportunities for lenders to exploit and no

GNMA
are

pools

is fully

mortgage market inefficiencies for policymakers to correct.

-26-

References
A.J. Curley and J.M. Guttentag, 'The Yield on Insured Residential
Mortgages," Explorations in Economic Research, 1, Summer 1971i,

pp.

K.B. Dunn

uA-i6i.

and JJ. McConnell, "Valuation of GNMA, Mortgage-Backed

Securities," Journal of Finance, June 1981.

____________________ "A Comparison of Alternative Models for Pricing
GNMA

E.F.

Mortgage-Backed

Securities," Journal of Finance, May

1981.

Fama, "Short-te Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation,"
American Economic Review, 65, June 1975, pp. 269-282.

____________________,

"Interest

Rates and Inflation: The Message in

the Entrails," American Economic Review, 67, June 1977, pp. 87_196.

K.D. Garbade, 'Measuring Yields, Risk and Risk Premiums on Pass-Through
Securities," Salomon Brothers Center Working

Paper,

October 1980.

R.L. Harvey, Jr., B.W. Cater, and W.P. Lloyd, 'Duration and GNMA.

Pass-Throughs,"

mlmeo, 1980.

P.H. Hendershott, "Inflation, Resource Allocation, and Debt and Equity
Returns," NBER Working Paper No. 699,

June 1981. (Forthcoming

NBER Conference Volume, University of Chicago Press.)

in

-27-

__________________ and K.E. Villani, "Terminations Rates, Interest
Rate Uncertainty and Mortgage Rate Premia: Some Tests from the

GNMA

T.N.

Market,"

mimeo, August 1980.

Herzog, "flayesian Graduation of FHA/HUD Single Family Home Mortgage

Insurance Contracts -- Section 203," mimeo, May

1981.

G.G. Kaufman and G.E. Morgan, "Standardizing Yields on Mortgages and
Other Securities," AREUEA Journal,

8,

Summer 1980, pp.

163-179.

J.H. McCulloch, "The Tax-Adjusted Yield Curve," Journal of Finance,

30, June
J.A.

Wilcox,
Why Real

at

1975, pp. 811-30.

"Interest Rates, Expected Inflation, and Supply Shocks or
Interest Rates Have Been So Low in the 1970's," presented

NBER Conference on Inflation and Financial Markets, May 15, 1981.

