NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING FINANCE IN THE UNITED STATES
IN THE YEAR 2001

Patric H. Hendershott
Kevin E. Villani

Working Paper No. T39

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
August 1981

Presented

at "North American Housing Markets Into the 21st Century"

Symposium, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada,
July 22—24, 1981. The study was supported by the Center for Real
Estate Education and Research, The Ohio State University, from
funds supplied by the Ohio Real Estate Education and Research Fund.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and project in Capital
Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #739
August 1981

Housing Finance

in the United States in the Year 2001

ABSThACT

This paper proceeds

as follows. We first

identify the essential

services provided by a financial system and then derive the characteristics
of the system that would exist in a technologically advanced society
unfettered by nonneutral taxes and regulations. Next we consider how taxes
and. regulations have shaped the existing American financial structure.

Finally, we posit likely tax and regulatory changes and conjecture as to
how technological innovation will further interact with these changes to

alter the American financial system. Our basic contentions are that
the tax and regulatory influences are eroding and that the system will
eventually move toward the unfettered financial system described in the

first section.
Patric

H. Hendershott
Krannert Graduate School of Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN 147906
(317) 494-10421

Kevin E. Villani
Department of Housing

Urban Develoent

and.

Office of Economic Analysis
451 7th Street, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 201410
(202) 755-5960

Table of Contents
Page

I. The Essential Elements of Finance

2

A. Essential Financial Services

3

B. Characteristics of an Unfettered Financial System

5

II. The Current Housing Finance System

.

9

A. TaxPreferencesandRegulations

10

B. Debt Instruments and Returns

12

C. Underwriting, BrokerageandExchange

14

III. Evolution of the Housing Finance Structure

...

16

A. The Forces for Change

16

B. The Ultimate Financial Structure ....

19

C. TheMortgagelnstrument
IV. Summary

References

.

.

.

........

21

. 24
27

HOUSING FINANCE IN THE UNITED STATES IN THE YEAR 2001

As the title suggests, this paper is an exercise in futureology.

Such exercises are not uncommon. What distinguishes this attempt from the
usual is the time frame; we view the system at the beginning of the next

century rather than over the coming decade. This makes our task less
difficult in one sense and more difficult in another: less difficult
because the memory of 20 year forecasts is vague; more difficult because
one needs to go beyond simple extrapolations of ongoing trends and to identify
the underlying forces of change.
Had the time frame been shorter, e.g., a decade, a more traditional

approach would suffice. This could entail:
1. a determination of "housing needs" through the next decade,
based on extrapolations of household formation and demographic trends,
2. a calculation of the demand for "housing credit" these needs
generate,
3. an estimate of the supply of housing credit from "traditional"
sources, and
4. an assessment of the secondary market and federal policy
response to the projected "gap" between the demand for and
supply of housing credit.
This sort of analysis, although somewhat useful for short time periods,

is not very enlightening of the more distant future. The financial system
is currently undergoing revolutionary changes. Lines of demarcation between
banks, thrifts, other financial intermediaries, and industry are rapidly
eroding.

Existing firms are expanding beyond traditional functions, and

new firms are performing nontraditional functions as innovation renders

2

regulatory

boundaries obsolete. New financial institutions and instruments

are developing in response to fundamental economic, regulatory and institutional

forces. Identification of these forces and of the logical end to which they

will

lead is necessary to understand both current developments and the likely

evolution of the housing finance system into the 21st Century.

This paper proceeds as follows. First, we identify the essential
services provided by a financial system and then derive the characteristics

of the system that would exist in a technologically advanced society unfettered
by nonneutral taxes and regulations. Next we consider how taxes arid regulations

have shaped the existing American financial structure. Finally, we posit
likely tax and regulatory changes and conjecture as to how technological
innovation will further interact with these changes to alter the American

financial system. Our basic contentions are that the tax and regulatory
influences are eroding and that the system will eventually move toward the
unfettered financial system described in the first section.

I. The Essential Elements of Finance
The first step in understanding the financial structure

between regulatory and economic induced

and in distinguishing

innovation is to identify those

elements of finance that are essential to household portfolio optimization.1

From this, the characteristics of a minimal financial sector (utilizing
current technology) follow in a straight—forward manner.

1/

Silber (1975) for an enlightening discussion of financial systems and
innovations.

See

3

A. Essential Financial Services
We identify four essential financial services that would be provided in

some form in any well-developed financial system: 1) a medium of exchange,
2) security underwriting, 3) security brokerage and 4) denomination intermedia-

tion. Each of these is discussed briefly in the remainder of this section.

1. Medium of Exchange. The first and most important financial
service is the provision of a "medium of exchange." Brunner and Meltzer
(1971) have shown that the costs of exchanging goods in an uncertain
world can be reduced if one good serves as a medium of exchange.

This medium, generally labeled money, must exhibit two characteristics.

First, it should be generally acceptable. To accomplish this, it

must

convey information regarding its ability to be converted to real

goods. Second, it
the

should

be "portable." The more

portable it is,

greater are the efficiency gains it generates. As will be discussed

later, technology is the limiting factor in conveying information and
transporting money.

2. Security Underwriting. The second most important financial
service is the provision of a financial claim that allows the transfer
of inccme from surplus to deficit units [see Gurley and Shaw (1956)].
This transfer reallocates real resources from less useful or less

productive activities to more productive activities. The key
characteristic of this transfer is the information embodied in the
financial claim regarding the probability the deficit unit will repay

the surplus unit. The primary function of security underwriting is
to identify the parameters affecting expost nominal returns and to
provide

information to surplus units to allow theu to form reasonable

4

subjective probability distributions regarding the future value of
these parameters and thus the probability that the terms of the contract
will be met. Because a given value of a parameter may increase the
expost nominal return on some instruerits and decrease the return on
others,

diversification reduces the variability of portfolio returns.

3. Security Brokerage. The need for brokerage stens from the desire
by households either to reallocate their' portfolios or to change their net

worth. The reallocation—induced deand for brokerage services arises
primarily

from diffring expectations of future outcomes affecting portfolio

returns.

Secondarily, households reducing net worth (deficit units) need a

mechanism to transfer assets to households increasing net worth (surplus

units). Again, the essential characteristic of brokerage is the transfer
of infonnation between surplus and deficit households to facilitate the
exchange.

4. Denomination Intermediation. Deficit units issue financial
instruments that presumably reflect their needs and available collateral.
There are two fundamental characteristics of these instruments.
These are those parameters that affect expost nominal and real returns.

A major benefit of finance is its contribution to superior allocation
of risk bearing in the economy [Arrow (1964)]; this derives from the
ability

of economic units to diversify risks associated with multiple

securities. The optimal portfolio for a household may include the
obligations

of many issuers, but in smaller amounts than are efficient

for the issuer to supply. The major role of financial intermediaries
is to provide these smaller denominations.

5

Denomination intermediation also allows diversification of inflation
risk through maturity intermediation. In a tax-neutral world, the real
value of capital should be unaffected by inflation, anticipated or unanticipated.
Thus, to the extent that financial contracts finance real assets, inflation

does not affect real wealth. Human capital may be considered a real asset,

but households cannot issue equity shares. Insofar as households issue debt
contracts, which provide a claim on future nominal income, to increase current
consumption above current income, the real value of those contracts will fall

in response to an increase in inflation. To the extent that the inflation
is unanticipated —-

not

built into the contract interest rate --

the

real

wealth of deficit units increases at the expense of surplus units. Theoretically, individual households can hedge their debt portfolios against uncertain
inflation

rates by either selling financial assets short or writing options

contracts. But as long as some households issue claLns on future nominal
income, unanticipated inflation will have distributional consequences.
In summary, there are few essential financial services. Deficit units
would issue instruments reflecting the collateral —-

either

the market

value of the asset or, in the case of unsecured debt, the income stream the

unit produces. Some form of banks would be created to provide a medium of
exchange, and some form of underwriters would develop to convey appropriate

information regarding the return parameters of the instruments. Brokers would
arise to facilitate the transfer of assets, and denomination intermediaries
would be created to facilitate diversification of nominal and real risk.

B. Characteristics of an Unfettered Financial System
Before returning to the existing financial structure, it may be useful
to speculate on the characteristics of a financial structure utilizing

6

existing technology but unfettered by taxes, regulation or fixed institutional

capital (hereafter institutional memory). In a subsequent section, we will
contrast
of

this system with the existing

structure and identify the consequences

taxes, regulations and institutional memory.
Consider a simple world in which the private capital stock consists of

residential and industrial capital. Producers of housing services and other
goods and services would issue both ownership shares in individual units

(or collections of units) of capital and debt instruments collateralized by

individual units or collections of these units. We denote the demand for
shares of the jth unit of capital by

Cj

=

f(P,d,7r),

where P, the anticipated productivity of the jth unit (or collection of
units) of capital, d, the anticipated depreciation rate, and 2T j, the
anticipated rate of price increase, are subjective probability distributions.
We note that productivity is defined as the rents accruing to capital.

An interesting question is, are there any reasons why households would
want to corner the :narket on an individual housing unit? That is, would full

homeownership exist in a well-developed financial system without tax pre-

ferences? Households desire manage'ent control to allow them to make all
decisions regarding the use of this capital, just as some shareholders of
industrial capital desire to maintain a majority interest, but, given the current
management prerogatives of shareholders, this explains a 51 percent ownership
share, not a 100 percent

share. In fact, homeownership is most prevalent in

very prinative societies without financial systems. Rental markets exist in

7
more developed societies and require a more developed financial system to
sell equity shares. Expost returns on equity shares in different houses
will vary for the same reason as they do on equity shares in different
industrial

plants and companies. That is, the actual returns will depend

on the expost value of the parameters. Portfolio optimization implies

diversification

among shares in residental as well as industrial capital.

What does all this imply for security supplies? Thus far, our analysis
suggests the existence of supplies of equity shares financing residential
and

industrial capital and of debt collateralized by residential and industrial

capital. Intermediaries will offer these four instruments in smaller
denominations. Whether or not these are a sufficient number of instruments

for all

households to optimize their portfolios, i.e., to reduce the benefits

from further diversification to zero, depends on the characteristics of

the debt instruments. This leads to a more fundamental question. That
is, what information does the debt collateral convey?
Two of the three parameters in the demand functions for shares, P,j and

d3, reflect the physical characteristics of the capital and are independent

of the third parameter, inflation. This information is most fully utilized if:
1) the instruments offer a fixed real interest rate, and 2) the principal is

repaid at the depreciation rate. The difference between debt and equity is
that the risks embodied in P3 and d3 are borne mostly by the equity holders.

A specific example may be useful here. Assume capital markets are efficient
and there exists a security (government?) of maturity k with a "certain"

real rate of interest r. In risk neutral markets, the "most likely" or
mean expected real return on a capital good with a life k and no physical

8

depreciation is also r. Suppose further that the capital good is one-half
equity financed and one-half bond financed. The bondholders' expost yield
is

r

plus a small default prerniumS so long as the equity share has positive

value. The return on equity reflects the actual productivity and depreciation
rates of this particular piece of capital and the extent of bond leveraging.
In this case, if ex post earnings were twice those expected (r), then the
return to equity would be almost three times (3r-S) that expected.
The bond instrument described above contracts for the "most likely"

real return on existing capital plus . .

How does this differ from a perfectly

diversified equity portfolio? The expected real return on the latter would
reflect the mean value of the subjective probability distributions of the

parameters Pj and d, i.e., the variance of these parameters for a perfectly
diversified equity portfolio is zero. But suppose that subjective probabilities turn out to be wrong "across the board," resulting in a lower (or higtier)

expost return on capital generally. This will be reflected in the return
on the perfectly diversified equity portfolio hut not the bond return (unless

the return on capital were markedly lower). The same certain return could be
achieved with a diversified equity portfolio and options contracts.2

That is, debt instruments are not an essential instrument of finance! Thus
the primary consequence of bonds is on the distributional impact of the
actual

real earnings generated by existing capital.

2/

—

For example, suppose the holder of a perfectly diversified equity portfolio
is extremely averse to actual productivity of capital generally falling
short of exante expected productivity. He can write a contract, the value
of

If

which depends on the difference between actual and expected productivity.

f is the expected forward price and f the actual forward price, the
difference will reflect the difference between expected and actual productivity.
The options contract would simply give the writer the ability to "put" the
equity shares into the portfolio of the holder of the option at .f.

9

We have thus far ignored instruments to finance consumption in excess

of income. These "unsecured" instruments are collateralized by the
productivity
least,

or

earnings potential of human capital. Conceptually, at

there would exist equity and debt instruments with characteristics

similar to those financing nonhuman capital

If all households shared the sane

expectations and were risk—neutral,

no other nonmoney financial instruments would exist.3 If expectations

then

regarding inflation differed, then some households would Nrite o7tions to
other households reflecting these differences, and an options market could
develop.

II. The Current Housing Finance System
Our previous discussion implied that 1)

financed
would

with equity shares and

residential capital would be

mortgage debt, 2) mortage

underwriters

originate real-denominated housing finance instruments, and 3)

financial institutions would develop as pooling arrangements to facilitate
diversification by lowering minimum denominations. The existing housing

finance system differs in important respects from this hypothetical model
Equity shares in

residential

capital are scarce; mortgage instruments pay

nominal returns; and "housing finance"

intermediaries have undiversified

portfolios. In this section we attenpt to explain the roles that taxes,
regulation, and institutional memory have played in the formation of the
current system.

3/

It takes time to produce capital , and the production period is uncertain.
Consequently, optional delivery markets would develop for real and financial
instruments.

10

A. Tax Preferences and Regulations
The most important consequences of current tax law stem from the failure
to tax imputed rent on owner—occupied housing and the preferential treatment

of capital gains for homeowners. This explains why almost two—thirds of
all

households own their own homes and the ownership rate is higher for

higher—income households.4 This, in turn, gives rise to mortgage instruments

collateralized by individual housing units and to many households having

real housing assets far in excess of their net worth. As a consequence,
the total stock of financial debt is draniaticilly increased, and most

household balance sheets are extree1y undiversified and leveraged. Because
of the latter, the return to household net worth varies far more than

proportionately

with the returns on individual houses for these homeowners.

The ultimate constraint on arbitrage between owner-occupied housing
and financial markets is the diminishing marginal utility of housing

services. In equilibrium, wealthier households (and those lower income
households for whom honeownership does not pay) ultimately finance the
owner—occupied

housing of middle—income households. There is a general

loss to society in that benefits of diversification are foregone. In
addition, the portfolios of wealthier households will be tilted toward
more debt and less equity. There are thus distributional consequences to
other than the "most likely" outcomes of Pj, d and, particular1y,i7'.

4/

See Hendershott and Shilling (1981) and Rosen and Rosen (1980) for analysis

of the determination of tenure choice in the U.S.

11

The second major tax policy affecting the housing financial system is
the preferential tax treatment of income from mortgages held in

institution
to

thrift

portfolios. Currently savings and loans are allowed to put up

40 percent of their earnings into a "bad debt" reserve without paying

federal tax on the income so long as at least 82 percent of their assets

are invested in residential mortgages.5 Virtually all institutions have been
induced to meet this requirement. This, combined with regulatory prohibitions
(or threats of the same) against variable-rate loans, has resulted in an
industry with a substantially undiversified portfolio of fixed-rate mortgage

investments. From

the depositor's perspective this is counterproductive

to the essential financial service of thrifts, i.e.,

to issue

small denomination

shares of diversified portfolios paying market interest rates.
These tax preferences have provided r3tionales for federal regulation.

One tax—policy, the tax preference on owner-occupied housing, results in
"excess" mortgage debt issues by middle—income households, justifying protective
consumer regulation, and a second tax preference results in this debt being
financed by, in part, even lower—income depositors who are less able to

diversify and thus are in need of protective deposit regulation. For
many years, virtually all consumer protections and safeguards focused on
the types of liabilities households were allowed to issue and basically

prohibited all but fixed nominal rate instruments. Lenders were subjected
to numerous regulations affecting who got credit and at what risk, e.g.,

5/

For more details on this tax preference and a discussion of its impact on
the portfolio behavior of thrifts and the relationship between mortgage
and bond rates, see Hendershott and Villani (1980) (1981).

12

Truth

in Lending, CRA, HMDA and RESPA. Depositors, in contrast, were

prohibited from diversifying out of this long-term fixed rate mortgage

portfolio by limits imposed on the minimum denomination of alternative
investments. Although thrift deposits are essentially equivalent to mutual
fund pools in Treasury bills, the yields on Treasury bills were not iade
generally available to depositors who thus paid the price for the years of
protective mortgage regulation.6

B. Debt Instruments and Returns
In the previous section, we argued that debt instruments were not
essential elements of finance and that, if issued, would reflect the real

value of the underlying collateral. There are thus two issues regarding
the use of debt instruments in the current system. The first is why they
exist at all. The second is why they are denominated in nominal terms.
Of

course, these issues pertain to the entire financial system, not simply

housing finance. We have several observations but no definitive answer to
the questions.
As already explained, households issue mortgage debt because their tax—
induced demand for owner-occupied housing generally exceeds net worth.

Selling shares in owner-occupied residential capital has not developed as
an alternative and would probably result in a loss of the tax preference.

This does not explain corporate bonds. Whereas owner-occupied residential
capital is tax favored, industrial capital is tax penalized. That is,

6/
—

See Kane (1970) and Hendershott and Viliani (1978, Chapter 6) for discussions
of the distributional impacts of ninimum purchase requirements in conjunction
with deposit rate ceilings.

13

returns to shareholders are taxed twice, at the corporate and individua1

levels. It is somewhat of an anomaly that double taxation of corporate
income leads to the same result with respect to corporate debt as no

taxation leads to regarding household debt. Because returns to bondholders
are taxed only once, the substitution of bond for equity financing reduces
the tax burden on industrial capital generally.

The second reason for the existence of bonds is that it may be more
efficient for households to hold bond portfolios than the alternative of

fully diversified equity portfolios with options contracts. Diversification
is obtained at some costs. Because there are fixed costs of obtaining
information, diversification costs are not proportional to portfolio size.

Reasons why debt pays nominal, rather than real, returns are more

numerous but less convincing. With respect to owner—occupied residential
capital, the most obvious reason is regulatory prohibition. In fact,
"equity kickers" have existed in commercial mortgage contracts for some

time. While regulation may have affected the design of mortgage instruments
offered by depository intermediaries, it does not explain why other firms

have failed to originate mortgages paying real returns. A'prlori, one
would expect mortgage bankers to originate whatever instruments households

desire to issue and investors are willing to purchase. There are two
constraints on mortgage bankers, however. First, the primary outlets for
the loans mortgage bankers originate -- GNMA, FNMA and FHLMC --

are

federal

or quasi federal. Their regulations In large measure determine the
characteristics of mortgage banker-originated loans. If, for example,
FNMA follows the recent example of FHLMC in refusing to purchase loans

14

with negative amortization, a conventional graduated—payment loan is less

likely to develop. Second, there may be economies of scale to mortgage

originations that require sufficient volume of issues of any specific type

of

mortgage to make the process profitable.

But this does not explain the absence of indexed corporate debt. One
reason may be innovation lag. Existing instruments were designed in a
noninflationary environment, and tax and accounting procedures developed

around these instruments. Other factors may be the difficulties in choosing
the appropriate index and/or appraising the value of residential and

industrial capital. Another reason that has been offered (with little
enthusiasm) is that lenders as a group are more optimistic about infLation
than borrowers (Fischer, 1979).

C. Underwriting, Brokerage and Exchange
The preferred tax treatment of mortgages in thrift portfolio's and
regulations limiting asset selection also help explain the structure of
the

mortgage underwriting industry. Mortgage underwriting conceptually

involves the same tasks as bond underwriting. What distinguishes mortgage
baiking

from investment banking is the greater need for local verification

of loans collateralized with residential as opposed to industrial capital.

The production function for mortgage loan underwriting is thus quite similar

to the production function for denomination intermediation. The thrift
industry has, in fact, become increasingly cognizant of the value of the

existing plant in producing mortgages as deposit flows have slowed. The
development of mortgage "brokerage" services by the FHLMC simply reflects

the comparative advantage of thrifts in mortgage banking given their existing
physical deposit—taking capacity.

15

Much significance has been imputed to the various "secondary" mortgage

market institutions: FNMA, GWMA and FHLMC. Actually, these institutions
act largely as demanders in the "primary" market for new mortgage securities;

they provide little brokerage. In essence, their role is to provide
denomination intermediation (to facilitate diversification), as well as to
diversify

risks of holding mortgages. They also provide ultimate investors

an essential element of underwriting, i.e., additional information (Van
Order and Villani, 1981). Mortgage bankers provide

investors information

pertaining to the quality of the collateral. Federal and quasi federal
institutions provide information on the quality of the underwriters. There
are

obvious scale economies to producing and providing this information,

which is why,
Where

for example, GNMA is actually quite profitable.

then, are existing mortgages brokered? The secondary market

for these mortgages is made up mostly of private "dealers"
private
little

placements. Trades are relatively

who seek out

infrequent because there is

to be gained. The perceived gains from trade reflect a) the different

expectations

of the buyer and seller or b) the need for liquidity. Expectations

regarding existing mortgages are homogeneous, and few institutions typically
need to sell mortgages for liquidity (the 1981 environment is an exception).
The story is somewhat different for owner—occupied residential capital.
There are a variety of reasons why people move, some of which are financial.

When an owner-occupant moves, ownership must change hands.7 This gives

7/
—

Simonson and Villani (1981) formally derive the demand for brokerage
services resulting from the homeowner tax preference.

16

rise to frequent trades during the life of the house. The real estate
brokerage industry is not publicly regulated, but subject only to self-policing
of roles of appropriate industry practices established by a representative
trade organization.

By definition, the accepted mediums of exchange are currency and demand

deposits at commercial banks. The McCarran—Furguson Act and Douglas Amendment
prevent bank mergers and branching across state lines, resulting in a fragmented

industry. Thrift institutions have been prohibited by law from offering
demand deposits, resulting in a duplicity of physical capacity to provide a

payment mechanism. But the barriers to entry for transactions mechanisms
are already crumbling. The implications of this are explained more fully in
the next section.

III.

Evolution
In

of the Housing Finance Structure

this section first we consider the basic economic and regulatory forces

of change in the existing financial structure and then derive the implications
for housing financ. The forces are viewed as driving the system toward
the hypothetical unfettered model developed in Section I.
A. The Forces for Change

Inflation

has been the most powerful economic force behind changes in

the financial structure. It has resulted in windfall gains to existing
homeowners, increased the demand for owner-occupied housing, and resulted in
an explosion in the supply of home mortgage debt (Hendershott and Hsieh, 1980).

Simultaneously, it significantly raised nominal interest rates and now

8/

For an overview of the movement toward financial reform in the
United States, see Hendershott and Villani (1978).

17

threatens the viability of thrift institutions. These developments have
temporarily abated the regulatory arid legislative sympathies for borrowers,

created empathy for depositors, and heightened concern for the federal

insurance funds. The deregulation of deposit rate ceilings, which began in
March 1980 with enactment of the Depository Institutions Deregulation and

Monetary Control Act9, is being accelerated.'° A decade of debate over the
appropriate consumer safeguards in variable—rate mortgage contracts ended
with the virtual total deregulation of these contracts.11 The economic
forces in this case simply overwhelmed the

existing

regulations.

Concern with the viability of the federal insurance funds, i.e., the
FDIC and more seriously the FSLIC, is providing additional impetus to
reform.

The first step will be a provision to allow commercial banks to

purchase "troubled' thrifts across state lines. This is essentially a
device to test the waters for repeal of McCarran—Furguson and the Douglas

Amendment. The ultimate step is elimination of prohibitions on branching,
mergers and acquisitions.

9/
—

Deposit

rate deregulation provides another example of a belated regulatory
response to an innovation, in this case the money market certificate
introduced in June 1978 to circumvent existing regulations.
10/

Thrifts perceived the Depository Institutions Deregulation Committee as
proceeding too fast and sued in Federal District Court for slower
deregulation in the summer of 1980. The Congress has criticized the
Committee only for moving too slowly, however, and the new Administration
has accelerated the pace of deregulation.
11/
—
In April 1981, several weeks after Richard Pratt became Chairman, the

FHLBB issued extremely flexible regulations regarding interest rate
adjustability.

18

A

major distinction between thrifts and commercial banks has

prohibition

been

the

of the former from issuing demand deposit liabilities. This

law is particularly capricious because the physical capital of the two

types of institutions is virtually identical. Higher interest rates on
existing deposits and disiritermediation enhanced the attractiveness of

demand deposits at thrifts. The law was ultimately circumvented first by
iarketing innovation (e.g., a deposit is not a demand deposit if you do not
call it one) and then by technological innovation (bill-payer accounts by phone,

etc.). Thrift institution demand deposits were legitimized in the WOW
Account provisions of the Depository Institutions Act.

Further evidence of the belated regulatory response to innovation with
the payments mechanism and the ultimate inability of regulators to prevail

is provided by the experience with international banking. Foreign deposits
easily evaded American regulations by flowing to other countries. Domestic
banks responded by establishing Carribean subsidiaries to handle these

funds. In June 1981, the Federal Reserve issued regulations approving the
establishment of international banking facilities in the United States,
thus ending the prohibition and the flow.

Technological innovation is providing an additional powerful economic
force; computer technology will ultimately facilitate a revolution of the

transactions mechanism. On May 29, 1981, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board
eliminated existing geographic restrictions on "remote service unit"

operations. The rationale for this first step into interstate banking by
thrift institutions was parity with commercial banks.

19

With this blurring of distinction between thrifts and commercial banks
came a similar blurring of distinction between deposit and nondeposit
financial intermediaries. Merrill Lynch's cash management account may be

the closest substitute to currency as a nationally recognized medium of
As existing financial firms are moving into banking, industrial

exchange.

firms are moving into finance.
Existing tax preferences favoring housing will also be of declining

significance. The bad debt allowance will soon be phased out, contributing
to the transition of thrifts into banks. The immediate impetus for the
removal of the bad debt allowance is provided paradoxically by the current

earnings squeeze. This earnings squeeze is attributable to low rates on
past nortgage loans, the existence of which is attributable to the bad debt
allowance, limited asset powers and restrictions against variable-rate

mortgages. Thrifts have already been granted expanded asset powers; these
powers

will he

enlarged further and the mortgage tax preference will be

reduced when thrift earnings make doing so feasible.

B. The Ultimate Financial Structure
Our

point is that economic and technological forces will ultimately ——

over the next 20 years -— render most existing regulations obsolete.12

This has three major implications for the financial structure and, in

particular,

housing finance institutions. First, various types of firms

will offer a medium of exchange. Money transfers will, for the most part,
be electronic. Banks and thrifts will still exist (although the two will

— For
12/

an expanded discussion of regulation—induced innovation in banking,
see Kane (1981).

20

not

be readily distinguishable), but in far fewer numbers and with significantly

less physical capital. The primary purposes of most reiiaining branches

will be to convert small deposits to currency (and vice versa) and to produce
mortgages. Federal deposit insurance will contract corniiensurate with

the

reduced role of deposit (or denomination) internediaries, and the two insurers
will be merged into one.
Second, mortgage banking subsidiaries will be formed by commercial

bank holding companies, savings and loan service corporations, and investment
bankers.

For the most part, mortgage origination arid mortgage finance will

be carried out by separate entities. Mortgages will be financed by various
pooling arrangements developed by the above institutions. The federal role

in

pOoling mortgages will likely

decline in response both to the improved

transfer of underwriting information in

the private sector and the political

backlash to the expanding use of federal guarantees. Private mortgage
insurance will play a larger role in the formation of these pools.
Third,

the real estate brokerage industry will he agglomerated. There

are currently 600,000 firms, 63 percent of which only have one office

(HUD, 1980, pp. 11.20 and 11.22). The recent entry of Merrill Lynch into the
real

estate brokerage industry on a national scale will he followed by other

firms as the ability to readily transmit information expands. In this regard,
one could envisage long—distance sales via tele—communication. In addition,
the larger firms with sufficient net worth will become dealers in houses,
following the lead of the Merrill Lynch and Sears executive relocation

services. Small firms will still dominate in less populated areas where
volume is insufficient to achieve the economies of scale necessary for
telecommunication and dealer inventory turnover.

21

Our previous discussion indicated that the housing finance institutions
are unlikely to exist In near their current form by the beginning of the next

century. The key issue is what this implies for the financing of owner—occupied
housing in the year 2001. The quantity of housing —- as opposed to the
quantity of housing credit --

will

depend on the real user cost or rental

price of housing capital.13 The absolute tax advantage to owner-occupied
housing will remain due to politically insurmountable obstacles, but the
relative advantage will be reduced by successive reductions in the corporate
income tax and increases in accelerated depreciation and investment tax

credits. The result will be a general rise in before-tax interest rates
and a fall in the demand for housing services. The disappearance of housing
finance institutions will have a negligible effect on the quantity of

mortgage credit available. In a previous paper (Hendershott and Villani,
1980), we argued that by the end of the past decade housing finance had
been substantially integrated with the capital markets, and thus mortgage

markets cleared at capital market interest rates. Further, empirical
forecasts of housing demand in 1979 and the first half of 1980 suggested that
the most recent housing collapse in the United States can be fully explained

without appeal to rationing effects (Hendershott, 1980). The expected
gradual

disappearance of institutions identifiable as "housing finance

institutions" is consistent with this integration of markets.
C. The Mortgage Instrument

The most important concern regarding housing finance in the year 2001

is

the design of the mortgage instrument. This concern arises from the

— See Hendershott (1980) for a recent discussion of the real user cost concept
13/

and

estimates of its empirical relevance.

22

fact that, for many homeowners, mortgage debt will coitinue to far exceed

net worth. The tax advantage will continue to provide incentives to issue
mortgage debt, and many households will still not have the flexibility in
the remainder of their portfolio to take actions offsetting undesirable

mortgage characteristics. To put it another way, some households may have
no alternative to accepting more cash—flow risk in a mortgage contract than
their income and balance sheets warrant.
We

are not advocating regulation of mortgage contracts, Our point is

that, at least in the short run, they are designed by existing financial
instititions and their regulators and thus reflect existing problems facing

the institutions and regulators (insurers). Our concern is that the pendulum
nay have swung too far in the direction of depositor and federal insurer interests

to redress past grievances. In our view, this appropriately characterizes

FHLBB regulations issued this spring. Here we assime the pendulum

the
will

reach balance within the next several decades (and hopefully much

sooner),

at which point the mortgage instrument will reflect the needs of

the issuer as well as capital market realities.
The principal change is that mortgage contracts with fixed nominal

interest rates will be rare. Most mortgages will contain various provisions
For adjustment, as described more fully below. The rate flexibility in the
contracts will remove the economic incentive for lenders to require "due
on

sale"

clauses. The application of computer technology will likely

result in an adjustable mortgage principal. Thus nortgages will be assumed
with greater frequency simply to avoid the transactions costs of repeat
underwriting.
principal

Similarly, flexible mortgage rates and adjustable

loan

will remove the economic incentive for borrowers to refinance.

23
Finally, the concepts of maturity and amortization will likely lose

significance. That is, once the principal balance becomes flexible, a
timetable for repaying debt will disappear. The mortgage instrument will
resemble a line of credit in this regard, with the maximum balance moving
with

the current market value of the asset. Lenders and property tax

appraisers may combine forces to produce current market appraisals.

The primary concern of borrowers with real rates of interest
contracts
problem

this

is the cash—flow

in mortgage

risks some instruments pose. The traditional

with the fixed—rate level—payment mortgage is that, with inflation,

mortgage causes too rapid a build-up of real homeowner equity and consumes

too large a share of homeowner income. Homeowners unable to issue other
forms of debt are constrained to save more income and/or own less housing

than they desire. Flexible rate contracts that require full payment of
nominal

interest when it accrues, in addition to scheduled principal payments

(due to amortization), expose the borrower to even greater cash flow risks.
The secondary concern of borrowers regarding real-denominated loans
relates to the types of index chosen. There are essentially two ways to
index. The first indexes yields to the actual real productivity of the
house, in effect converting the mortgage to an equity share. The second
way is to index yields to the expost real yield on new capital. An example
of the former Is the shared-appreciation mortgage (SAM). Technically, the
lender receives a share of the appreciation —-

either

when the house is

sold or at some prespecified date -— as an interest payment. But the
amount of this payment will reflect the real expost productivity of the

24

specific housing capital and is thus in essence an equity interest. An
example of the latter is the variable-rate mortgage, e.g., the Wachovian
Plan.'4 The yield under this plan is indexed to the new-issue six-month
Treasury bill rate.
The first type of index provides a complete hedge to the hornebu.yer.

Lenders can diversify their implicit residential equity shares to earn the
average expost real rate on housing equity by diversifying the SAM portfolio.

With the Wachovian plan, the lender earns the actual real return on new
capital

return

in each future period; households thus bear both

the risk of the

on an individual house being below average and the risk that future

real returns will rise above returns on existing residential housing.
The SAM is thus the preferred real—denominated mortgage contract from the
borrower's perspective. Moreover, it may be preferred from society's
viewpoint in that lenders are far better able to diversify away the risk
of returns on individual houses.

IV.

Sumary
There are four essential services provided by a financial system:

a

medium of exchange, security underwriting, security brokerage, and denomination

intermediation. These avoid the costs of barter, increase the productivity
of investment by separating the investnent and saving decisions, reduce

14/
—
This plan was first introduced by the Wachovian National Bank in

North Carolina. Variants have sprung up around the country.
Presently (June 1981) Wachovian mortgages also reduce the cash—flow
problems of borrowers because mortgage payments are based on a 13 3/4
percent interest rate, far below the 16-17 percent rate available on
fixed-rate mortgages.

25

transactions costs by providing marketability or liquidity, and lower risk

by permitting asset diversification. In a housing finance system unfettered
by nonneutral taxes and regulations, residential capital would be financed
by equity shares and (mortgage) debt; nortgage underwriters would originate
real-denominated housing finance instruments (paying real returns and
indexed, at least roughly, to the nominal value of the underlying house

asset); and financial institutions would facilitate portfolio diversification
by holding a wide variety of assets, including mortgages, and offering
small denomination liabilities.

The current housing finance system in the United States differs widely
(at least until very recently) in all respects from this hypothetical

model. That large part of residential capital which is owner-occupied is
financed by a single equity share (100 percent ownership); mortgages have
carried fixed nominal rates and negative amortization has been precluded;
and housing finance institutions exist with undiversified portfolios.

These differences can be attributed virtually entirely to the existence of

nonneutral taxes and a myriad of government regulations. Because the tax
subsidy to homeownership is available only to owner-occupiers, there are

strong incentives against issuing multiple equity shares. Because tax
preferences for thrifts are contingent upon

large

percentage investment in

mortgages, thrifts hold undiversified portfolios. Finally, regulations,
or the threat of them, have prevented thrifts from originating variable—rate
mortgages and investing in certain classes of assets.

The driving force for change of the housing finance system has been

the acceleration of inflation. Increased nominal interest rates have

26
threatened the viability of thrift institutions and created enormous cash-

flow problems for homebuyers. As a result, regulators now favor variablerate mortgages, and mortgages with negative amortization —payaient, shared—appreciation, and Wachtovian -—

are

graduated

being utilized.

Moreover, because returns on shared-appreciation mortgages are tied to the
movement in the price of the underlying house, this instrument is equivalent
to an equity and allows diversification of part of the risk of investment
in individual

houses. We expect such

instruments to become widespread in

the future. The early disappearance of fixed-rate mortgages is obvious.
Other likely changes affecting housing finance include the following.

The tax preferences of thrifts and relative tax advantage of owner-occupied

housing will e reduced, the latter by cutting effective tax rates on other
assets (reductions in the corporate and capital gains tax rates and increases

in tax depreciation and investment tax credit). There will be fewer

firms and financial institutions, and there will be few, if any,

brokerage

undiversi fi ed "housing finance" institutions. Mortgage on gi nation and

finance will be carried out almost entirely by different institutions.

Finally,
The
will

the federal role in housing finance and insurance will be contracted.

reduction in

the relative tax advantage for owner—occupied housing

obviously tilt households away from ownership and tend to reduce the

quantity of housing desired, but the development of mortgages with negative

amortization will act to raise housing demand. The projected demise of

traditional housing finance institutions will have little
demand

impact on housing

because the mortgage market is already integrated with capital

markets generally.

27

References
Arrow, Kenneth J., "The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of
Risk Bearing," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. XXXI (2), 1964.

Brunner, Karl and Allan H. Meltzer, "The Uses of Money: Money in a Theory
of an Exchange Economy," American Economic Review, December 1971.
Fischer, Stanley, "Corporate Supply of Index Bonds," NBER Working Paper
331, March 1979.
Gurley, John G. and Edward Shaw, "Financial Intermediaries and the Saving—
Investment Process," Journal of Finance, May 1956.

Hendershott, Patric H., "Real User Costs and the Demand for Single—Family
Housing," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1980.
Hendershott, Patric H. and Chang-Tseh Hsieh, "Inflation and the Growth in Home
Mortgage Debt, 1964—78," Journal of Financial Research, Fall 1980.
Hendershott, Patric H. and James D. Shilling, in Sirmans (ed.), Research in Real
Estate, Vol. 1, JAI Press, Inc., 1981.

Hendershott, Patric H. and Kevin E. Villani, Regulation and Reform of the
Housing Finance System, American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy
Research, Washington, D.C., 1978.
Hendershott, Patric H. and Kevin E. Villani, "Savings and Loan Usage of the
Authority to Invest in Corporate Bonds," Savings and Loan Asset Management
Under Deregulation, Proceedings of the 6th Annual Conference of the Federal
Home Loan Bank of San Francisco, 1981.
Hendershott, Patric H. and Kevin E. Vil lani, "Secondary Residential Mortgage
Markets and the Relative Cost of Mortgage Funds," American Real Estate and
Urban Economics Association Journal, Spring 1980.

HUD's DRAFT RESPA - Section 142: The Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act,
Volume II: Settlement Performance Evaluation, (Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of PD&R, October 1980).
Kane, Edward J., "Accelerating Inflation, Technological Innovation, and the
Decreasing Effectiveness of Banking Regulation, Journal of Finance, May 1981.

Kane, Edward J., "Shortchanging the Small Saver: Federal Government
Discrimination Against Small Savers During the Vietnam War," Journal of
Money Credit and Banking, November 1970.
Rosen, Harvey S. and Kenneth T. Rosen, "Federal Taxes and Homeownership:
Evidence From Time Series," Journal of Political Economy, February 1980.

28

Silber,

William B., "Towards a Theory of Financial Innovation," in Silber (ed,)
Financial Innovation, Lexington Books, D.C. Heath and Company, 1975.

Simonsori, John C. and Kevin E. Villani, "Real Estate Settlement Pricing:
A Theoretical Framework, presented at the 9th Annual Mid—year Meetings
of AREtJEA, May 1981.

Van Order, Robert and Kevin E. Villani, "A Study of the Conventional GNMA
Pass-Through Security," HUD Occasional Paper Series, June 1981.

