                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              TAX EXPORTING AND THE COMMERCE CLAUSE:
                REFLECTIONS ON COMMONWEALTH EDISON




                      Charles E. McLure, Jr.

                       Working Paper No. y46




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          September 1981




The res earch reported here is part   of   the NBER' s res earch program
in Taxation and in Law and Economics. It was prepared for presen-
tation at a conference on "Fiscal Federalism and the Taxation of
Natural Resources" sponsored by the Committee for Taxation,
Resources, and Economic Development on September 11—12, 1981. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #746
                                                     September 1981




                      Tax Exporting and the Commerce Clause:
                        Reflections on Commonwealth Edison



                                     ABSTRACT



      This paper appraises the conflicting contentions found in the majority

and dissenting opinions in Commonwealth Edison Co. et al. v. Montana et al.

about the feasibility of basing findings of constitutionality under the

Interstate Commerce Clause on the results of incidence analysis. Severance

taxes, property taxes, corporate income taxes levied by both producing and

consuming states, and gross receipts taxes levied by consuming states in

conjunction with price controls are considered. Factors affecting tax

exporting by producing states include the degree of geographic concentration

of natural resources, cartelization by producing states, the mobility of

various resources, international competition, natural substitutability,

government regulations, the prevalence of long—term contracts, and trans-

portation costs. The analysis of tax exporting is sufficiently complicated

that attempting to base constitutionality on estimates of tax exporting

is fraught with danger, expecially in times of rapid economic and institu—

tional change, in part because it is so difficult to know when the tax

exporting question is being asked properly.




                                       Charles E. McLure, Jr.
                                       Hoover Institution
                                       Stanford University
                                       Stanford, CA 94305

                                        (415) 497—0713
                                                                           9/22/81

                     Tax Exporting and the Commerce Clause:
                       Reflections on Commonwealth Edison

                             Charles E. Mclure, Jr.
                               Hoover Institutjon*


 I. Introduction

           The appellants in Commonwealth Edison Co. et al. v. Montana et al.

 argued, among other things, that the 30 percent severance tax levied on coal by

 Montana imposed a burden on interstate trade proscribed by the Commerce Clause,

 because much of the tax would be exported to consumers residing outside of

Montana. In the majority opinion written by Justice Marshall, the Supreme Court

gave short shrift to this argument, noting (p. 8) that

          appellants' assertion that Montana may not "exploit" its
          "monopoly" position by exporting tax burdens to other states,
          cannot rest on a claim that there is need to protect the
          out—of—state consumers of Montana coal from discriminatory
          tax treatment. As previously noted, there is no real discri-
          mination in this case; the tax burden is borne according to
          the amount of coal consumed and not according to any
          distinction between in—state and out—of—state consumers.

The Court went on to say in a footnote (footnote 8),

           nor do we share appellants' apparent view that the Commerce
           Clause injects principles of antitrust law into the
           relations between the States by reference to such imprecise
           standards as whether one State is "exploiting" its
           "monopoly" position with respect to a natural resource when
          the flow of commerce among them is not otherwise impeded.
          The threshhold questions whether a State enjoys a
          "monopoly" position and whether the tax burden is shifted
          out—of—state rather than borne by in—state producers and
          consumers would require complex factual inquiries about
          such issues as elasticity of demand for the product and
          alternate sources of supply. Moreover, under this approach,
          the constitutionality of a state's tax could well turn on
          whether the in—state producer is able, through sales contracts
          or otherwise, to shift the burden of tax forward to its
          out—of—state customers.

It then quoted with approval (also in footnote 8) the Montana Supreme Court,
                                      —2—


which had said, "It would be strange indeed if the legality of a tax could be

made to depend on the vagaries of the terms of contracts."1

          Justice Blackmun, in the dissenting opinion, in which he was joined by

Justices Powell and Stevens, disagreed with the majority view on both the rele-

vance of tax exporting for determination of constitutionality under the Commerce

Clause and the ability of the Court to base such a determination on estimates of

tax exporting. Quoting earlier commentators, Blackxnun noted (p. 13),

          'like a toll gate lying athwart a train route, a severance
          or processing tax conditions access to natural resources.'
          Thus, to the extent that the taxing jurisdiction approaches
          a monopoly position in the mineral, and consumption is
          largely outside the State, such taxes are 'economically and
          politically analogous to transportation taxes exploiting
          geographical position.'
The dissenting opinion concludes (p. i4) that

          the mere fact that the burden of a severance tax is
          largely shifted forward to out—of—state consumers does
          not, standing alone, make out a Commerce Clause violation.
          But the Clause is violated when, as applicants allege
          is the case here, the State effectively selects 'a
          class of out—of—state taxpayers to shoulder a tax burden
          grossly in excess of any costs imposed directly or
          indirectly by such taxpayers on the State.'

Blackmun agrees with the majority opinion, when he states, "It is true that a

trial in this case would require 'complex factual inquiries' into whether econo-

mic conditions are such that Montana is in fact able to export the burden of its

severance tax." But he concludes by saying, "I do not believe, however, that

this threshhold inquiry is beyond judicial competence."2

          This paper appraises the conflicting contentions found in the majority

and dissenting opinions about the feasibility of basing findings of constitu-

tionality under the Commerce Clause on the results of incidence analysis. The

conclusion is, in brief, that the analysis of tax exporting is sufficiently
                                        —3—


 complicated that attempting to base constitutionality on estimates of tax

 exporting is fraught with danger, especially in times of rapid economic and

 institutional change. This does not, of course, mean that the Congress should not

 consider the likely incidence of taxes on natural resources in deciding whether to

 limit state use of such taxes. Whether the
                                              degree of tax exporting would be an
 appropriate basis for the appraisal of either the constitutionality of state tax

 provisions or the desirability of Congressional limits on state taxes, if the

 degree of tax exporting could be quantified with ease and certainty, is not

 addressed here. Nor does the paper comment on the decision reached in the

 Commonwealth Edison case, including the interpretations of the tests of Complete

Auto Transit found in either the majority opinion or in the dissent.

           In Commonwealth Edison v. Montana the Court was dealing with the

narrow issue of whether the Montana severance tax on coal was levied at a rate

so high as to burden interstate commerce
                                           unconstitutionally. Much of this paper
deals with severance taxes, and many examples are drawn from institutional

experience in the coal market. But the question that nist be examined here goes

well beyond this narrow case. First, severance taxes are only one of many ways

in which natural resources can be taxed by producing states.3 Obvious alter-

natives that have been widely used for similar
                                                 purposes are property taxes and

corporate income taxes. Moreover, producing states are not the only ones

attempting to play the tax exporting game. Gross receipts taxes imposed by con—

suming states in combination with statutes intended to prevent the taxes from

being passed forward to consumers, if consitutional,
                                                       might also entail tax
exporting, but to non—resident owners of oil companies. Some in consuming sta-

tes appear to believe that adoption of the unitary approach to the taxation of
                                            _14




the net income of oil companies would have the same effect.

           Most popular discussion of tax exporting, and all that in the

Commonwealth Edison case, focuses on exporting to non—resident consumers. But

tax   exporting occurs just as surely when rents received by non—resident owners
of resources are reduced by a tax. Again, how this kind of tax exporting
should be viewed in adjudication of the constitutionality of state taxes under
the   Commerce Clause is not considered here. But it is well to keep in mind that

determination of a tax burden on rents often implies tax exporting to

non—residents.

            While it is true that all taxes levied on natural resources by pro-

ducing states bear a general resemblance, there are important differences

in likely outcomes, depending on a) the particular type of tax (severance,

property, or income tax), as well as b) the conditions under which it is levied.

The latter result from differences in the degree of geographic concentration and

the mobility of resources or industry, cartelization by taxing states, inter-

national competition or price umbrella effects, natural substitutability,

government   regulation, the prevalance of long—term contracts, the importance of
transportation costs and the way      in   which such costs are determined,
unionization, and market structure, as well as the more        nundane attributes of

long and short—run elasticities of supply and demand.5

             It   is, of course, very difficult to allow for all these factors

simultaneously in one simple analytical model, especially if the primary exposi-

tion of the model is verbal. The exposition therefore begins in section II with

the relatively simple case of a severance tax levied in a competitive market

that is free of non—fiscal government intervention that would significantly

affect the outcome of the analysis. Market dominance .ad collusion by producing
     P                                    P
                                              B
P1
P0                                                                                     I
                                                                                   D
         A1   200
                    AO      300   A      0
                                                                              ro
          Panel A                                                   Panel B
                                       Figure     1
                    Illustration of Possibility  of Tax Exporting
                                      by State A
                                       —5—




states   play an important role in this analysis. In section III various other

complications listed above are then considered. Following that, property taxes

and corporate income taxes levied in producing states are considered briefly in

section IV. This discussion of taxation of natural resources by producer states

is augmented by brief consideration in section V of the incidence of taxes that

could be used by consumer states to try to tap rents from natural resources.


II. Severance Taxes in a Free—Market Setting

            Figure 1 provides a useful starting point for the analysis of tax

exporting. In it, panel A shows the production situation in state A, the one

levying the tax to be examined. That is, curve SA is the supply curve of the

natural resource in question, based on costs prevailing in the state. Panel B

shows the analogous information for production in the rest of the country, indi-

cated by curve SB. For convenience, different horizontal scales (in the ratio of

three to one) are used in the two panels. Curve ST in panel B represents the

aggregate supply curve for the nation as a whole. It is derived by summing hori-

zontally the supply curves for the two individual states, SA and SB. The ay

these curves are drawn implies that state A provides only a relatively small part

(approximately one—fourth) of the entire national output of the commodity in

question.6 The demand curve for the nation as a whole is indicated in panel B by

curve D, and its intersection with ST determines the equilibrium price, F0, and

national output of the commodity in question, QT0 Since, by assumption, there

are as yet no taxes in the model, this price prevails in both markets, ani the

output produced in each of the two states A0 and BO is indicated by the inter-

section of the relevant state supply curve with this price line.

            Imposition of a severance tax in state A can be illustrated by an upward
                                             —6—



 shift   in   curve   SA by the amount of the tax, to SA' •1   This   shift is also

 reflected in an analogous shift in ST to uT. The new equilibrium price is

 given by p1. At this price national output has been reduced somewhat, from

QTO to Tl• The fall in national output is not greater, given the elasticity of

national demand, because the relatively elastic production outside the taxing

state rises in response to the higher price (from Bo to Bl and partially off-

sets the lost output in the taxing state that has been choked off by the tax.

This reduction in output resulting from the tax is indicated by the shift in the

quantity produced in       state   A from Ao to Q.    Because of the increase in market

price, resource rents in the state not imposing the tax increase (by the ver-

tical difference between P1 and P0, per unit of output, at least for the quan-

tity produced in the absence of tax). Those in the taxing state fall, per unit

of output, by the vertical distance between the price net of severance tax, N'

and the initial price, P0.8

              Tax exporting to non—resident consumers occurs to the extent that a)

thetax induces an increase in the price of the commodity and b) the good is
bought by non—residents.9 As is suggested by this diagram, if a state producing
only   a small fraction of the national output of a      given commodity levies a
severance     tax, there will be little effect on the national price of the

commodity, and therefore hardly any exporting of the tax to out—of—state

consumers, even if virtually all of the state's output of the taxed commodity

is exported. If, however, the taxing state were the only producer, the analysis

of tax incidence would be identical to that for a nationwide tax, and the like-

lihood that the tax would be reflected in higher prices and exported to con-

sumers would be substantially greater. (Such a case could be examined in figure
                                      —,r--



1 by assuming state B to be the only producer and examining a tax levied there,

that is, by ignoring panel A and considering only curves ST, S, and D in panel

B. Realistic cases that are of interest in the context of the present policy

debate are, of course, intermediate between these two. That is, interest is

strongest from a policy point of view where there is substantial market domi-

nance by one state or a few states; but rarely is dominance complete.

          Figure 1 can be employed to examine the incidence of a tax levied by a

state with substantial market dominance. One need assume only that the tax that

causes the aggregate supply curve to shift is imposed by state B, rather than

state A. Clearly, for a given configuration of elasticities of supply and

demand and percentage of out—of—state consumption, tax exporting is greater if

the tax is imposed by state B than by state A.1° Indeed, it can be shown (see

McLure, 1981a) that the degree to which a severance tax is reflected in higher

prices is directly related to the degree of market dominance by the taxing

state. In the extreme case in which all supply curves are perfectly elastic and

the aggregate demand curve is totally inelastic, the conditions under which a

national severance tax would be shifted forward completely, the percentage of

the tax that is reflected in higher prices is exactly equal to the taxing

state's share in national output of the commodity. This conclusion will be

employed further below.11

          Understanding the role market dominance plays in the analysis of tax

exporting makes it easy to appreciate the importance of cartelization by pro-

ducing states. Suppose that only two states with equal output produce the

entire national output of a natural resource, but consume very little of it.     If

only one levies a severance tax on the commodity, ordinarily at most one—half of
                                            —8—


  the tax will   be   reflected in higher prices and possibly exported to non—resident

 consumers. The remainder will simply reduce resource rents originating in the

 state.     (Note, in addition, that because of the nationwide rise in price, the

 non—taxing state will also "export" half the tax, per unit of output sold to
 non—residents, levied by the taxing state. Its economic rents will rise by the
 other half of the tax, per unit of output.12) If, however, the two states agree
 to    levy identical severance taxes, market dominance by taxing states will be

 complete and shifting to consumers, most of whom are presumed to be

 non—residents, will be     nch more nearly complete. In    the polar cases   of either
 completely   elastic supply or completely inelastic demand, all the tax will be

 shifted   to consumers in this case.
             Consider now the situation in which one producing state imposes a
severance    tax and then the second imposes an identical
                                                            tax, acting independently
and perhaps after the passage of a substantial amount of time. This might

occur, for example, if the resource were discovered in the second state long

after it had been discovered,
                                  exploited, and taxed in the first. To simplify

matters assume that supply is ecjually elastic in the two states and demand is

completely inelastic. If we consider imposition of the two taxes as independent

actions, we are forced to conclude that one—half of each tax would be shifted

forward    to consumers, even though the entire tax would be shifted forward if     it
were   imposed simultaneously, and perhaps collusively in both states. These
apparently inconsistent results are easily reconciled. Recall that when the tax
is   imposed in one state the price rises throughout the
                                                           nation by half the amount
of the tax, and rents fall in the taxing state and rise in the non—taxing state,

in both cases by one—half the amount of the tax. If the same tax is imposed
                                       —9—




sequentially   in both states the total price rise equals the tax, and effects on

rents cancel. But the tax of either state, considered by itself, to repeat the

point, only raises the price by 50 percent of the tax.13 This anomalous result

plays an important part in the discussion of table 1 below and in the discussion

of the ability of enerr—rich states to hide under the rent—increasing umbrella

of OPEC.

           It takes little imagination to see the relevance of this analysis to

concrete situations occurring in the United States. Montana alone accounts for

a significant percentage of the nation's output of low—sulfur soft coal, and

with Wyoming and North Dakota it produces an even greater percentage of the low—

sulfur coal used in the midwestern area defined by the economics of

transportation. Moreover, the market share of these three states is prpjected

to grow rapidly. All three states export virtually all of their coal, either

directly or through electricity generated within the state for transmission to

other states. Acting alone, Montana might therefore be able to export a

substantial fraction of any severance tax it imposed. But if it were to act in

collusion with one or both of its two neighboring states to raise taxes, the

degree of exporting would be even   greater.
           From the discussion of the previous paragraphs it can be seen that

important questions of interpretation of facts can arise. Suppose that three

states completely dominate the national market for one resource.     To simplify

the analysis assume that each state supplies one—third of the market, that

supply in all three states is equally elastic, that aggregate demand is totally

 inelastic, and that no consumption of the resource in question occurs within any

of the three producing states. (The last assumption implies that any tax that
                                       —lo-


 is   shifted to consumers is also exported.) Suppose no that the three states

 impose severance taxes of 10 percent, 20 percent, and 30 percent, and that con-

 sumers of the taxed resource question the constitutionality of one or more of

the severance taxes under the Commerce Clause, on the grounds of tax exporting.

Ourobjective is to attempt to help the Court to determine how much of any tax
under challenge is exported in this hypothetical case.
            The answer to this question depends upon exactly   how the factual

situation described above is interpreted. First, suppose that     only one of    the

state   taxes is under constitutional challenge, but it is asserted that this tax

was set with the collusion of the other two producing states)- Since the state

tax rates are set at different levels, by assumption, "collusion" must be

interpreted as being complete at the 10 percent level, as iovolving only two of

the   states at the 20 percent level, and as being non—existent at the 30 percent
level, at which one of the states is "going it alone." The result of an analy-
sis   under these assumptions is given in the top part of the second group of four

columns in Table 1. (The bottom part of these columns just repeats information

contained in the top, and is therefore ignored.) The 10 percent tax can be

exported entirely to non—resident consumers, because dominance by colluding sta-

tes is complete at that level. The same is true of the first 10 percentage

points of the 20 percent tax. But only two—thirds of the second 10 percentage

points of the 20 percent tax can be exported. This raises the interesting

question of whether the courts should be concerned with this marginal export

rate of 67 percent or with the average export rate of 83 percent. Finally, by

analor to the results for the first two rates, we see that 6 percent of all

revenues resulting from the 30 percent tax can be assumed to be exported to
                                          —11—


                                         Table 1


                              Percent of Taxes Exported
                      Under Alternative Conceptual Experiments



Tax(es) under               Taxes in Other States Assumed to Be Set
 Challenge   Independently of Tax(es) Challenged*          In Collusion
 (percent)    1st 10%  2nd 10%  3rd 10%  Total        i 10%
                                                          2nd 10% 3rd 10%   Total

   10           33          —        —           33    100       —    —      100

   20           33          33       —           33    100       6i   —       83

   30           33          33       33          33    100       67   33      67

10 and          67          —        —           67    100       —    —      100
  20            67          33       —           50    100       67   —       83

10 and          66i         —        —           67    100       —    -      100
  30                        33       33                100       67   33      6
20 and          67          67       —           67    100       66   —

                                                                      33
                                                                              83
                                                                              6
  30            6i          67       33          55    100



*Where two taxes are challenged, it is assumed that they are set in collusion, but
 independently of the tax in the third state.
                                         —12—


 non—residents. But at the margin only 33 percent can be exported.

           Collusion between the states is, of course, only one possible analytic

 scenario. Any   state   defending the constitutionality of its severance tax

 against a charge of exporting would naturally deny that it had acted in collu-

 sion with its sister states in choosing its tax rate.16    This denial would pro-

 bably be especially convincing if all the taxes under examination had not been

 iiosed at their existing rates within a short period of time. Under this

 description of events, taxes levied in other states would he of no direct analy

tical relevance. Stated alternatively, they would be of no more relevance than

geologic overburden or the weather, regardless of their levels. Under this

"independence" description of the process of setting tax rates, each state would

export one—third of its tax, both on average and at the margin, as indicated by

the top part of the first four columns in Table 1. This rate is, of course,

well below any of the export rates in the "collusion" colunns of table 1, except

for the marginal rate on the last 10 percentage points of the 30 percent tax.

Thus it matters a great deal whether the courts believe severance taxes are set

independently or through collusion.

          Even the difficulties arising from the ambiguities described thus far

are compounded if more than one tax is challenged in a particular suit.

Suppose, for example, that both the 10 and 20 percent taxes are challenged, but

under the independence assumption.     (That is, it is argued that the 10 and 20

percent rates are set collusively, but independently of the 30 percent rate.)

Since these two states account for two—thirds of total output, 6 percent of the

first 10 percentage points of the taxes could be exported. But only 33 percent

of the next 10 percentage points of the 20 percent tax could be exported. Thus
                                     —13—


we have an export rate for the 10 percent tax (67 percent) that differs from

both those previously determined (ioo percent under total collusion and 33 per-

cent under total independence). The 33 percent marginal export rate for the 20

percent tax equals the export rate for the 20 percent tax challenged alone under

the independence assumption. But both it and the 50 percent average export rate

differ substantially from the marginal and average rates under the collusion

assumption (67 and 83 percent, respectively). Even worse, contrast this

situation with the case in which the 20 and 30 percent tax rates are challenged,

under the assumption that they are set collusively, but independently of the 10

percent rate. Here the marginal and average export rates for the 20 percent tax

are both 67 percent, a figure found in several other cases, and for the 30 percent

tax considered under these circumstances the marginal rate is 33 percent, as is

always the case for this tax. But the average export rate of 55 percent is found

in no other case, including that in which the 10 and 30 percent rates are

challenged simultaneously, under the assumption that they are set independently of

the 20 percent rate (where it is 14 percent).

          This simple example suggests the difficulty of gaining the "evidentiary

evidence't needed to determine whether or not an unconstitutional degree of tax

exporting occurs. In this case the basic economic analysis is relatively

straightforward, being severely circumscribed by the simplifying assumptions

underlying the exampie.lB But the degree of tax exporting one finds depends cru-

cially on a) which of the three taxes is being examined, b) whether it is being

examined alone or in conjunction with a suit questioning the constitutionality of

the tax levied by one or more other states, c) whether it is assumed that the tax

(or taxes) is (are) set independently or in collusion with one or more other
                                         -lu-

 states,   and d) whether one is interested in the average or marginal rate of tax

 exporting. It is difficult to know whether these questions can generally be

 answered satisfactorily, given that except for the third, independence versus

 collusion, none of them has ever been explicitly asked before.
                                                                       Certainly, one
 might   want to agree in principle with Justice dlackmun (footnote 11) that "the
 complexity   of a properly presented federal question is hardy a suitable      basis for
 denying   federal courts the power to adjudicate." But one should probably not be

 overly sanguine about the outcome of such adjudication,   in   part   because it is so
 difficult   to know when the question is presented properly.


 III. Substitution, Regulation, and Transportation

             Discussion to this point has been entirely in terms of "a commodity" or

"a natural resource." In order to focus on the role played by market dominance,

we have generally assumed that aggregate national demand for that commodity is

totally inelastic. But aggregate demand for commodities tends to have at least

some price elasticity over some range of price, especially in the long run, if

only because of the existence of substitutes of various degrees of perfection.

Thus alujminwn can be substituted for steel in the production of automobile

engines; glass and aluminum are substitutable in the packaging of beer and soft

drinks; for some uses electrical wiring can be made of either aluminum or copper;

and coal, gas, oil, nuclear power, and solar ener are actual or potential

substututes. Cutting the other way is the fact that "coal" can be either high or

low sulfur. The two are not perfect substitutes, and the Great Plains states come

much closer to complete dominance of the market for the preferable low sulfur

variety. Moreover, the degree of potential substitution changes over time, as new

technolor evolves, in part in response to shifts in relative prices. This,
                                       -15-


alone, makes it difficult to make   estimates   of tax exporting that are immutable,

as well as accurate when made.

          Any state attempting to export taxes on natural resources must recognize

these possibilities for substitution between commodities in designing its tax

system. Of particular interest in the context of Commonwealth Edison is the

potential for substitution between coal and various alternative soarces of ener,

particularly in the generation of electric power. A simple relabeling of figure 1

will allow us to examine this situation. Suppose that panel A describes the

supply of steam coal and panel B that for oil and gas used in generating

electricity, as well as aggregate supply and demand for fuels used for this pur-

pose. (it would be necessary to rescale the horizontal axes in terms      of
B.T.U.'s and the vertical axis in terms of price per B.T.U.)

          Suppose, now, that the prices of oil and (indirectly) gas are determined

outside the model, say through the actions of OPEC. (The role of federal agen-

cies responsible for the regulation of the prices of oil or gas is considered

below.) If coal were sold in spot markets, an increase in this externally—

determined price for oil or gas would be reflected in a corresponding increase

in the price at which coal could be sold, and therefore in the economic rents

being received by owners of coal. This increase in rents is much like that

resulting in a non—taxing state when a tax is imposed by one producing state.

Some observers tend to conclude from this induced rise in the price of coal that

a severance tax levied on coal would be shifted forward to consumers. This

would, of course, be erroneous, unless one believes that the higher taxes on

coal were enacted in collusion with the members of OPEC. In a sense, the higher

price for the competitive fuel acts like an umbrella over owners of coal,
                                         —i6—


 allowing them to raise their price. But it is the OPEC umbrella,    not   the tax on

 coal, that would cause the price of coal to rise.'9 The analysis presented thus

 far indicates that in a situation such as this, where the taxing states do not

 dominate the relevant market, in this case the market for fuel for generation of

 electricity, the severance tax on coal cannot be exported to non—resident

 consumers.

              Coal has a very high ratio of bulk and weight to value. Thus,

 transportation costs loom large in the price of coal delivered to electric uti-

lities in Texas and the Midwest. But the demand for transportation is also

extremely price inelastic, especially in the short run, since coal that cannot

be taken to market has little immediate value. (Of course, over the longer run

electric generating plants can be built nearer the coal mines so that

electricity, rather than coal, can be transported.) To the extent that

railroads have monopolies in the transportation of coal, and are not hindered by

price regulation, they can capture some of the increased rents resulting from

higher prices by raising freight rates.2° Indeed, in a sitution in which coal

is sold in spot markets and aggregate resource rents are determined by the price

umbrella being held by OPEC, the states and the railroads may compete to capture

the available rents. Which is more successful probably depends on the relative

abilities of a) the states to collude and play off railroads against one another

and b) the railroads to whipsaw the states.21- In any event, if either taxes or

freight rates were raised, rents would be captured by the states or the

railroads. Neither kind of increase in cost could be shifted forward to

consumers, since an attempt to raise the prices for coal above the umbrella

price would cause conversion to oil or gas, at least in the long run.22
                                     -17-


          There is, of course, considerable difficulty in pretending that coal

is sold on spot markets. As is well known, the great majority of coal presently

being produced is sold to public utilities under long—term contracts. The price

received for coal under such contracts would generally not be directly affected

by the actions of OPEC. But if the contracts provide for the pass through of

severance taxes, price would rise by the full amount of any increases in taxes,

up to the level equivalent to the new price for oil and gas.23 That is, the

existence of such contracts would greatly modify the spot market result, by pro-

viding that the creation of rents through increases in price could occur if, and

only if, the rents were taxed away. Under these circumstances it is clearly

more natural to think of the increase in severance tax as being borne by the

consumer than by the recipient of rents, since in the absence of the tax the

rents that are "taxed away" would not exist.

          Government regulatory activities have tended recently to accentuate

the ability of coal—producing states to export severance taxes.2 First, the

decontrol of the price of oil would have freed economic forces that would have

created the kind of price umbrella described earlier; this would have facili-

tated tax exporting via price increases sanctioned under long—term contracts. A

similar effect might have occurred if natural gas had been decontrolled. In

fact, however, regulatory activity has gone even further than merely allowing

the umbrella prices of oil and gas to rise to the level set by OPEC.

Prohibition of the use of oil and gas in new electric power plants segments the

market for hydrocarbon fuels and makes the umbrella price set by OPEC largely

irrelevant.25 The coal—producing states do, of course, enjoy substantially

greater dominance of the market for coal than of the market for all fuels poten—
                                        —18—



  tially   used in generating electricity. The only important remaining potential

  competition for coal comes from nuclear
                                            power, hydroelectric power (especially
  inorted from eastern Canada), and eventully perhaps solar enerr. Government

 regulation of nuclear power, which could even take the form of a moratorium on

 future installations, further segments the market and reduces the constraining

 influence of power from this alternative source.

             As suggested above, freight rates for the shipment of coal resemble

 taxes. If coal is sold under long—term
                                            contract, increases in freight rates are

 likely to be borne by consumers, until the umbrella price is reached. If the

 discipline provided by the world price of oil is removed by government

 regulation, the only limit that would remain on the ability of states and

 railroads to tax consumers would
                                    appear to be joint maximization of the sum of
 severance taxes and railroad profits. A study by Zimmerman and Alt (1981)

 suggests that if Montana and Wyoming were to act collusively, but as the resi-

dual supplier of coal, the tax rate that would maximize joint tax revenues,

given present freight rates, would be 62.5 percent. This would represent an

increase of about $3 per ton over the present tax. Zimmerman and Alt (1981, p.

20) note that increases in freight rates since 1975 that cannot be explained by

various determinants of costs amount to over $2.

            The discussion of this section indicates that in addition to the con-

siderations described in section II, it is important to know the extent of

potential substitution between various natural resources, in order to be able to

predict the degree of tax shifting and exporting.     By itself, this may be a tall
order, especially for a commodity such as aluminum.     Moreover, the existence and
nature of long—term contracts can be important.     Finally, changes in government
                                         —19—




regulations   can make it either more or less difficult to export a tax, and

railroads may vie with states for the economic rents potentially available from

natural resources. Considerations such as these add to the "formidable eviden—

tiary   difficulties" encountered in estimating the degree to which taxes   on

natural   resources   would be exported in a given situation.

           Moreover, analytical results might well be capricious, or at least

transitory. For example, one could easily construct an example in which nothing

differed   between two situations except the extent to which sales were made under
long—term contracts. Should the tax he held constitutional in one case, but not
the   other? Might    a natural evolution of contracts that did not depend on
influences    of taxes result in a change in the finding of constitutionality?

Would private parties really be allowed to rewrite contracts to provide that any

new tax would be passed through, and therefore be found unconstitutional? What

if contracts allowed pass through for some taxes but not others? It is not unu—

sual for constitutionality to depend on the exact way in which statutes are

written. But should the constitutionality of a tax depend upon the degree of

tax exporting, if that, in turn, were to depend upon possibly subtle differences

in the wording not of the tax statutes, but of private contracts? Should

constitutionality of a severance tax on coal ride the actions of OPEC or on

whether or not a moratorium on the construction of nuclear power plants elirnina—

tes a potential constraint on the ability to shift taxes forward, especially

when regulations such as these may depend on the occurrence of accidents such as

that at Three Mile Island?


IV. Other Producer Taxes on Natural Resources

             To some extent, the incidence of property taxes and income taxes is
                                        —20—


 more difficult to assess than is that of severance taxes. This is true, in

 part, because the incidence of those taxes depends on how they are assessed on

 natural resources, details that are not necessarily revealed by these generic

 terms. Beyond that, the theoretical literature on the incidence of excises, of

 which a severance tax is one variant, shows less recent Hchurningt than does the

 analogous literature on these two taxes. It does, however, generally appear

 that such taxes imposed by producer states are less likely to be shifted forward
 and   exported to non—resident consumers than are severance taxes.
            Producing states are likely to attempt to use a net income tax to tap
rents    from natural resources in one of two ways.26 The most effective way would

be to employ separate accounting, under which the firm or group of firms

operating in the state would be required to treat their activities in the taxing

state, or those functions that are particularly profitable, such as production,

as separate entities. Thus, for example, Alaska has required that separate

accounting be used to measure the taxable income of oil and gas companies

resulting from production and pipeline transportation, although it uses formula

apportionment (to be discussed immediately below) to tax other industries.27     If

the deductions allowed in calculating net income under this approach are set

arbitrarily, as they are in Alaska, so that they vary little with expenses

actually incurred, a tax that is described as being levied on net income may

actually resemble fairly closely a peculiar form of severance tax with a fixed

deduction or credit. In that instance the analysis of sections II and III

applies. (But pass—through of such taxes may not be allowed under long—term

contracts.) If, however, actual expenses are used in measuring net income, the

tax is more likely o resemble a true income tax and to be borne by recipients
                                     —21—


of rents. Certainly there is little reason to expect shifting to consumers,

except in the case of substantial market dominance by the taxing state.

          Most states actually employ formula apportionment, rather than

separate accounting, to determine the part of the income of a nationwide firm on

which to levy tax. That is, the state taxes a fraction of the firm's total

income equal to a weighted average of the firm's fractions of nationwide

payroll, property, and sales occurring within the state.   (Usually these three

"factors" are accorded equal weight.) I have argued elsewhere that a tax such

as this should be interpreted as economically equivalent to three separate

taxes, levied on payroll, property, and sales, at rates equal to the product of

one—third the statutory rate and the firm's nationwide profit margins on

payroll, property, and saies.28 The portion of the corporate tax related to

property is likely to have incidence such like that of a property tax, the

effects of the payroll—related part of the tax are likely to resemble those of a

payroll tax, and the incidence of the sales—related part of the corporate tax

can be expected to resemble that of a tax on sales.

          States generally base the sales factor on sales at destination. But

substantial producing state interested in exporting its income tax (or, indeed,

gaining substantial income from it) would define sales at origin, rather than at

destination. For example, before moving to separate accounting for the oil

industry, Alaska had employed sales at the wellhead in its sales factor for that

industry. Only this case seems worth considering in the present context. (The

use of formula apportionment by consuming states in an attempt to tax resource

rents is considered in section V.) An income tax on a resource sector levied on

sales at origin is, of course, roughly equivalent to a severance tax.
                                         —22—



            It   seems unlikely that the parts of the income tax related to property

 or to payroll would result in much exporting of burden to nonresident consumers.

 Both would probably be borne largely by recipients of rents originating in the

 state.29 The conditions under which the sales—related part of the corporate tax

 could be exported would seem to resemble those for the severance tax, except

 that effects would be much more difficult to untangle, because the effective

 rate of tax applied to sales differs between firms, depending on their rate of

 profitability throughout the nation. This complication, does, of course, make

 it more difficult to assess the likelihood of tax exporting.

            There are a number of ways of valuing deposits of natural resources

 for the purpose of levying property taxes. These do, however, tend to be redu-

cible to an attempt to set an assessed value on property based on the present

value of the stream of future income.30 If that is a stream of net income, the

analysis   of the incidence of a property tax resembles that of the incidence of

an income tax.     (Presumably the similarity is to an income tax levied under

separate accounting, not formula apportionment. If, as is more common, a stream

of ss receipts is being discounted, the property tax tends to resemble a

severance tax. In either event the analysis presented earlier should be

generally applicable, and is not repeated.31-


V. Tax Exporting by Consuming States.

           Apparently spurred on by widespread publicity of the image of

"blue—eyed Arabs," consuming states have been considering, and even enacting,

legislation that they probably hope would allow them to cut themselves in on the

increased rents from natural resources that have resulted from the actions of

OPEC and from shortages of various natural resources. The likely distributional
            CL.




        P




P1

                                 A
P                                         S
    0


P




                                              Q
                      Ql



                      Figure 2

            Incidence of a State Tax on
              Gross Receipts, with and
                without Price Control
                                      —23—


 effects of two such efforts by consuming states deserve special attention.

           Several states, among them New York and Connecticut, have passed gross

 receipts taxes on petroleum companies operating within their boundaries, coupled

 with provisions intended to prevent the companies from raising prices of pro-

 ducts sold in the state in response to the tax. The intended effect can be exa-

 mined using figure 2, and is easily understood. The suppiy curve S faced by any

 individual consuming state is almost completely elastic. Imposition of a gross

 receipts tax implies that the state's demand curve, as seen by the industry, D'

would lie below the actual demand curve D by the amount of the tax. In the

absence of the limitation on price increases, the price in the taxing state

would rise by the full amount of the gross receipts tax, or from P0 to F1, and

the equilibrium quantity of petroleum products sold in the state would shrink
from    to Q1. Needless to say, such a tax would simply be borne by resident

consumers, and would not be a very popular measure in states already burdened by

high and rising costs of enerr.

          The prohibition on raising price in response to the tax is intended to

change the nature of the demand curve faced by the oil companies in the taxing

state. The price ceiling implies that to the left of point A the demand curve

becomes horizontal at price P0. As seen from the vantage point of the consumer,

it appears that nothing would be changed by imposition of the tax; the price

would remain at P0 and the consumer would be in equilibrium at Q0. Rents of the

oil companies would simply be reduced by the vertical distance between P0 and

P. Note, however, that the oil companies would not be in equilibrium in this

situation, at least in the long run. As seen by them, the demand curve (net of

tax) would be PNBD'. The attempt to combine the gross receipts tax with price
                                     -2k-


controls would result in diversion of petroleum products to other markets; if

the supply curve were as elastic as shown here diversion would be complete,

because PNBDt lies below the supply curve at every point. In short, in long run

equilibrium the goal envisaged in this legislation would not be realized.

          Of course, rents could be captured in   the   short run.   While the long—

run supply of petroleum products might be almost as elastic as shown in figure

2, in the short run supply is less elastic than is indicated here. In

particular, service stations cannot be converted instantaneously to other uses

and long—term contracts of various kinds exist. Depending on the exact nature

of contractual arrangements and other rigidities, the short—run effect of a

policy of this type might very well be a substantial reduction in rents.32

Note, however, that this burden might very welt he borne in large part by resi-

dent owners of service stations, rather than by oil companies, depending on

contractual arrangements.

          Finally, if the tax and price ceiling described here were imposed in

the context of federal allocation of energy among states, the consuming states

would find long—run exportation of their tax to owners of oil companies substan-

tially simpler. This combination of policies would have the effect of imposing

on the oil companies a totally inelastic supply curve and confronting them with

a totally elastic demand curve at the prevailing retail price. The use of state

ceilings on prices has, however, been found to conflict with federal regulation

of prices of enerr, and therefore to be illegal.33

          It appears that a movement is underway in many consuming states to

attempt to use the so—called unitary method of taxing corporate income to cap-

ture part of the rents of the oil companies. This movement can be traced to two
                                        —25—


 recent Supreme Court cases. In Exxon Corp. v. Wisconsin Department of Revenue
 the   company had used functional separate accounting to argue that only its pro-

 duction activities were profitable.    (It claimed that both exploration and deve-

 lopment and marketing were not profitable.) It therefore argued that     Wisconsin
 should tax none of its income, since only marketing occurred there. The Supreme

 Court rejected this argument, noting that Exxon carriea on a "unitary business"

 extending from exploration and development through production to marketing. In

 such a case, the Court ruled, a state was justified in using formula apportion-

ment of the entire income of the corporation and that separate accounting could

not be used to insulate production income from the tax net of the consuming

state.

            In Mobil Oil Corporation v. Commissioner of Taxes, a case decided

shortly before Exxon, the Court went even further, in ruling that states could

constitutionally include dividends, including those paid from income earned

abroad, in income to be apportioned by formula, so long as a unitary business

was involved. Consuming states may see in the unitary business approach the

opportunity to apportion to themselves income of the oil companies that they

would not be able to tax under separate accounting. (Naturally they define

sales on the basis of destination.) This, they apparently think, will allow

them to take a share of the rents of the petroleum companies.

           The analysis of the incidence of the corporate income tax outlined

above suggests that these expectations may     not be realized, at least in the long
run. Where any one state is concerned, the corporate income tax is best con-

sidered to be a composite of taxes levied on whatever enters the state's appor-

tionment formula. This being the case, it appears that the sales—related part
                                       —26—



of   the state corporate income tax should have incidence very much like that of a

state sales tax. We would not, of course, ordinarily expect this to be borne by

rents, in the absence of measures to prevent pass—through of the tax, such as

those discussed earlier. Similarly, to the extent that property and payroll are

required to provide distribution of energy within the taxing state, we would

expect the burden to be on consumers, rather than on rents.35

             Note, however, that once again the incidence of a particular tax

depends on the exact question being asked. Suppose all consuming states were to

impose corporate income taxes using the same rate and apportionment formula. In

such a case the aggregate of all such taxes would, indeed, be just a corporate

income tax, not a couposite of taxes on the factors in the formula. Such a tax

would probably be borne largely b rents. Thus we are faced again with the

question of whether taxes are set independently by consuming states, or in

collusion.      In this case independence would imply a burden on resident con-

sumers, while collusion would imply exporting to recipients of rents.


VI. Concluding Assessment

             Despite the venerable position the analysis of tax incidence has

occupied in the history of microeconomic thought, such work remains to be done

in establishing the principles that determine the ability of states to export

taxes and in gaining general understanding of, and agreement cr1, those prin-

ciples. Often the results of analysis depend crucially on exactly what question

is being asked and how it is framed, something that is not generally recognized.

Moreover, even if there is widespread understanding and agreement of the prin-

ciples of tax incidence and the proper questions are being asked, extremely

complex factual inquiries may be required in some instances to determine the
                                      —27--



 extent to which taxes are likely to be exported. These involve carefal investi-

 gation of the considerations discussed in this
                                                  paper and the impact they have.
Even worse, economic considerations are not constant over time, as tastes, tech-

nological opportunities, and known availability of
                                                      resources change. Beyond
that, institutional change can bring with it changes in the extent of tax

exporting. it seems extremely difficult to gain sufficient agreement on the

likelihood of exporting of various taxes to provide the basis for adjudication.

Basing legislation on estimates of tax
                                         exporting, is, of course, somewhat more
practical, since Congressional hearings provide a forum in which to consider

such estimates —— though
                         not one particularly conducive •to determination of
truth.
                                     —28—


                                   Footnotes


     *The author is a Senior Research Fellow at the Hoover Institution at

Stanford University. At the time this paper was prepared he was Vice President

of the National Bureau of Economic Research. The opinions expressed here are

solely the author's, and not those of the Hoover Institution or the National

Bureau of Economic Research.


     i-Throughout this paper references made by the Court in quoted material are

omitted.


     2Blackmun's dissent goes on to say, "If the trial court were to determine

that the tax is exported, it would then have to determine whether the tax is

'fairly related' within the meaning of Complete Auto Transit." The Blackmun

dissent also disagrees with the majority's interpretation of the important

fourth prong of the Complete Auto Transit test of a Commerce Clause violation.

As Blackmun noted (p. 8), the majority interpretation "emasculates the fourth

prong." Under Blackmun's interpretation of the forth prong, substantial addi-

tional evidentiary burdens would arise.     (See Hellerstein, 1978). These issues

are not discussed further here. Nor do I consider the extent to which taxes can

be considered payments for benefits received; indeed, benefits of public ser-

vices are ignored completely in the discussion of incidence analysis that

follows.


     3Taxation of enerr is only one source of potential conflict in a nation

that suddenly believes it is running short of natural resources. As has been

noted by many observers, other natural resources, Florida sunshine, the histori—
                                       -29-


  cal advantage of the New York stock exchange, and various other instances of

 geographica11y_concentrt production, such as automobiles in Detroit in the

 1950's, have the potential of raising constitutional challenges akin to those in

 Commonwealth Edison. These are not considered here.   Nor do I consider taxes on

 "processing" of natural resources, such as oil refining in Texas or generation

 of electricity in the coal states. But see McLure (l980b).


      4Gillis and McLure (1974, p. 391) distinguish between the legal owner of

 resources and the economic owner, the distinction being that the focus in inci-

 dence analysis is on who bears the burden of taxes that reduce resource rents.

 Note that this can be taxpayers, throughout the nation, when taxes reduce

 royalties on federal lands.


      5A careful reader will note that the elasticities of supply and demand can-

not really even be specified until the various factors mentioned in this sen-

tence are considered. The somewhat imprecise wording of the text is used simply

to emphasize that in the analysis of geographic tax incidence one rmst be par-

ticularly careful to consider such factors, rather than
                                                          simply drawing a diagram
containing the supply and demand curves for the entire nation, as is sometimes

done. Elaboration on this point is the purpose of much of the remainder of this

paper. Unionization and market structure, factors that can significantly affect

incidence even in closed economies, are not considered here, in order to allow

focus on determinants of incidence that are particularly important in a

geographic context.


     6One fourth probably should not be considered to be a "relatively small"

part of national output for the purpose at hand, which is to show the role
                                       —30—


played by market dominance in the analysis of tax exporting. But a tax levied

by a state that really produced only a very small share of national output would

have such a small impact on price that the effect could not be shown clearly in

this diagram.


      TThis exposition treats severance taxes as simple per unit levies on

output. Consideration of a similar tax based on value of output would change

little. But more complicated forms of taxation could render the analysis

substantially more difficult and ——   to   stress a major theme of this paper ——

determination   of the degree of tax exporting perhaps more uncertain.


      8This reduction in rents per unit of output applies, strictly speaking only

to   the quantity produced in the situation with the tax in place. Producer

surplus is also lost over the range betieen Ao and           But because the supply

curve is upward—sloping the average loss of surplus over this range is only

about one—half that on the units that are produced when the tax is imposed.


      9A careful statement of the second requirement should probably be in terms

of net exports of the taxed good. No net exporting of the tax would occur if

state A bought from state B as much (or more) of the taxed commodity as it sold

to state B. This complication is ignored here, as elsewhere. See also footnote

12 for   further consideration of this interpretation of tax exporting.

      1-0One way to see this is to realize that to produce a given shift in ST a
higher   tax is required in state A than in state B. Thus a given tax—induced

increase in price represents a greater fraction of the tax if B is the taxing

state.
                                        —31.-


       The   fraction of a production tax that is reflected in higher prices is

 given by F =                               where S and D are the nationwide
                                  )s
 elasticities of supply and demand for the taxed product, St and s are the ela—

 saticities of supply in the taxing and
                                          non—taxing states, respectively, and a is
 the taxing states' share in national
                                        output. Strictly speaking the result given
 in the text occurs if either a) all
                                       supply curves are equally elastic and demand
 is totally inelastic or b) all supply curves are perfectly elastic, regardless

 of the elasticity of demand. The second condition is rather misleading, since

 the slightest effort to tax output would price the taxing state completely out

 of the market. For convenience the discussion
                                                 that follows employs the first of
these weaker conditions. Of course, to the extent that demand has some

elasticity, the degree of tax shifting is overstated.


      '2This conclusion can, of course, be generalized to any nber of producing

states. In the extreme case of completely inelastic demand consumers would pay

an additional amount for the taxed commodity (including
                                                          quantities bought from
non—taxing states) that is exactly equal to the tax revenues collected by the

one state levying the tax. This has led Peter Mieszkowski to suggest that

perhaps the entire tax should be deemed to be exported. I find such an

interpretation quite inferior to my own, which I believe to be more in accord

with prior literature and intuitive understanding of tax exporting. Moreover,

the implication that tax exporting would always be complete under these

conditions, and not dependent on the degree of market dominance, seems

misleading, as well as counter—intuitive.


     13Analysis similar to that of fire 1 can be employed heuristically to see
                                             —32-


this. When       the     tax is isosed in the first state, it does not exist in the
second.      Thus 50 percent     forward shifting is   our standard result. If, now, the

second state imposes a tax, we do our analysis with a supply curve for the first

state that includes its tax. Again, 50 percent forward shifting and exporting

occurs.


      lThe following statements quoted from Zimmerman and Alt (1981, pp. 20—21)

are worth note:

              ...Montana and Wyoming have considerable market power. It
              would be in the interest of Montana and Wyoming to raise
              taxes above the currently high levels. The only effective
              break [sic] on the market power of these states is inter—
              regional competition...Clearly, concerted action among
              states or among railroads could remove the limits on market
              p owe r.


The role of railroads is considered below.


         -5The relevance of this assumption is seen by noting that (in footnote 5)

the   dissenting opinion contains the following Quotation from Church (1978, p.

218): "      [t]ax   leadership' in western states appears to be an emerging

reality." Similarly, it notes that "the 197b Montana Subcommittee on Fossil

Fuel Taxation was directed by the Montana legislature 'to investigate the feasi-

bility and value of multistate taxation of coal with the Dakotas and Womning,

and to contract and cooperate joining with these other states to achieve that

end. .   .


         6This   raises the interesting Question of how "conscious parallelism" in

setting state tax rates should be treated.


         'TSuppose, however, that the three rates had previously been zero, 10 per—
                                         —33—



 cent,    and 20 percent. A uniform 10 percent increase in tax rates would be

 completely reflected in higher prices under the conditions assumed.


         iSNote that the possible variation in export rates is reduced somewhat in

 this example by the simplifying assumptions that a) output is split evenly bet-

 ween the states, b) rates differ by 10 percentage points, c) there are only

 three producing states, and d) all production is exported.


      -9Martin Zimmerman has noted in his comments on this paper that this result

would hold only if both fuels continued to be competitive in the

B.T.U.—equivalent equilibrium prevailing after the increase in oil prices by

OPEC. Under these conditions the OPEC price constitutes a ceiling, as well as

an umbrella. If the members of OPEC priced themselves out of the market for

generating fuel, oil would cease to be a substitute for coal in that market, the

OPEC price would not be a ceiling, and the ease of shifting and tax exporting

would simply be given by the analysis of section II. In this respect, beyond

the price at which oil became non—competitive the result would be quite similar

to that for regulatory segmentation of the market discussed below.     Shifting and

exporting would be much more likely than if the OPEC price effectively consti-

tuted a ceiling price, as well as an umbrella.


     20For more on this point, see Zimirierman and Alt   (1981).

     21Presumably the coal companies would not act as disinterested bystanders

in this conflict; given their desire to protect their own interests, they can be

expected to do some whipsawing of their own.


     22In the situation described in footnote 19 above increases in freight
                                         —34—


rates might be partially reflected in consumer prices.


       23The price could, of course, go even higher, depending on whether taxes

were   set at rates greater than needed to capture all rents.

       2'4An earlier federal policy that helped   energy—rich states was the import

quotas    imposed on crude oil during the 1960s. This raised    prices and created

greater pools of rents for the states to tap, as did the pro—rationing activi-

ties of the Texas Railroad Commission and the complementary actions of the

Interstate Oil Compact.


       25Martin   Zimmernian has noted that given present levels of OPEC prices these
regulations have little such effect; OPEC has, in effect priced itself out of
this   market.


       26 the general nature of state corporation income taxes, see McLure
(1981c,   1981d, and l981f).


       2TAlaska   has recently gone back to a more conventional tax based on formula
apportionment.

       28For an analysis of the   incidence and other economic effects of state   cor-

poration income taxes, especially those levied using formula apportionment, see

McLure 1980a and 1981e.


       291n an industrial context it mdght be more likely that the part of the

corporate tax related to payroll would be borne by labor, since the later might

be relatively immobile, geographically. But given the need to bring in large

amounts   of capital and labor to exploit natural resources, it seems unlikely
                                          —35—




 that    in the long run either the payroll or property—related parts of the tax

 would not be borne by rents, except where taxing states dominate the national

 market.


        30For more on this, see Mieszkowski and Toder (this volume).


        31The point is not that the incidence and other economic effects of a pro-

 perty tax are identical to those of an income or severance tax. Substantial

 differences in the speed and efficiency of exploitation can be induced by dif-

 ferences in these taxes. But tendencies f'or tax
                                                    exporting nay be quite similar,
 despite these differences. Mieszkowski and Toder (this volume) note that in

 several states assessed value is based directly on the value of current output,

 making the similarity to a severance tax even closer.


        32This could be shown by drawing an upward sloping short—run supply curve

passing through point A and intersecting PNBD'. The short—run price increase in

the absence of the price control would, of course, be less than shown in figure

2.



     330n this and other cases
                                 involving constitutional challenges of state
taxes on energy, see Hellerstein (this volume).


     4For an excellent discussion of these two cases, see Helierstein (1980).


     35mese tendencies might, of course, not be fully realized in the short

run, when there are nany contractual obligations and other rigidities that would

prevent escaping the burden of the tax.
                                     —36—



                                  References



Church, Albert M., "Conflicting Federal, State and Local Interest Trends in

    State and Local -iergy Taxation Coal and Copper - A Case in Point,"

    National Tax Journal, Vol. 31, No. 3 (September 1916), pp. 269—283.


Gillis, Malcolm and Charles E. McLure, Jr., "The Incidence of the World's Taxes

    on Natural Resources with Special Reference to Bauxite," American Economic

    Review, Vol. 65, No. 2 (May 1915), pp. 389—96.


Hellerstein, Walter, "Constitutional Constraints on State and Local Taxation of

     Energy Resources," National Tax Journal, Vol. 31, No. 3 (September 1918),

     pp. 2L5_256.


Hellerstein, Walter, "State Income Taxation of Multijurisdictional Corporations:

     Reflections on Mobil, Exxon, and H.R. 5016, Michigan Law Review, Vol. 19,

     November 1980, pp. 131—111


Hellerstein, Walter, "Legal Constraints on State Taxation of Natural Resources

     in the American Federal System." (this volume).


McLure, Charles E., Jr. , "The State Corporate Income Tax: Lamb in Wolves'

     Clothing," in Henry J. Aaron and Michael J. Boskin, editors., The

     Economics of Taxation, (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1980), pp. 321-

     346. (a)


McLure, Charles E., Jr. , "The Economic Effects of a Texas Tax on the Refining of

     Petroleum Products," Growth and Change, Vol. 11, No. 3 (July 1980),

     pp. 2—8. (b)
                                          —31—



McLure, Charles E., Jr., "Market Dominance and the Exporting of State Taxes,"

     forthcoming in the National Tax Journal, Vol. 31, No. 1 (December 1951). (a)


McLure, Charles E., Jr., "Fiscal Federalism and the Taxation of Economic Rents,"

        Xerox, 1981. (b)


McLure, Charles E., Jr. ,   "State   Taxation of Corporate Income," Xerox, 1981. (c)


McLure, Charles E., Jr., "Toward Uniformity in Interstate Taxation: A F1irthe

     Analysis,"   Tax Notes, (July 13, 1981), PP. 51—63. (d)


McLure, Charles E., Jr. , "The Elusive Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax: The

     State Case," forthcoming, Public Finance Quarterly, October 1981. (e)


McLure, Charles E., Jr., "State Corporate Income Taxes," Xeroxed, 1981(f).


Mieszkowski, Peter and Toder, Eric. ,    "Taxation   of Enerr Resources: Iniplications

     for Intergovernmental Relations and Economic Efficiency," this volume.


Zimmerman, Martin B., and Christopher Alt, "The Western Coal Cartel," Hoover

    Institution Working Papers in Economics No. E—80—9, 1981.
