                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CAPITAL STRUCTURE EQUILIBRIUM UNDER
                    INCOMPLETE MARKET CONDITIONS


                           Lemma W. Senbet

                      Robert A. Taggart, Jr. *


                       Working Paper No. y1




                NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge MA 02138

                          September 1981




* Graduate
           School of Business, University of Washington—Madison and
  J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management, Northwestern
  University. This paper was written while the former author was a
  visiting Associate Professor of Finance at Northwestern. The
  research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program in
  Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and project on the
  Changing Role of Debt and Equity Finances in the United States,
  which is being financed by a grant from the American Council of
  Life Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
  and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #747
                                               September, 1981



                    Capital Structure Equilibrium
                 Under Incomplete Market Conditions




                              ABSTRACT



     Most discussions of corporate capital structure have been set in

the context of a complete capital market. In this paper we study the

determinants of capital structure for the incomplete markets case, where

incompleteness manifests itself in the form of divergent borrowing and

lending rates. We argue that firms have a natural incentive to tailor

their financing choices so as to narrow such divergences. While this

implies an optimal capital structure for firms in the aggregate,

however, competition will drive out profits, and the capital structure

of any individual firm may still be a matter of indifference. Firms'

incentive to try to complete the market provides a rationale for corpor-

ate finance even in a taxiess environment. This incentive may also

shed light on such related issues as corporate mergers, the use of com-

plex securities and the role of financial intermediaries.



                                 Lemma W. Senbet
                                 Graduate School of Business
                                 University of Wisconsin
                                 Madison, Wisconsin 53706
                                  (608) 263—6907

                                 Robert A. Taggart, Jr.
                                 J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
                                 Northwestern University
                                 Evanston, Illinois 60201
                                  (312) 492—3562
                  CAPITAL STRUCTURE EQUILIBRIUM
                UNDER INCOMPLETE MARKET CONDITIONS



     Discussion of the Modigliani—Miller (MM. 1958) theorem on the irrele-

vance of corporate capital structure has largely taken place, explicitly

or implicitly, in the context of a complete capital market. Either an

Arrow—Debreu world is specifically assumed, as in Hirshleifer (1970), or

some variation is invoked, which for practical purposes amounts to the

same thing.1 The crux of MM's own analysis, for example, is the availa-

bility to investors of costless "homemade" leverage, which serves as a

perfect substitute for corporate leverage. In subsequent generalizations,

a similar role is played by assumptions of costless financial intermediation

(Stiglitz, 1974) or the "equal access" assumption (Fama, 1978). The key

element in each case, however, has been the availability of a perfect

substitute for whatever return patterns might be created by corporations'

financing decisions, and in this sense it is always the complete markets

case that is under consideration.

     The case of incomplete capital markets, by contrast, has remained

largely unexplored. Indeed, the phrase "incomplete markets" seems to

suggest to financial economists a murky region about which little can be

said.2 Despite the difficulties cited by other scholars, however, we

think that analysis of the incomplete markets case can yield some useful

insights into the corporate financing process, and that is the primary

point of our paper.

     The distinguishing feature of an incomplete market is that marginal

rates of substitution between current consumption and all conceivable

patterns of future returns are not necessarily driven to equality for all
                                 —2—




 investors. In that event, though, there is a clear incentive for

 corporations to tailor their issues of securities so as to eliminate or

 at least reduce these divergences in marginal rates of substitution, and

 this incentive provides a positive role for corporate financing decisions.3
      A given corporation, of course, would not typically possess a unique

 ability to enhance the degree of spanning in the capital market. Any one

 corporation faces competition in this activity not only from other corpor-

 ations but from individual investors and financial intermediaries as well.

 The Modigliani—Miller theorem may thus be viewed as the special case in

 which other parties compete in the capital market on an equal footing

with corporations. More generally, however, one might expect corporations,

either individually or collectively, to exhibit some comparative advantages

in financing, even though their ability to profit from such advantages

would be circumscribed by competition from other sectors.

     We are. by no means the first to suggest that the role of corporate

finance lies in helping to complete the capital market. A variety of

authors, including J. B. Williams (1938), Durand (1959),
                                                            Litzenberger
and Sosin (1977), Sosin (1978), Litzenberger (1980) and Satterthwaite (1980),

have previously alluded to the role of corporate securities in enhancing

market completeness. However, the equilibrium implications of this role

for corporate finance have not been fully pursued. Our paper

extends previous work in the area by taking a specific form of

market incompleteness and examining in detail the resulting corporate

capital structure equilibrium. We employ primarily the case of divergent

borrowing and lending rates that has received previous attention in the

asset pricing literature and show that if corporations as a whole can
                                —3—




borrow and lend advantageously relative to individual investors, then

an equilibrium results in which corporate capital structure is determinate

at the aggregate level but not at the individual firm level. This will be

recognized as similar to Miller's (1977) results under conditions of cor-

porate and personal taxes. This similarity is not surprising, in fact,

once it is recognized that implicit tax arbitrage restrictions in Miller's

model create the same kind of divergences in marginal rates of substitution

that occur in an incomplete market.4

     There is also another parallel between our results and Miller's. If

Miller's paper is interpreted as reinforcing perfect market results of

modern finance theory by establishing a limited MM indifference result

even in the presence of taxes, our paper may be seen in much the same vein.

Although market incompleteness can dictate a positive role for corporate

finance in the aggregate, the same kind of limited MM result may yet hold at

the individual firm level, and in this sense we feel that our analysis

underscores the robustness of modern finance theory, even under certain in-

complete market conditions. This is contrary to the prevailing notion in

the literature that market incompleteness per se rationalizes optimal

financial behavior at the individual firm level.

     Our analysis proceeds from specific to more general cases. In the

first two sections, market incompleteness takes the specific form of a

divergence between borrowing and lending rates. We present a model of

investors' portfolio selection under these conditions in Section I and also

analyze investors' preferences for the capital structure decisions of firms.

In Section II we analyze the determination of a capital structure equili-

brium when firms have a comparative advantage over individual investors in
                               —4—




 borrowing and lending, and we establish a limited MM theorem. We also

 show that previous results on asset pricing under divergent borrowing

 and lending rates disappear if firms are allowed to adjust their

 capital structures. In Section LII we argue that the basic results

 of Section II are more generally applicable and that they shed light

 on such topics as bankruptcy and mergers, the role of complex financing

 instruments and financial intermediation.


1. Equilibrium with Divergent Borrowing and Lending Rates

    A. The Basic Framework

        Consider first, for simplicity, a single representative firm

and a single—period economy. Each investor in this economy has an

initial endowment of cash, Y, as well as an initial shareholding,

    in the firm. Investors can either consume or save their endowments,

and savings take the form of either bond purchases, £1, or purchases

of fractional shares, c, in the value, S, of the firm's stock.

        Both firms and individuals are assumed to issue riskless

promissory notes in the bond market, so that an individual can be

either a borrower or lender, depending on whether £1 is positive

or negative. The bond market is incomplete, however, and this

incompleteness manifests itself in divergent borrowing and lending

rates. The divergences can be rationalized as follows: We could

imagine either that a market—maker extracts a commission from both

parties to each transaction or that market participants directly

incur such costs as record—keeping and insuring that all contracts

are sufficiently collateralized. In either case, we will let

    represent this transaction cost, and in general   X may
                                    —5—




    depend on the size of each participant's transactions.5 If we let

    R represent the gross interest rate on riskless debt that would

   prevail in a frictionless capital market, then in our model

   R[l—xçe. )]
              i I.is                                         I
                           the return on bonds for lenders (. >0), while

   —R[l+()1 is the cost that borrowers (i0) must incur on

   their debt.

        Investors may also deal in the market for corporate stock,

   where purchase of a fractional share, ct1, of the firm's stock

   entitles the investor to the same share, a, of the firm's end—

   of—period profits. These profits, ll,are given by
                           *
       II =   OX   —   R[l+A   (D)]D,                                      (1)


   where 0 is a random variable with cumulative distribution

   F(S)6. If we let E(0) =          1,    may be interpreted as the expected

   operating cash flow associated with the firm's primary activities,

   as distinguished from financial (i.e. lending or borrowing)

   activities. D represents the firm's borrowing in the bond market,

   and as indicated in (1), the firm also faces a transaction cost
             *                             8
   function X when dealing in this market.    The firm's debt is

   assumed to be issued at par, so that D represents both book value

  and market value.

B. Portfolio Equilibrium

      We first analyze a portfolio equilibrium for investors,

  consisting of market prices S and R, and portfolio holdings,

  and c, such that both bond and share markets clear and each

  investor's expected utility is maximized.9 This portfolio
                                   —6—




equilibrium is predicated upon an exogenous value of D for the firm.

A change in the firm's financing decision would presumably result

in a new portfolio equilibrium for investors, and this process will

be examined in Section I.C.

     The investor's choice problem is to maximize the expected

utility of present and future consumption. Since future consump-

tion consists of the investor's income from bond and shareholdings,

this amounts to choosing optimal values of £1 and ct1, and the

problem may be written as

     max E(u') =
                         fu1(C, C(OdF(e),                        (2)




               ii
     £
where present consumption, C, is given by

           =         —        ]515

and future consumption, C, is given by

         =     R[1+A()]'          + [O R[l+X*(D)]D]              (4a)

for £i<O, and


     C =    R{1-)] +c[O _R{l+A*(D)]D}                            (4b)


for £1>O (hereafter we drop the tilde on 6 for convenience).

    After some rearranging, investors1 first order conditions

for an optimal portfolio may be written as


    E(u1)                                 ,         .            (5a)
                                               if
                                      .

               =   R[l   + A(s)   + £1A (k)]            <0
    E(u2 1)
                               —7—




          1
       E(u)                     -
       ____ = R{l     -                 (f)]   if   £' >0,       (5b)

       E(u)

and



     if — ®dF(0)\—\ E(u,)
                               1
                                          *
                                     R[l+X (D)] D = S,
                           E(u)                                  (6)

        E(u1)


where


       E(ui)/E(u) =       3u   dF(e),/u1 dF(e)
                          Ci


is    investor i's marginal rate of substitution between first—period

consumption and certain second—period consumption. Conditions

(5a) and (5b) indicate that, unlike the familiar complete markets

case, divergent borrowing and lending rates prevent these marginal

rates of substitution from being driven to equality for all

investors.

       Condition (6) represents an investor's subjective valuation

at the margin of the firm's stock. Because trading in shares is

competitive and unrestricted, these subjective marginal valuations

are in agreement for all investors.10 Nevertheless, because of

divergent borrowing and lending rates, investors may not agree on

the value of the separate components of the finds stock.
                                                      11
       To see this, rewrite equation (6) as
                        —8—




      2   +   cov(u,8) - E(u) R[l+X*(D)] D =     S               (7)

   E(u)         E(u)     E(u)

The two terms in equation (7) represent the two components of the

market value of the firm's stock. The first of these is investors'

valuation of the firm's operating cash flows, 8x, while the

second is their valuation of future interest payments (receipts)

on the firms's debt (bondholdings). The sum of these two compon-

ents must be the same for all investors, but since the marginal

rates of substitution) E(u)IE(u), differ across investors.

the separate components of (8) must also differ across investors.

     In particular, since E(u7/E(u) is smaller for borrowers

than lenders, according to (5) borrowers must also possess higher

cov(u8)/E(u) so as to arrive at the same equity valuation, S,

as lenders. This in turn leads us to the natural conclusion that

borrowing investors are less risk averse at the margin at a port-

folio equilibrium. To see this let us look at a slice of the

utility function depicted in Figure I. Increases in 8 are asso-

ciated with increases in C. Also, we know that u'/C is de-

creasing in C for risk averters, so cov(u,8) <0. In addition,

the more concave is the utility function, the more negative is

this covariance, and hence cov(u,O)/E(u) is an index of risk

aversion. Indeed, this term can be viewed as a certainty—equivalent

adjustment factor, so that the more negative is this term, the lower

is the value that an individual places on the random variable 8.
                         -8A-




    1
   U




                                            C

                       FIGURE I

Investor i's Utility of Second Period Consumption
       (First Period Consumption Held Constant)
                           —9--




   The index is less negative (or higher) for borrowers as we

   pointed out earlier, and hence they are less risk averse at
                 12
   the margin.



C. Investor Preferences for the Firm's Capital Structure

       Up to this point investors' portfolio selection has been

   analyzed, taking the firm's financing decision as given. We

   could imagine, however, that something like the following process

   would take place: after an initial portfolio equilibrium had been

   reached, the firm could poii its shareholders and determine their

   preferences for any changes in its capital structure. The firm

   could then alter its capital structure in the desired direction,

   following which a new portfolio equilibrium would be established

   with new market prices and possibly a new group of shareholders.

   The process would repeat itself in exactly the same fashion until

   the firm could make no further alterations in its capital structure

   that would unambiguously increase the welfare of its shareholders.

   At this point a capital structure equilibrium will have been

   reached.

        The problem in analyzing this optimal capital structure is to

   find a method for investigating investor preferences. In the

   unanimity literature, two such methods have been employed, and

   these have been termed the ex ante and ex post modes of unanimity

   analysis)3 In the ex ante analysis the emphasis is on the firm's

   initial shareholders. When a firm announces a change in its

   policies, these initial shareholders may choose to sell their
                         —10—




holdings, and under competitive conditions their preferences

will be for those policies that maximize the value of their shares.

In the ex post analysis, initial shareholders are constrained to

keep their shares (that is, initial and final shareholders are

assumed to be the same), and thus their preferences are for those

policies creating patterns of return that they most desire, whether

or not those policies are value—maximizing. Even if one is ulti-

mately interested in determining value—maximizing financial policies,

however, the ex post mode of analysis has the advantage of explicitly

displaying those patterns of return that shareholders desire. The

ex ante mode by contrast, requires a prediction of how market prices

change in response to a change in the firm's policies, and such

predictions are difficult in cases where final shareholders are not

unanimous in their desires. Since the divergence of borrowing and

lending rates causes a lack of unanimity of this kind in our model,

we have chosen to follow the ex post mode of analysis. This allows

us to identify the different patterns of return that different in-

vestors would desire. We can then predict that different firms

would choose different capital structures (that is, our representa-

tive firm now becomes many firms) so as to satisfy these desires on

the part of investors.

    We proceed, then, by differentiating a representative investor's

expected utility with respect to a change in the firm's debt,

evaluating this derivative at a portfolio equilibrium, and con-

straining c   =      For shareholders who are also borrowers

( <0)   this results in"14
                             —11—



                                                 a
                                     R[l+* (D)+DA
                                 /
       dfu1 dF(G) = E(u1)        (                   (D)] \•
                                                                         (8)
       dD
                       1
                                     R[1++ (fl)            1




On the other hand, for lenders, we have



       dfu' dF(B) =
        dD
                      E(u)   (
                             \
                                     R[l+(D)÷DA*D)]\
                                     R[l—A()—e'A'()] j
                                                           1
                                                                         (9)




       Little   can be inferred from these conditions without further

assumptions. In general, a given investor's preferences for the

capital structure of a firm in which he holds shares depend on

whether the investor is borrowing or lending and how much,

whether the firm is borrowing and lending and how much, and on

any comparative cost advantage or disadvantage that the firm may
                                                               *
have in these activities. If the cost functions X andX have the
                          *
same form (that is, 2. and X have the same sign, as do X and

X*),we would expect from (9.) that lending investors would shun

holdings in borrowing firms, and in similar fashion we could infer

that borrowing investors would prefer not to hold shares in lend-

ing firms. Firms with a variety of capital structures might be

expected to evolve, then, in order to serve different clienteles
                                    15                               *
of   borrowing and lending investors.         If the cost functions X

were firm—specific one could even derive optimal capital structures

for individual firms.

      It might be more realistic, as well as more illuminating,

however, to suppose that firms as a group possess certain cost

characteristics that differ from those of individual investors as
                                     —12—




         a group. Borrowing and lending activities are a means of

         transforming unlevered return streams into alternative streams

         with different risk and return characteristics, and firms and in-

         vestors may be seen as competing with one another to perform the

         desired transformations. tn several respects, firms as a group

         might be expected to have some cost advantages in these activities.

         There might be economies of scale in record—keeping and collecting

        or disbursing interest payments, for example. There might also be

        economies, in monitoring the firms' debt contracts relative to those

        of individuals. It might be easier to monitor one large borrower,

        for instance, and then split up this debt into small units through

        individuals' holdings of shares in the levered firm, rather than to

        have many individual borrowers, all of whom would need to be moni-

        tored. In addition individual investors may be constrained by

        margin limits on securities debt, whereas firms as a group do not

        face analogous limitations. For these reasons, we turn now to a

        more detailed analysis of the case in which       *
                                                      is the same for all
        firms                                              *
                while ? is the same for all investors, and X < X. To

       ensure that all firms and investors are identical within their
                                             *,
       groups, we will also assume that X         =   = 0.

II. Corporate Leverage as a Means of Completing (Spanning) the Market

   A. Capital Structure Equilibrium: A Limited MM Theorem

            Suppose, then, that firms can borrow at an effective rate

       R(l+A
            *                                         *
                    and lend at an effective rate R(l— ),
                )                                             while   investors
       borrow and lend at R(l+) and R(l—?), and that X *<X.            For any

       given initial capital structures for firms, a portfolio equilibrium
                                 —13—




would be established exactly as in the preceding section.

     The capital structure equilibrium, however, would be slightly

different. For those individuals who are borrowers, the analogue

of equation (8) would be



     dfu1dF(8) =
                        E(u)(l    -                 > 0.            (10)




Thus, borrowers would prefer that their firms do more borrowing.

Similarly, if a firm were a net lender to begin with borrowers pre-
ferences for further lending by the firm would be given by

     dfu1dF(O)
       d(—D)
                    =    E(u
                          '
                               (R(1-)
                           1' 'R(l+X)
                                            -   '                   (11)



Thus, borrowers would be actively opposed to the firm doing any

lending. For investors who are lenders, the analysis would just be

reversed, and the analogue of equation (9) is



     dfu1dF(e)      =            (1-                   <   0,
                        E(u)                                        (12)




Lenders' preferences for lending by the firm, on the other hand, are

given by


                                        *
     dfu1dF(e)      -             (R(l )        1)ct       > 0
       d(-D)             E(u1)   'Rl- -                             (13)




Thus, lenders are actively opposed to borrowing by firms in which

they own   shares   but are actively in favor of lending by these firms.
                         —14—




      In response to these conflicting desires on the part of

 investors, some firms would increase their lending while others

would increase their borrowing. In fact, since corporate borrowing

and lending is a strictly superior substitute for individual borrow-

ing and lending, this process would continue until all borrowing and

lending took place among corporations. Investors' portfolios would

then consist entirely of corporate shares, with those investors

who would formerly have been borrowers holding shares in levered

firms and erstwhile lenders holding shares in negatively levered

firms.

     Once this point had been reached, however, equations (10)

and (13) would abruptly change. As soon as all borrowing had

been shifted to the corporate sector the marginal rate of substitu-

tion between certain first and second period consumption, would
                            *
change from R(1+A) to R(l+ X )   for   all investors who had formerly

been borrowing on their own account. Similarly the marginal rate

of substitution for formerly lending investors would shift from

R(l—) to R(1—A).

     In this fashion, corporate capital structure adjustments would

help to complete the market by driving marginal rates of substitu-

tion closer to equality. Investors holding shares in levered firms

would still have different marginal rates of substitution and

1owr degrees of risk aversion at the margin than investors holding

shares in negatively levered firms, but these divergences would

at least have been narrowed.
                           —15—




      Furthermore, once this change in investors' marginal rates of

 substitution had taken place, equations (10) and (13) would be

 identically zero, implying that all investors would be indifferent

 toward further marginal changes in the capital structures of firms

 whose shares they held. Capital structure equilibrium in this

 environment would thus be very much like the equilibrium described

 by Mill?r (1977). There would be an optimal amount of corporate

 debt in the aggregate, and all of this debt would be held by

 corporations. In the absence of firm—specific costs, however, it

would not matter which corporations did the
                                              borrowing and lending
norat the level of the individual firm, how much of it they did.

A variety of capital structures could coexist in equilibrium, and

changes in these capital structures would not matter to investors

so long as the aggregate level of corporate debt remained
                                                            unchanged.
In this sense we arrive at a limited MM result in which corporate

capital structure matters in the aggregate but not at the level

of the individual firm)6

     Similar                                                     *
               results would emerge for the special case where A = 0,

so that return streams can be costlessly transformed
                                                       by corporations.

Again corporate borrowing and lending would dominate personal

borrowing and lending, and there would be an optimal amount of

corporate debt. In this case, however, capital structure adjustments

would be sufficient to drive marginal rates of substitution exactly

into equality for all investors. The capital market would be fully

spanned even in the face of "unequal access" on the part of individ-

ual investors. Furthermore, competition among firms would ensure
                           —16—




    that investors would not be "charged" for this transformation

    service. Firms would be willing to substitute debt for equity

   with no differential in the certainty equivalent yields on the two

    securities, and in equilibrium, therefore, both would have a cer-

    tainty equivalent yield equal to R. In the case considered above
                             *
   by contrast, in which 0 <<X, corporate debt would have to bear
   a differential yield below that of equity in order to give corpora-

   tions an inducement to issue it.

        The question of equilibrium yield differentials on securities has

   been studied extensively in the asset pricing literature. We now

   turn to the effect of corporate capital structure adjustments on

   the conclusions of that literature.


B. A Special Case: Divergent Borrowing and Lending Rates and the

   Capital Asset Pricing Model

        The problem of divergent borrowing and lending rates has re-

   ceived previous attention in the context of the capital asset pricing

   model (CAPM). Brennan (1971), for example, has studied equilibrium

   security' pricing for the case where investors have riskiess borrowing

   and lending opportunities but the borrowing rate exceeds the lend-

   ing rate. Vasicek (1971) and Black (1972) have analyzed the case

   in which investors have a riskiess lending opportunity but no

   riskiess borrowing is allowed. In each of these papers it is demon-

   strated that the equilibrium expected return on security j has

   the same linear structure as in the standard CAPM, but the pricing

   relationship is affected by restrictions on borrowing and lending.
                        —17




This effect manifests itself in the intercept and the market

price of risk. In each of the three papersas well, the capital

market line becomes piecewise linear, with efficient portfolios

falling along different segments for borrowing and lending
            17
investors

     This entire strand of literature, however, takes security

supplies as given and thus ignores the capacity of firms to adjust

their capital structures in response to divergent borrowing and

lending rates at the investor level. If, as in the case considered

at the end of Section II.A, firms can borrow and lend at the same

rate, then as we have seen, they will have an incentive to rearrange

their capital structure until margnal rates of substitution are

equalized for both borrowing and lending investors. In this way,

all investors would face the same capital narket line and the

standard CAPN riskreturn relationship would be restored)8 This

restoration is done at no cost to investors so long as firms are

price—takers.

     Whereas the literature in corporate finance has tended to

focus on the extent to which investors' portfolio operations can

undo corporate financing decisions, then, the investments literature

has tended to focus on the pricing of fixed supplies of securities.

In either case, the positive role that corporate financing decisions

can play in completing the market and hence restoring perfect

market—type pricing relationships, has been overlooked.
                               —18—




III. Further Implications of an Incomplete Market Structure for Corporate

      Finance

     Up to this point, market incompleteness has manifested itself in our

paper solely in the form of a divergence between riskless borrowing and

lending rates. While this case is useful for its simplicity, it is never-

theless somewhat restrictive. In this section, we consider extensions of

the fundamental points from preceding sections to more complex situations.


     A. Corporate Bankruptcy and Mergers (Spin—offs)

     In the model of Section II, individual investors achieved their

preferred portfolio positions by combining equity shares with long and

short positions in riskiess debt securities. Corporate capital struc-

ture adjustments were then a means of augmenting the set of portfolio

opportunities that investors could construct on their own account. If

we do not restrict corporate and individual borrowing contracts to be
free of default risk, risky debt can still play a role in completing

the market up to a point. The capacity of any given corporation to

issue debt with the desired return attributes, however, depends on the

characteristics of its operating cash flow stream.

     Consider, for instance, a firm engaged in splitting up its ori-

ginal equity securities into debt and levered equity securities.

This is accomplished by the conventional expedient of using the

proceeds from the newly issued debt to retire part of the outstand-

ing equity. Accordingly, the total income, Y, is partitioned into

return streams available to the two classes of securityholders
                                    -18A-




titioned
Income
St r earn
                                                              .—. a


                                                                            I
                                                                       DMin1(l




                                                                           =Min(F


                                                         /
                                                     /
                                                 /

                                            //
                   F
                                       Total Operating Stream in Various
                                              States of Nature




                                 FIGURE II
                   Partioning of Firm's Operating Income

            Stream Through the Use of Debt and Equity Securities
                          —19—




as depicted in Figure II. The terminal cash flow, ,    is   measured

along the horizontal axis, and the partioned return stream is along

the vertical axis. If the promised payment, F, on the firm's debt

is relatively small, then the debt will be virtually riskless (that

is the actual payment will equal the promised payment in almost

every state of nature). But as the firm alters its capital struc—
                                       *
ture   from the promised payment F to F = F + dF, the corresponding

return streams to debtholders and equityholders are altered to

and Y, respectively. Indeed, if this process continues, the

firm's debt will no longer have its desirable near—riskiess prop—

perty, because its return stream approaches that available to

unlevered equity. High probabilities of bankruptcy can thus play

a negative role in completing the market, because they reduce the

available supply of near—riskiess debt. From the standpoint of

investor welfare, this is much like a bankruptcy cost, but it is

fundamentally different from traditional notions of costs associated

with formal bankruptcy proceedings either in liquidation or reor-

ganization. This cost arises naturally in the market place through

the process of altering the debt security into an "equity—like"

security.

       If bankruptcy were to introduce a cost of market incomplete-

ness in this sense, it could be mitigated, or even eliminated,

through financial synergy. A conglomerate merger is a case in

point.19 Consider two firms,A and B, having operating cash flow

streams that are imperfectly correlated, with equal standard de-

viations,     =     The pre—merger risk—return vector composition
                             —20—




    A'        ÷
                  B'     is now altered to (aAB AB where
         =                                The return stream available to
             A+   B and o <cY =
    debtholders in the merged firm   is   less "equity—like" than the com-

    bination of streams of the unmerged firms. With merger it is

    possible to support the issuance of additional debt without

    additional cost of bankruptcy in the sense of market incompleteness.

    Thus, merger increases the capacity of debt to complete the market.2°

          If the process of merging were costless, this activity alone

   would not affect equilibrium market valuation, but would simply

   arise as part of the competition among firms to meet investors'

    desired return patterns. Nonetheless, there would be an optimal

    economy—wide configuration of firms with various sizes. Whenever

   departures from this configuration arose, an incentive would exist

    for certain firms to merge. In this sense, depending upon the

   underlying investment opportunity sets available to firms, not

   only mergers but spin—offs would be endogenous in financial

   equilibrium.

B. A Rationale for Complex Finance

         Although we have focused only on debt and equity securities,

   a truly complete market may necessitate the existence of other

    forms of securities to be supplied by firms, such as hybrid

    securities with option characteristics (e.g. warrants, callable

   debt, etc.). In a multiperiod environment, a complete market is

   presumed to have securities that sDan the available tulle—state

    space. When investors' desires include return patterns across time,
                         —21—




 then securities with multiple periods become relevant.   Thus,

 corporate debt maturity structure, at least in an economy—wide

 sense, evolves naturally as a means of completing the market.

      When corporations can costlessly transform their return

 streams into any securities package, as in the discussion at the

 end of Section II.A., the certainty—equivalent yield differentials

among various classes of securities must be identical in equilibrium.

Therefore, the advantages that firms possess in completing the mar-

ket get "priced out," as long as firms act as price—taking

competitors. This is depicted graphically in Figure III. There

exists a (certainty—equivalent) yield differential between debt and

equity, —G, at which no lender demands corporate debt. At this

point the benefit that corporate debt offers to investors in com-

pleting the market is outweighed by the yield differential. Stated

another way, the negative yield differential on corporate debt is

at least as high as the cost associated with financial transforma-

tion at the investor level. As long as this personal transformation

remains costly, however, there will be some yield differential at

which there is a demand for corporate debt, and the demand curve

for corporate debt is thus a set of tradeoffs between its benefit

in completing the market and its yield disadvantage relative to equity.

     As the level of corporate debt increases, its marginal benefit

in completing the market decreases. Therefore, the demand curve

must be upward sloping as investors require a lower yield differential

to trade—off against lower marginal benefits. Indeed a zero yield
                                    -21A-




Yield
Differential
 between
Debt and Equity
                                                    Demand with costly
                C
                                                     personal transformation




                                                    Supply with costless
            0                                        financial transformation
                *
           —o




           0I
                                                    Supply with costly
                                                     financial transformation




                                        Quantity of Debt




                                    FIGURE III

           An Equilibrium Characterization of Financial Tranformation
                             —22—




differential obtains when the marginal benefits of both debt and

equity are driven to zero. This occurs at the point of intersection

(Z) between the flat supply curve and the upward sloping demand

curves when firms   adjust   their supply of debt to meet the desired

combinations of debt and equity demanded in the aggregate. At this

point financial transformation has effectively eliminated the ini-

tial effects of an incomplete market at the investor level.

     Although this equilibrium is posited in the context of two

classes of securities, it can be expanded to multiple classes with

a whole range of payoff characteristics. One can envision the

development of complex financial securities, such as callable debt and

convertible debt, and thus the process of completing the market via

corporate financial behavior has the potential for rationalizing

observed complex finance even in the absence of agency costs and

taxes.2' Nonetheless, financial transformation at a particular

firm level is of no consequence to its market value unless the trans-

formation itself is costly. Again, this underscores the fact that

the limited MM theorem obtains so long as corporate financial policy

is costless, irrespective of the degree to which markets are in-

complete at the investor level. In particular, the familiar home-

made leverage assumption, which is also a disguised assumption

underlying Stiglitz (1974) and Fama (1978), is not necessary to

this result.

     Of course, yield differentials occur so long as corporate

financial transformation is costly. This is depicted in the down-

ward sloping supply curve in Figure III. The curve is generated by
                                    —23—




      the process of firm supply adjustments up to the point where

      the marginal benefit (cost) of substituting debt for equity is

      equal to the positive (negative) yield differential between

      debt and equity. A yield differential can now occur. The

      differential is positive or negative depending upon the elas-

      ticities of the supply and demand curves and their intersection

     point. Note again that it is not market incompleteness         se

     which leads to the yield differential. It is the interaction

     between costs of financial transformation both at the level of

     firms and investors that leads to the relative value differen-

     tial among firms of the same risk class. If these transformation

     costs were firm—specific, there would exist optimal mixes of

     financial claims not only in an economy—wide sense but also at the

     level of individual firms. This optimality depends upon relative

     efficiencies in packaging financial securities across firms and

     industry groups. More generally, we might expect specialized

     financial transformers (financial intermediaries) to spring up in

     such an environment, and it is to this possibility that we now

     turn.


C.   Financial Transformation by Nonfinancial Firms and Financial

     Institutions.

             Up to this point we have considered firms and individual in-

     vestors as the two groups competing with one another to perform

     financial transformation activities. Once financial institutions

     are brought into the picture, this transformation process might
                        —24—




best be thought of as occurring in two stages.

     Firsts those with expertise in managing real assets organize

corporations and partnerships for the purpose of holding and opera-

ting these assets. They in turn issue financial claims against

these assets in the form of bonds, bank loans, stock and partner-

ship shares. These claims can split up the return stream from the

real assets in a variety of ways desired by households. This first

element in the economy's financial structure thus consists of the

nonfinancial sector's capital structure, broadly construed to con-

sist not only of debt, equity and complex securities, but also the

very organization of firms into partnerships and coporations.

     The second step in the process of transforming asset charac-

teristics is performed by financial institutions. Although house-

holds find it convenient to hold directly many of the financial

claims issued by nonfinancial firms, the degree of transformation

inherent in these claims may still be insufficient in some respects

to match their desired consumption plans. Commercial banks, for

example, thus buy debt claims of nonfinancial firms (as well as

of households themselves) and enhance their liquidity and divisi-

bility by transforming them into demand and savings deposits; or

mutual funds buy stock and bonds and overcome the barriers to diver-

sification implied by security indivisibilities by in turn issuing

small—denomination claims on their overall portfolios; or insurance

companies hold claims on nonfinancial firms and rearrange their

return streams so as to pay of f households in the event of death or

illness.
                         —25—




      It is important to recognize, however, that the second stage

 in financial transformation can be performed by nonfinancial firms

 as well. There is nothing inherent in the institutional arrange—

 ment of a financial institution that makes it superior to a non-

 financial firm in performing financial transformation.     The theory
 of financial intermediation is usually thought of as distinct from

 the theory of corporate finance, but to the extent that both types

 of institutions help to complete the capital market, they are

 competing with one another to perform the same function.    Apart
 from distinguishing institutional features such as government

regulation, then, we would argue that there is a basic identity

between the phenomena that the two theories are attempting to

explain.

     Another important point to note is that just as the productive

process of transforming raw materials into finished goods requires

capital and labor resources, so does the process of financial

transformation. This has been widely recognized for the case of

financial institutions which have long been thought of as having

production functions. It has not been explicitly recognized for

nonfinancial corporations, however, where the dominance of perfect

market models has confined discussion to the case where financial

transformation is costless.

     The nonfinancial firm can be thought of as operating with two

production functions: one that uses capital and labor to produce

real goods and services and one that uses capital and labor to

transform the characteristics of its real assets into alternative
                                  —26—




financial asset characteristic vectors. From this perspective, the

importance of nonfinancial firms' capital structures depends on the

characteristics of their financial production functions relative to

those of households, financial institutions and one another. If nonfi —

nancial firms   are identical to one another in this respect but possess

relative advantages over financial institutions and households, a limited

MM theorem will again result. Capital structure will not affect the

equilibrium valuations of firms in a given risk class, but the aggregate

corporate capital structure will nevertheless be determinate. When

viewed in the context of financial production functions, in fact, this

limited MN result is analogous to the constant returns to scale case in

ordinary microeconomic theory, where industry output alone is determinate,

but the size and the output of any one firm are not.

IV. Conclusion

     In order to reconcile returns from the economy's real assets with

investors' portfolio needs, the capital market offers a variety of return

stream transformations. Nonfinancial firms, financial institutions and

even individual investors themselves all compete with one another in the

market to perform these desired transformations.

     Analysis of the role played by nonfinancial firms in this process has

been dominated by the MN theorem, which assumes that financial transforma-

tion is costless. Under that assumption individuals and institutions alike

are competitive equals in the capital market, and the profits that any one

agent might hope to gain through purely financial transformation are

inexorably squeezed out.
                                —27—




     In this paper, in contrast to the MM tradition, we have assumed that

financial transformation is costly, and thus our analysis of capital struc-

ture equilibrium necessarily takes place in an incomplete market setting.

Whereas previous discussions have asserted that the incomplete markets

case confers monopoly power on individual firms, however, we have retained

MN's emphasis on the force of competition. In particular, while we assume

that nonfinancial firms as a group may have a comparative advantage over

individuals or financial institutions in performing certain transformations,

we view these firms as competing with one another on equal terms.

     Our principal conclusion is that, rather than being hopelessly

intractable, the incomplete markets case can yield useful insights into

the function of corporate finance. First, firms' attempts to profit

from their comparative advantage will dictate an optimal capital structure

for firms in the aggregate. Just as in the complete markets case, however,

competition among firms will drive out profits, and in equilibrium the

capital structure of any one firm will be a matter of indifference.

Nevertheless, these aggregate capital structure adjustments play a positive

role in alleviating market incompleteness, and this provides an alternative

to the agency theory, and the signalling theory which are the only other

currently available rationales for corporate finance in a pre—1913 taxless

world. Moreover, firms' incentives to narrow divergences in investors'

marginal rates of substitution may also shed light on such related issues

as corporate mergers, the use of complex securities and the role of

financial intermediaries.
                                 Footnotes



1. A particularly strong example of this view may be found in Milne (1974):

            It has been said that for the Modigliani—Miller
            finance theorems to be true, there must exist
            perfect markets in assets. Once one has grasped
            the essential point that a perfect market must
            involve explicit (or transparently derivable)
            markets for a given set of returns, these theorems
            follow easily because the asset model is no more
            than a thinly—disguised Arrow—Debreu model.

2. Two examples from the literature illustrate the gloomy sentiments

    surrounding the case of incomplete markets. Baron (1976), for instance,

   has stated:
            If the financing—investment alters the space of
            available returns in the capital market, the
            implicit prices will depend on the firm's de-
            cisions except under certain special assumptions
                   In such cases where the implicit prices
            are not independent of the decisions of the firm,
            the firm is without a guide as to how to work in
            the best interests of the shareholders since the
            best interests of shareholders are not in general
            coincident with changes in the value of the equity
            of the firm.

   And in explaining his reasons for shunning the incomplete markets

   case, Ross (1977) has said:

            Leland, Ekern and Wilson, Radner and others have
            examined this possibility for activity choice in
            models with incomplete (marginal) spanning and
            suggested alternative behavioral rules such as
            the requirement of stockholder unanimity. This
            is equivalent, though, to assuming that firms have
            monopoly power in financial markets, and it is
            difficult to see a definitive theory emerging
            from such an inherently game theoretic and strategic
            situation.

3. In other theories of capital structure, a positive role for corporate

   finance is provided by such factors as corporate taxes (Modigliani
     and Miller, 1963), bankruptcy costs (Robichek and Myers, 1966;

     Kraus and Litzenberger, 1973), agency costs (Jensen and Meckling,

     1976), and signalling considerations (Ross,1977). The theory

     presented here offers an alternative to these factors but not necessarily

     a mutually exclusive one.

 4. The relationship between tax arbitrage restrictions and market

     incompleteness is discussed further in Taggart (1980).

 5. The functions X could also be specific to individuals. To simplify the

     notation we will ignore this complication.

 6. All taxes and agency costs are purpcsely ignored in the model in order

     to focus on the effects of market incompleteness.

 7. To simplify the notation, investors are assumed to agree on the distri-

     bution of 0. This assumption is not critical to the results.

 8. The firm could also choose to be a lender (D<0) in which case its pro-

     fits would be given by II =   e -R[l—?(D)}D. We will assume throughout
     that transaction costs are symmetrical, and thus that there is no reason

     for either the firm or individual investors to simultaneously engage

     in borrowing and lending.

 9. In arriving at a portfolio optimum, all investors are assumed to act as

    price—takers.

10. In general, of course, share trading could also be subject to transaction

    costs,and this could cause divergences in share valuations in much the

    same fashion that short—selling restrictions cause such divergences in

    Litzenberger and Sosin (1977). We have chosen, however, to isolate

    market incompleteness in the bond market so as to highlight its effects.
     In Section III we introduce incompleteness in both markets (albeit

     in an unspecified form) to rationalize complex finance under incomplete

     markets.

11. In going from (6) to (7) we have used the following:

                JU   OdF(O) =
                                E(uO)

     and

                E(uO) = E(u7E(O) + coy
                                       (u,O)

12. It is interesting to note that E(u)/E(u) can be driven into equality

     if short sales are unrestricted and if there exists an unlevered risk—

     free firm among many firms. The expedient of purchases and shortsales

    of this firm's stock would dominate borrowing and lending for

    individuals. We shall assume, however, that there is no such a firm.


13. See Baron (1979) and DeAngelo (1981) for surveys of the unanimity

    literature.

14. Specifically, for

           (fu1dF(O)J =


                       +                                               1



                       - (E(u2)R(l+X    (D)-i-DA (D))+E(u1)) c.

                            I dS        -
                      + E(u1)(+1)ct..

    In the last term of the expression, +E(u). comes from the fact that

    when a dollar of additional debt is issued by the firm, the proceeds

    are used to retire a dollar of equity held by initial shareholders.

    Substituting (5a) and(6) in the above, and setting a. =       a.       yields (8).
15. The existence of conflicting investor preferences for firm capital

     structures provides a rationale for the existence of many firms, even

     in a single good economy with no diseconomies of scale. Although the

     production side of the firm is not considered in this paper, it is

     evident that economies of scale in production would interact with

     investors' varying desires for leverage to produce an optimal pro—

     liferation of capital structures.

16. It is interesting to contrast this with the equilibrium that would

     result if all the conditions in this section remained the same except

     A =   A.   In this case corporate and personal leverage would be perfect

     substitutes. There would still be an optimal aggregate level of

     combined borrowing by firms and individuals) because anything more than

     this could not be undone without incurring costs. As long as this

     aggregate level of borrowing were maintained, however, it would not

    matter whether it was done by firms or individuals. Corporate capital

    structure would be unimportant not only at the firm level but also at

    the level of the corporate sector since any increase or reduction in

    borrowing by firms as a whole could be offset by individual investors.

17. In the models of Vasicek and Black, short sales of the zero beta port-

    folio take the place of borrowing.

18. Much the same point is made in a different context by Black and Scholes

     (1974) when they argue that supply responses by firms will tend to

    eliminate any dividend yield effect from the ordinary CAPM equation,

    even in the face of personal tax considerations.

19. See Higgins and Schall (1975) for a discussion of conglomerate mergers

    under the traditional notion of bankruptcy costs.
20. This is not the whole story, however. Mergers also restrict investors'

     portfolio flexibility by cementing together the equity streams of the

     two firms. If good substitutes exist elsewhere in the capital market

     for the two pre—merger equity streams this creates no problem.

    Otherwise, there might be a tradeoff between the enhanced ability to

     issue near—riskiess debt and reduced flexibility for equity investors.

21. See Haugen and Senbet (1981) for a discussion of the role of complex

    securities in resolving agency problems.
                              REFERENCES




K. Arrow, "The Role of Securities in the Optimal Allocation of Risk—Bearing",
  Review of Economic Studies 31 (1964), pp. 91—96.

D. Baron, "Default Risk and the Modigliani—Miller Theorem: A Synthesis",
  American Economic Review 66 (1976), pp. 204—12.

________ "Investment Policy, Optimality and the Mean—Variance Model",
  Journal of Finance 34 (1979), pp. 206—232.

F. Black, "Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing",
  Journal of Business 45 (1972), pp. 444—54.

________ and M. Scholes, "The Effects of Dividend Yield and Dividend
  Policy on Common Stock Prices and Returns", Journal of Financial
  Economics 1 (1974), pp. 1—22.

M. Brennan, "Capital Market Equilibrium with Divergent Borrowing and
  Lending Rates", Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 6 (1971),
  pp. 1197—1205.

H. DeAngelo, "Competition and Unanimity", American Economic Review 71
  (1981), pp. 18—27.

P. Diamond, "The Role of a Stock Market in a General Equilibrium Model
  with Technological Uncertainty", American Economic Review 57 (1967),
  pp. 759—76.

D. Durand, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and the Theory
  of Investment: Comments", American Economic Review 49 (1959),
  pp. 639—55.

S. Ekern and R. Wilson, "On the Theory.of the Firm in an Economy with
  Incomplete Markets", Bell Journal of Economics 5 (1974), pp. 171—80

E. Fama, "The Effects of a Firm's Investment and Financing Decisions
  on the Welfare of its Security Holders", American Economic Review 68
  (1978). pp. 272—84.

I. Fisher, The Theory of Interest (London: the MacMillan Company, 1930).

R. Haugen and L. Senbet, "The Insignificance Bankruptcy Costs to the
  Theory of Optimal Captial Structure", Journal of Finance 33 (1978)
  pp. 383—93.

________________________ "Resolving the Agency Problems of External
  Capital through Stock Options", Journal of Finance, forthcoming, 1981.
R. Higgins and L. Schall, "Corporate Bankruptcy and Conglomerate
  Merger", Journal of Finance 30 (1975), pp. 93—113.

J. Hirshlejfer, Investment, Interest and Capital (Englewood Cliffs:
  Prentice—Hall, Inc., 1970).

N. Jensen and W. Meckling, "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,
  Agency Costs and Ownership Structure", Journal of Financial
  Economics 3 (1976), pp. 305—60.

H. Kim, W. Lewellen, J. McConnell, "Financial Leverage Clienteles:
  Theory and Evidence", Journal of Financial Ecomomics 7 (1979) pp. 83—109.

A. Kraus and R. Litzenberger, "A State Preference Model of Optimal
  Financial Leverage", Journal of Finance 28 (1975), pp. 911—22.

H. Leland, "Production Theory and the Stock Market", Bell Journal of
  Economics and Management Science 5 (1974), pp. 125—44.

R. Litzenberger, "Debt, Taxes and Incompleteness: A Survey",
  Unpublished manuscript presented at the 1980 AlA meetings, Denver,
  Colorado.

R. Litzenberger and H. Sosin, "The Theory of Recapitalizations and the
  Evidence of Dual Purpose Funds", Journal of Finance 32 (1977),
  pp. 1433—55.

N. Miller, "Debt and Taxes", Journal of Finance 32 (1977), pp. 261—75.

F. Milne, "Corporate Investment and Finance Theory in Competitive
  Equilibrium", Economic Record 50 (1974), pp. 511—33.

F. Modigliani and N. Miller, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance,
  and the Theory of Investment", American Economic Review 48 (1958),
  pp. 162—97.

______________ and __________, "Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost of
  Capital — A Correction", American Economic Review 53 (1963), pp. 433—43.

N. Nielsen, "The Investment Decision of the Firm Under Uncertainty and
  the Allocative Efficiency of Capital Markets",     Journal of Finance
  31 (1976), pp. 587—602.

R. Radner, "A Note on Unanimity of Stockholders Preferences Among
  Alternative Production Plans: A Reformulation of the Ekern—Wilson
  Model", Bell Journal of Economics 5 (1974), pp. 181—4.

A. Robichek and S. Myers, "Problems in the Theory of Optimal Capital
  Structure", Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 1 (1966),
  pp. 1—35.
S. Ross, "The Determination of Financial Structure: the Incentive—
  Signalling Approach", Bell Journal of Economics 8 (1977), pp. 23—40.

M. Satterthwaite, "On the Scope of Stockholder Unanimity Theorems",
  International Economic Review, (1981), pp. 119—133.

J. Scott, "A Theory of Optimal Capital Structure," Bell Journal of
  Economics 7 (1976), pp. 33—54.

H. Sosin, "Neutral Recapitalizations: Predictions and Tests Concerning
  Valuation and Welfare," Journal of Finance 33 (1978), pp. 1228—34.

J. Stiglitz, "On the Irrelevance of Corporate Financial Policy",
  American Eocnomic Review 64 (1974), pp. 851—66.

R. Taggart, "Taxes and Corporate Capital Structure in an Incomplete
  Market", Journal of Finance 35 (1980), pp. 654—59.

0. Vasicek, "Capital Asset Pricing Model with No Riskless Borrowing",
  unpublished manuscript, Wells Fargo Bank, March 1971.

J.B. Williams, The Theory of Investment Value (Amsterdam: North—
  Holland Publising Co., 1938)
