                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                ASPECTS OF THE OPTIMAL MANAGEMENT
                        OF EXCHANGE RATES


                        Jacob A. Frenkel

                         Joshua Aizenman


                      Working Paper No. 7I48




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                         September 1981




Prepared for presentation at the Fifth International Conference of
the University of Paris—Dauphine on Money and International
Monetary Problems, Paris, June 15—17, 1981. An earlier version was
presented at a conference on the Choice of an Exchange Rate System,
held at the University of South Carolina, May 1—2, 1981. J.A.
Frenkel is indebted to the National Science Foundation, grant
SES—7814-80 AOl for financial support. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies and
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #748
                                                  September 1981


            ASPECTS OF THE OPTIMAL MANAGEMENT OF EXCHANGE RATES

                                 Abs tract
        This paper analyzes aspects of the economics of the optimal management
of   exchange rates. It shows that the choice of the optimal exchange rate re-

gime depends on the nature and the origin of the stochastic shocks that affect

the economy. Generally, the higher is the variance of real shocks which

affect the supply of goods, the larger becomes the desirability of fixity of

exchange rates. The rationale for that implication is that the balance of

payments serves as a shock absorber which mitigates the effect of real shocks

on consumption. The importance of this factor diminishes the larger is the

economy's access to world capital markets. On the other hand, the desirability

of exchange rate flexibility increases the larger are the variances of the

shocks to the demand for money, to the supply of money, to foreign prices and

to purchasing power parities. All of these shocks exert a similar effect and

their sum is referred to as the "effective monetary shock." It is also shown

that the desirability of exchange rate flexibility increases the larger is the

propensity to save out of transitory income. When the analysis is extended to

an economy which produces traded and non—traded goods it is shown that the

desirability of exchange rate flexibility diminishes the higher is the share

of non—traded goods relative to traded goods and the lower are the elasticities

of demand and supply of the two goods.



Professor Jacob A. Frenkel                       Professor Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
University of Chicago                            University of Pennsylvania
1126 E 59th Street                               3718 Locust Walk
chicago, IL   60637                              Philadelphia, PA   19104

312/753—4516
I. Introduction

        This paper deals with the problem of the choice of an optimal ex-

change rate   regime for a small open economy. Previous analyses of the choice

between   fixed and flexible exchange rate systems centered around questions
of stabilization policies, the effect of capital irobility on the efficacy
of monetary and fiscal policies, the role of speculation in the foreign ex-
change market, the nature and origin of exogenous disturbances, and the like.
Subsequent   discussions originating with contributions in the 1960s by Mundell
(1961), McKinnon (1963) and Kenen (1969) have   shifted the focus of analysis

to   the choice of the optimal currency area. The shift of emphasis reflected
the recognition of the fact that the optimal exchange rate regime need not be
the same for all countries. Rather, a country might find it useful to main-
tain a fixed rate with some currencies while having a flexible exchange rate
with some other currencies.
        The analysis in this paper recognizes that the spectrum of possibilities
open for the various economies is much broader than the one implied by   the

framework   of analysis of the optimal currency area. Rather than dividing
the   world into currencies among which exchange rates are flexible and those

among   which exchange rates are fixed, one might consider the optimai degree
of   fixity of exchange rates between each pair of currencies. In this frame-

work   the choice of an exchange rate regime between any pair of currencies need
not be a fixed or a flexible rate but rather it might be some optimal mix
of the two extremes. The optimal mix is referred to as the optimal managed
(or dirty) float and the determinants of the optimal degree of exchange
rate management is the subject of this paper.
          The analytical framework that is outlined below builds upon, and
extends   the analysis of recent papers by Fischer (1976) and Gray (1976).


                                       1
                                          2



Fischer analyzes the choice between the two extreme exchange rate systems

in terms of the     source of   exogenous disturbances. He demonstrates that when

the exogenous shocks are real, the variance of steady—state consumption is

lower under a fixed exchange rate system than under a flexible rate system.

On the other hand, when the exogenous shocks are monetary, the opposite

holds and the flexible rate system is preferred to the fixed rate system.

Gray's paper deals with wage indexation in a closed economy and develops

the concept of the optimal degree of wage indexation when the system is

subject to real and monetary shocks which occur simultaneously. Lack of

complete information precludes identifying the effect of each shock separ-

ately, and thus results in the optimal degree of wage indexation. In what

follows we combine the two approaches of Fischer and Gray into a framework

which yields an index measuring the optimal degree of fixity of exchange

rates, i.e., the optimal managed float. Section II describes the analytical

framework   and   analyzes   the problem for an economy whose production consists
only   of commodities that are traded internationally. It is shown that the

major   determinants   of    the optimal managed float are the variances of and the
covariances among the various shocks that affect the economy.1 In section III
we extend   the analysis to an economy which produces tradable as well as




       1The analytical framework is adapted from Frenkel (1976, 1980). For
an early analysis of the optimal exchange rate regime in terms of the structure
of the economy see Stein (1963). Modigliani and Askari (1973) have emphasized
that the optimal exchange rate regime depends on the nature of the shocks
and that the optimum may  be an intermediate system between fixed and flexible
rates, e.g.,  sliding parities.  A similar emphasis on the origin of shocks
is found in Flood (1979) , Buiter (1977). and Enders and Lapan (1979) who also
emphasize the stochastic nature of the various shocks.
                                              3



non—tradable goods and examine the dependence of the optimal managed float

on the composition of production. Section IV contains some concluding re-

marks.




II. Optimal Managed Float with only Tradable Goods

         In this section we analyze the determinants of the optimal degree of

exchange rate management for an economy which produces only tradable goods.

We start with a presentation of the analytical framework.

         11.1 The Analytical Framework

         The key characteristic of the analytical framework is the specification

of the stochastic structure of the economy. Consider a small economy that

is subject to three types of repetitive and serially uncorrelated shocks.

These shocks which are specified below are referred to as real, nonetary, and

foreign shocks.

         Denote   the supply of output by              and assume that

(1)              =    ye   ;       N(—c2/2, 02)

where p is a     stochastic disturbance with a constant variance 2                    The mean
                                                                                 11


of the distribution of p is chosen to be _02/2 so as to assure that the ex-
pected value of output E(Y) equals y. Thus, y is referred to as permanent
income and p is referred to as the real shock. It can be shown that a is
                                                                                         p
approximately     equal to the standard deviation of current income as a per-

centage of permanent income.2



         2                             2                         2
          E(Y)
                  =   y, E(Y) =    y2e°P and var(Y) =         y2(e   —   1);   thus

                           2                  2

      a/E(Y) =        y(e 1)2/y = (e
                               —                  -   1)1/2

                                                                 (footnote continues p. 4)
                                               4


          The second source of disturbances arises from the monetary sector of
the economy. Let the demand for nominal balances L be

(2)         Lt =   kPYe       ;         N(—a2/2,   a2)


where k is the Cambridge          k denoting the desired ratio of money to income, P
denotes   the domestic price level and c denotes the stochastic distrubance

to the demand for money, where again its time subscript has been omitted.

Analogous to the distribution of the real shock, the standard deviation of

the monetary shock a is approximately equal to the standard deviation of

the income velocity as a percentage of permanent velocity.

       The third source of disturbances stems from the foreign sector. Denote

the foreign price level by P and let it be related to its permanent value

p according to
                     X1                  2      2
(3)            =   p*e    ;           N(—c /2, a
                                          xl       xl


Thus, x1 denotes the shocks due to variability of foreign prices. Again, a
                                                                                   xl
is approximately equal to the standard deviation of foreign prices as a per-

centage of their mean.

       The domestic price level is linked to the foreign price level through

the purchasing power parity which is assumed to be satisfied except for

random deviations. The stochastic deviations from purchasing power parity


(footnote 2 continued)
for small a. It should be clear that the choice of a2/2 as the mean of

the distribution of   is made solely for analytical convenience. None of
the results are affected by rescaling the distribution so as to move its
mean to zero. To simplify notations we have suppressed in equation (1) the
subscript t that is attached to the realization of the shock ii. We will
follow the same convention in subsequent specifications of shocks.
S '5.5   -   ——   — —,— r-".   ..   44   — . nL.   -_._....   —   .4,se--t..   .t   —
                                            6


Thus, the equilibrium exchange rate is


(7)          St =    (Mt/kp*y)e+
and    the percentage change thereof is

(8)             log S — log   S1 =   1og(M/kS1p*y)
                                                       —
                                                           (p+E+x)


For    the other extreme regime of the fixed exchange rate system, the exchange
rate does not change and therefore

(9)          log S, — log S_1 =

Using    (8) and    (9) we may define   an index i such that 0 E y      1:



(10)        y      (log S —   log S1)/[1og(M/kS1p*y) — (u+c+x)

In    equation (10) the   parameter y characterizes     the   whole spectrum of exchange
rate regimes. In the two extreme systems of a fixed and freely flexible
exchange rates, the value of the coefficient y is zero and unity, respectively.
Between these two extremes there is the wide range of possible mixtures of
the    two extremes. The coefficient y may      be   viewed as indicating the fraction

of    money market disequilibrium that is allowed to be eliminated through
changes in the exchange rate. In what follows we will refer to y as the co-
efficient of managed float. Equation (10) also implies that the current
exchange rate is

(11)        St =         (Mt/kp*y)
          11.2     The Objective Function

          The optimal managed float strategy is necessary because it is assumed
                                                   7


that   the government (as well as the private sector) possess information that

is incomplete. If information was complete and during each period the various

shocks could be observed and           identified      separately, an optimal policy would

be   to allow changes in the exchange rates to correct only for the             monetary

disturbances     and not for the real disturbances. This is essentially the
main insight from Fischer's paper (1976). In introducing incomplete
information   it is     assumed that during a given period only the joint outcome
of   the various shocks is known but not their separate valtes. Because complete

information   is not available,         policymakers face a signal extraction problem

and some second—best policy is required.

         It is assumed that the objective is to minimize             the losses due to
imperfect information, and that the policymaker seeks to minimize the
quadratic loss function H:

(12)      Minimize HEE[(ct - E(Yt)]2 = var(c) + [E(Yt) - E(ct)}2

where c denotes the rate of consumption which, from the budget constraint,
equals the rate of income minus the real value of additions to cash balances

                         tIM
(13)       ct =Yt
                         Pt

The previous relationships imply that

(14)       [ct
                 -
                     E(Yt)]
                               =   y(e' -   1) —   aky[e      (Mt
                                                                      p*y)1       -i-c)+xh' l)



and using (14) in (12) yields the loss function which is to be minimized with

respect to the intervention index




         31n a recent analysis of the optimal              foreign exchange intervention,
Boyer (1978) extends and applies Poole's framework (1970) to the problem at
hand. Boyer assumes that real income is fixed and that the objective function
is to minimize the variability of prices.
                                        8


         Inspection of (14)   suggests that in addition to finding the optimal

y,   the policymaker might want to pursue what Fischer terms "active" monetary
policy by   setting the beginning of period holdings of cash balances Mtl at

some desired level. It is assumed that at the beginning of each period the

monetary authority changes the money supply so as to compensate for past

disturbances. Thus, the money supply is set at that level for which


(15)        Mt =   kS1p*ye    ;   5
                                      N(—a/2, o)
The stochastic term 5 in (15) denotes the stochastic shock to the money supply.
It reflects the possibility that in setting the money supply the monetary
authorities are unable to avoid stochastic deviations from their target.4
Recalling that the shock to the demand for money is denoted by ,     the net
monetary shock, i.e., the shock to the excess demand for money, is c — 5.




       4it siiouji be noted that the specification of the "active" monetary
policy is somewhat arbitrary since, in principle, other rules are possible.
For example, one could specify a rule by which the monetary authority sets

Mt so as to ensure equality between the values of the mathematical expectations
of the streams of consumption and income, i.e., E(c) =
                                                         E(Yt). Further,
equation (14) suggests that the monetary authority possesses two instruments
for the attainment of its policy goals: a '' policy--the optimal intervention
index and an     policy--the optimal stock of money at the beginning of each
period. The general optimization procedure would then solve simultaneously
for the optimal combination of M and y so as to minimize the loss function.
In the following section we report and analyze the results of computer simulations

that are based on determining     according to Fischer's specification of
"active" monetary policy. We have experimented with the other two alternative
monetary rules. It turns out that, at least for the range of parameters that
have been assumed, the resulting optimal intervention index is almost in-
variant among the various monetary rules for the choice of Mt and thus, for
ease of exposition, we report only simulations using Fischer's rule. It is
also relevant to note that under rational expectations the precise specification
of the Mt policy is completely irrelevant for the key results; for an explicit
demonstration of this point see Aizeninan (1980).
                                                   9


            II. 3 The     Optimal Intervention Index
            Having outlined    the objective function we now turn to the solution

 of the optimal intervention index which will be denoted by y. To simplify

 the computations we approximate             the   discrepancy between consumption and   ex-
 pected income by the first two terms of a Taylor expansion of equation (14).

 Thus


 (14')         [c —                Eu — (1   - i)akOly
                      E(Yt)]

 where the expansion is carried out around a zero value of the shocks.5 In

 equation (14') 0       denotes    the sum of all shocks, that is,

              0     1+X+E—         (S




 and,    under full flexibility of exchange rates (when 'y=l), money market equilibrj

 implies that the percentage fall in the exchange rate equals 0.

          Minimization of the loss function requires that the value of y in              (14')
 is   chosen so as to minimize the squared discrepancy between p and (1 —
                                                                                     y)akO.
 This minimization amounts to computing the ordinary least squares estimate
of a regression of p on ck0. It follows that the optimal intervention index
1* is

 (16)         * =1    —   cov(p,0)
                               2
                            cka0

and when all shocks are independent of each other, the optimal intervention
index    becomes:



       5The expansion is around zero in order to ensure that the approximation
would be around the expected value of the function; thus we approximate
e by (1 + p) and thereby we have that E(e) = 1. Likewise, as was shown in
footnote 2, a2 a. It should be noted that in computing the loss
function, the second moment of the distributions is much more relevant than
the mean and thus the choice of the mean may be made on the basis of con-
venience.
                                              10


                                 2
                              a
(16')       1* = 1 —
                          2          2
                       ak[a +a
                                     (x-e—)

         2.is                                        .
                                                                              2
where           expressed as the sum of the variance of the real shock a and

the variance of the effective monetary shock                       The intuition under-

lying equations (16) and (16') can be provided in terms of the signal extraction

problem which is faced by the policymaker given the assumed informational

structure. From his knowledge of the intervention rule and roni the observed

change   in the exchange rate, the policymaker can infer the magnitude of         the

global   shock e. It is assumed that only the value of e is known but
not the individual components of the global shock. The signal extraction

problem amounts to an attempt to estimate the unobserved value of the real shock

  from the known value of 0 (that is inferred from the change in the exchange rate).

         Inspection of (16) and (16') reveals that when            = 0 so that the

disturbances are composed only of effective monetary shocks, y* = 1           and the

optimal   exchange rate regime is that of complete flexibility. On the other
extreme for which a2             = 0     so that the disturbances are entirely of a
                       (X+c—ô)
real origin,     the optimal intervention index is set to equal       zero and the
optimal   exchange rate   regime is       that of fixed rates.7 In general, when both




       6Since the effective foreign price shock x (which is composed of the
shock to foreign prices, x1 and the shock to purchasing power parities, x2)
exerts similar effects as shocks to the excess demand for money,   - 5, their
sum (+—S) is referred to as the effective monetary shock. Since       repre-
sents a chnqe in taste, wa assume that the objective Function remains invariant
with respect to this shock. If the objective function iere to depend on , we
would have had to assume that there are no shocks to money demand. In that
case the effective monetary shock should be read as x— instead of x-l-E—5.


          7From (16) and (16'), when the effective monetary shock is zero,

   = 1 —        where ck denotes the marginal propensity to save (hoard) out of

transitory income. When ctk = 1, the loss function is minimized when                  =   0.
For ck < 1, y is set to equal zero since we rule out negative values.
                                             11



types of shocks are present, the optimal intervention index is within the

range (0,1) and the optimal exchange rate system corresponds to neither of

the extremes of a completely fixed or of a completely flexible rate regime.

In that case the optimal system is an intermediate system, i.e., a system

of an optimal managed float.

          The   magnitude of the optimal intervention index depends on the      charac-

teristics of the shocks. As may         be   inferred from ecuation (16), as long as
the covariance between i       and   (ii-I-X+c-S) is positive, the optimal intervention
index   depends negatively on the variance of the real shock. Thus,

(17)        .< 0.
                 11




High variance of real shocks, ceteris oaribus, tends to raise the desirability

of greater fixity of exchange rates. Small economies, and in particular

developing countries, tend to have concentrated       production patterns and
thus, are       likely to have higher variance of real shocks than more diversified
economies. Ceteris paribus, these economies will find it optimal to have
greater    fixity of exchange rates.

          Similarly, equation (16) implies that as long as the covariance between

the effective monetary shock (+-S) and the global shock (ii+x+€-5) is positive,

the intervention index depends positively on the variance of the effective

monetary    shock. Thus,

(18)             2
                          >0
                  (x-6)
High variance of the effective monetary shock tends to raise the desirability

of greater flexibility of exchange rates.

          Equation (16) also implies a definite relationship between ck--the
                                           12



propensity to save out of transitory income——and the optimal intervention

index. As long as the covariance between           and (T.1+x+€-6) is positive, a

higher value of ctk   is   associated with a higher value of y*.


(19)             0


Thus, high speed of adjustment to asset disequilibrium (high c) and low velocity

of circulation (high k) tend to raise the desirability of greater flexibility

of exchange rates. This result may be rationalized by noting that the effect

of any given value of the real shock on the excess flow demand for money

depends positively on ck. Since the desirability of greater flexibility in-

creases with the extent of monetary shocks, and since the monetary disequilibrium

which corresponds to a given real shock is larger the higher is the saving

propensity, it follows that      the   effect of cik on -y is similar to the effect

of a rise in the variance of the effective monetary shock.

        From equation (16') it is clear that the results in (17), (18) and (19)

must hold when the various shocks are independent of each other. Further,

inspection of equations (16) and (16') suggests that what is relevant for

the optimal intervention index is not the absolute macTnitude of the variances

of the various shocks but rather their relative magnitude. In general, when

the ratio between the variances of the effective monetary shock and the

real shock approaches infinity (either because the former approaches infinity

or because the latter approaches zero) the optimal exchange rate system is

that of freely flexible rates. Likewise, when the same ratio approaches

zero   (either because the variance of the effective monetary shock approaches
zero or because the variance of the real shock approaches infinity) the
optimal exchange rate system is that of fixed rates.
        Since the optimal intervention index depends negatively on the
variance of real shocks and positively on the variance of the effective
                                            13


monetary shock, it is clear that its dependence on the covariance between

these two types of shocks is ambiguous since it depends on the relative

magnitudes of the two variances. Using equation (16) it can be shown that

                                             2 —       2
(20)          sign _______________ =   sign(a      a
                                             it        (x--c—)

Thus, if the variance of the real shock exceeds the variance of the effective
monetary shock, a rise in the value of the covariance between these shocks

results in a higher value of the optimal intervention index and raises the

desirability of greater flexibility of exchange rates. This result may be

interpreted     by noting that when the covariance between the two types of

shocks is zero while the variance of the real shocks is large relative to that of

the    effective monetary shock, the optimal intervention index is low since the
optimal exchange rate regime is close to that of a fixed exchange rate. Under
these circumstances, a rise in the covariance between the shocks implies that
any given real shock is now being accompanied by a monetary shock. The         induced

rise    in the importance of the monetary shock results in a higher value

of the optimal intervention index, and increases the desirability of greater

flexibility of exchange rates. A similar result as in (20) also applies

to the analysis of the dependence of the optimal intervention index on the

correlation     between the two   types of shocks.

          11.4 Illustrative Computations

          The   analysis of the properties and the determinants of the   optimal

intervention      index was based on a Taylor approximation of the loss function.
As is    obvious, the accuracy of this approximation depends negatively on
the    magnitudes of the shocks. While the qualitative conclusions do not

depend on the accuracy of the approximation, the quantitative estimates

might    be   somewhat affected. To gain insight into the precise quantitative
                                      14


magnitude of the optimal intervention index we report in Table 1 illustrative
computations for the case in which the shocks are independent of each other.8
These   computations are performed for alternative values of the propensity

to   save out of transitory income as well as for alternative assumptions
concerning   the magnitudes of the various shocks as measured by the standard

deviations o and               These results illustrate the negative dependence

of * on c-—the standard error of the real shock as well as the positive
dependence of y on             -—the standard error of the effective monetary

shock,and on ak——the propensity to save out of transitory income.

         In computing the optimal intervention index in Table 1, it was assumed

that the covariances among the various shocks were zero. In Table 2 we allow

for various covariances among some of the shocks and we report the resulting

optimal intervention index. Consider first the comparison between panels A

and B of Table 2. In panel A all three shocks are assumed to be of the

magnitude of 3 percent while in panel B all three shocks are assumed to be

of the magnitude of 9 percent. As is apparent, tripling of the magnitudes

of the shocks while maintaing their ratios constant, does not seem to have

a significant effect on the optimal intervention index. This illustrates

the proposition that the optimal   intervention index depends on the ratios
of   the various shocks rather than on their actual magnitude.

         Panels C, D and E of Table 2 illustrate the effects of changing the

ratio among the various disturbances. When the magnitudes of the foreign

price disturbance or of the domestic monetary disturbance are high relative




       81n these computations the optimal intervention index was obtained by using
equation (14) in the loss function (12) and minimizing with respect to y.
We are indebted to Michael Bazdar±ch for helpful assistance in the computations.
                                           15



                                        TABLE 1

 OPTIMAL MANAGED FLOAT FOR ALTERNATIVE VALUES OF REAL AND EFFECTIVE
           MONETARY DISTURBANCES AND SAVING PROPENSITIES




Nx+—
u        .01   .03
                     xk =
                       .05
                             .5
                                  .07     .09     .01   .03
                                                              ctk = 1
                                                                .05     .07   .09

.01      .0    .80     .92        .96     .98     .50   .90     .96     .98   .99
.03      .0    .47     .69        .80     .87     .10   .50     .74     .85   .90

.05      .0    .0      .0         .33     .53     .04   .27     .50     .67   .77

.07      .0    .0      .0         .0      .25     .02   .16     .34     .50   .63

.09      .0    .0      .0         .0      .0      .01   .10     .24     .38   .51
                                         16


                                    TABLE 2

            OPTIMAL MP.NAGED FLOAT FOR ALTERNATIVE VALUES OF
                  DISTURBANCES AND THEIR COVARIANCES



ov(,c-ó)                     A                                    B
            a .03;a          =.03;a =.03; ak=1      a =.09;a     =.O9;Y     .09;   ak=1
             ii         c—cS                         u      c—cS        X
cov(x,p)    —.6    —.3       0     .3         .6     —.6   —.3     0        .3      .6


 —.6        .33    .66      .78    .83        .87    .35   .67    .78       .84     .87
 —.3        .42    .61      .71    .77        .81    .42   .62    .71       .77     .81

   0        .44    .58      .67   .72         .76    .45   .59    .67       .73     .76

   .3       .46    .57      .64   .69         .73    .46   .57    .64       .69     .73

   .6       .47    .56      .62   .67         .70    .47   .56    .62       .67     .71




 —.6       1.0    1.0     1.0 1.0         1.0        .0    .0     .03       .10     .16

 —.3        .98    .99      .99   .99         .99    .0    .06    .12       .17    .22
   0        .87    .89      .91   .92         .93    .08   .14    .18       .22     .26
  .3        .79    .83      .85   .87         .88    .15   .19    .23       .26     .29
  .6        .75    .78      .81   .83         .85    .19   .23    .26       .29    .32




 —.6        .94    .95      .96   .97         .97
 —.3        .90    .92      .93   .94         .95
   0        .87    .89      .91   .92         .93
  .3        .84    .87      .88   .90         .92
  .6        .82    .85      .87   .89         .90
                                         17


to the other shocks (panels C    and   E, respectively) the   optimal   intervention
index is   close to unity and thus, the optimal regime is closer to that of a

freely   flexible rate.   On the other hand, when the magnitude    of the real
shock   is high relative to the other shocks (panel D), the optimal inter-
vention index is low and the optimal exchange rate regime is closer         to that

of fixed exchange rates.

         The various panels of Table 2 also illustrate the effects of the co—

variances among foreign and domestic disturbances. Generally speaking, a

positive covariance between foreign price shocks and domestic monetary

shocks tends to raise the optimal intervention index and thereby lower the

desirability of fixed rates. Consistent with the results in equation (19),

the effect of a positive covariance between foreign price shocks and domestic

real shocks is ambiguous and depends on the sign of the difference between

the variance of the real shock and the variance of the effective monetary

shock. When this difference is negative, as in panels C and E, a rise in

cov(x,) is associated with a decline in y. Likewise, when this difference

is positive, as in panel D, a rise in cov(X,) results in a higher value of

the optimal intervention index.

         11.5 Balance of Paytrnts Variability

         The logic underlying the optimal degree of exchange rate management

is that the optimal response to monetary shocks differs from the optimal

response to a real shock. Monetary shocks are best dealt with through ex-

change rate changes while real shocks are best dealt with through trade

flows. Using the terminology of Mundell (1973) and Laffer (1973), under

the fixed exchange rates the current account (which equals the balance of

payments in the absence of capital flows) cushions the effects of real

shocks. As a result, large variability of real shocks yields large variability
                                                  18


of the balance of payments. In what follows we examine                          the   variability of

the    balance of payments under the optimal degree of managed float.
          We first note that the discrepancy between consumption and expected

income which is the key element in the objective function (12), can be
written as

                                       —                   —
(21)         [c — E(YtH =         (c       Yt)
                                                 +
                                                     (Yt       E(Yt))

The first term on the right-hand side denotes the deficit in the trade

balance (which equals the balance of payments in the absence of capital flows)

and    the second term denotes transitory income. Minimization of the loss
function amounts to choosing the optimal intervention index so as to minimize
the average squared deviation of transitory income from the balance of pay-
ments deficit.          Transitory income is iy and the balance of payments deficit

is (1 -    y)ck8y   which measures the fraction of money market disequilibrium

that is not allowed to be cleared through exchange rate changes. It follows

that the variance        of the balance of paynnts,                     can   be expressed as the

variance of (1 -        )ctkOy.   Substituting equation (16') for the optimal value

of y (under the assumption that the shocks are independent of each other)

yields equation (22) as the expression for the variance of the optimal

balance    of payments

                        (a
                             22
(22)         a* =
                         a0

or, expressed in terms of the standard deviation,
                         2

(22')               =
                        —-
                        a0

Thus,    given the variability of the global shock 0, a rise in the weight                          of
                                         19


real variability in total variability increases the variability of the optimal

balance of payments. This relationship suggests that, ceteris paribus,

countries for which real variability comprises a relatively large share of

total variability should hold larger stock of international reserves in order

to be able to facilitate the relatively high variance in the optimal balance

of payments.

         11.6 The Capital Account

         An important limitation of the analysis in the previous sections has

been the assumed absence of an integrated world capital market which reflects

itself in the capital account of the balance of payments. As a result, the
previous analysis identified the trade balance with the balance of payments.
While   such   a simplification might   be   appropriate for economies with severe
limitations    on access to world capital markets, it may not represent the

conditions faced by developed countries. In what follows we introduce some

elements of the capital account.

         It is assumed that the economy faces       a perfect world capital market
in   which it can borrow and lend at a fixed rate of interest. Suppose that

the desired ratio of money to securities depends on the rate of interest

and, due to the assumed fixity of the world rate of interest this ratio is

also fixed. Since the economy may be a net debtor or a net creditor in the

world capital market, the value of its permanent output need not equal the

value of its permanent income. The analysis simplifies considerably by

assuming that the world rate of interest is deterministic since in that case

the stochastic characteristics of output are similar to those of income.9




         9Flood (1979) analyzes the implications of stochastic interest rates
on   the choice of the exchange rate system.
                                          20


As a result, the previous analysis which minimized the squared deviation of

consumption   from permanent output remains relevant even though the concepts
of   income and output need not coincide. The only difference that has to be

kept in mind is that when the economy has an access to world capital markets

the previous analysis applies to the current account rather than to the

overall balance of payments.

         The signal extraction problem is similar to that in section 11.3.

Individuals are assumed to observe the global shock 0            i.i++c-5, from which

they attempt to estimate the real shock component           and, thereby,   the   value

of transitory income ity (where denotes the estimated real shock given the
realization of 0). The least squares estimate of the real shock is:



(23)        E(pI0) =
                       cov(i,0)
                          (10




which,   when multiplied by y, provides the estimated value of transitory

income. In the previous analysis we argued that the optimal policy should

aim at minimizing the squared discrepancy between transitory income and the
current account (which was equal to the balance of payments). Suppose now

that, given the rate of interest, portfolio holders wish to add to their

holdings of securities a fraction         of their estimated transitory income.

Under these circumstances, only a fraction (1 —        ) of the current account
should be offset by monetary flows, and the analogous equation to (14') be-

comes


                                  - (1 — y)cLkO -   cov(p,0)       +   constant
(24)        [c - E(Yt)]
                                                        6
where the constant in (24) is independent of the current values of the

shocks and of y, and where the term [          cov(i,0)/c1]yQ   represents the desired
                                                21


change in security holdings given the (conditional) estimate of transitory
income. Minimizing the squared value of (24) with respect to y yields the
optimal intervention index:

(25)          = 1   —
                        (1   —
                                  )   cov(,O)



As is evident, when 8 = 0, the optimal intervention index in equation (25) is

identical to that in equation (16). Further, as long as the covariance between

 and (+X+c-S) is positive, a rise in the fraction 8 raises the optimal inter-

vention index. Thus


(26)



The higher is the share of transitory income that is absorbed by changes in

the holdings of securities., the larger becomes the desirability of greater

flexibility   of exchange rates. The rationale for that result is quite clear
since   a high value of 8 (which may be viewed as reflecting a high degree of

capital mobility) implies that a larger fraction of the real shocks can be

cushioned through the international capital market and, thereby, reducing

the need for international reserves flows.

        Finally, when some of the cushioning is provided by the capital account,

the standard deviation of the optimal balance of payments becomes

                                  2

(27)        aB (1 —          8)



which is smaller than the magnitude corresponding to the case of no capital

mobility. Again, in the special case for which 8 =    0,   equation (27) becomes

identical to equation (22').
                                            22


            11.7 The Supply of Output

            Up to this point we have assumed that variations in the supply of out-

put are determined exclusively by the characteristics of the stochastic shock

. In what       follows we modify the specification of ecrnation (1) and we assume

a supply function of the Lucas and Rapping (1969) variety. Accordingly, output

is assumed to depend on the ratio of realized to expected prices. Thus,



(28)              =
                      'Et-lt
where EtiP denotes the expected price level for period t based on the infor-

mation available at period t-l, h denotes the elasticity of the supply of output

with respect to the ratio of realized to expected prices and, as before, u         de-
notes a stochastic disturbance. The specification in equation (28) may be

rationalized in terms of models which allow for a confusion between relative

and absolute price changes like in Lucas (1973) as well as in terms of models

which postulate short—term fixity of nominal wages, e.g., Fischer (1977). Using

the first two terms of a Taylor expansion, the supply of output in equation (28)

can    be   approximated as


(29)                  y[l + u + h(X +


where S denotes the percentage change in the exchange rate, i.e., St 9nS —               LnS1.
            Under full   flexibility   of exchange rates, changes in the rate ensure that

the money market clears. Thus,          analogously   to equation (6),



(30)          kYe =
                            M
                              t

where, from equation (4'), Stp*e< designates the price level. Differentiating
                                             23



equation (30) logarithmically and using equations (15) and (29) for Mt and

the change in the exchange rate may be expressed as



'31'/         -        l+h               —
                                               t
          The equality in equation (31) between the change in the exchange rate

and the sum of the shocks B, is confined to the case in which the exchange

rate is fully flexible. Under managed float                      = yB, and the s.pply of output

becomes


(29')
            Yy[l++h(x_ye)]
Using the previous expressions for the values of consumption and output, the

discrepancy between consumption and expected income may be approximated by


(32)         [ct —   E(Yfl '   [p + hX   —   {(1   —   i)ctk   ÷ yh}01y


In this formulation, p + hX may      be      referred to as a real shock. It is

composed of two terms: the first is the genuine output supply shock p. while

the second is induced by the effective foreign price shock x that is translated

into changes in output through the supply elasticity h. Thus, in addition to

its direct monetary effect on the price level, x contributes to output variations.

It is noteworthy that in the special case for which h=0, the value of B reduces

to the one obtained in the previous analysis, and the real shock reduces to p.

        The optimal intervention index, y, is computed so as to minimize the

discrepancy between p + hX and [(1 - 'y')ck +             yh]B.     It follows that


(33)
                        bh
where b denotes the regression coefficient of the real shock p + hX on B, i.e.,
                                                   24



                   cov(i + h,O)

                            0


As is evident, in the special case for which the value of the output elasticity

h is zero, equation (33) coincides with (16).

       As is revealed by equation (33), the magnitude of y* depends on the sto-

chastic structure of the economy and on whether c&——the propensity to save out

of transitory income, exceeds or falls short of h--the elasticity of output with

respect to the ratio of realized to expected prices. As long as ck > h, the

relation between y* and the variances of i and (E-5) is sixrtilar to the one
                            •            2                 •      •   2
analyzed before: a rise in a lowers y while a rise in a( raises it. On

the other hand, when ck < h, these relations are reversed and a rise in the

variance of (—c5) lowers it. The rationale for this reversal is that when the

value of h is high (relative to czk), changes in the price level which result

from unetary shocks induce relatively large changes in output. Thus, when

ck < h, monetary shocks act more like real shocks. Finally, since the foreign

price shock exerts both real and monetary effects, the dependence of y* on a2

depends on the variances of the real and the monetary shocks as well as on the

sign of ck -   h:


(34)                (ak —       h)[(1   + h)a2 -   h(l   + h)a2
          3a2
               x
                                                 25



III. Optimal Managed Float with Tradable and Non-Tradable Goods

           The preceding analysis was confined to an economy whose production

consists only of commodities that are traded internationally. This assumption

implied that, except to random deviations from purchasing power parities,

the domestic price level was tied to the foreign price. In this section we

extend the analysis to an economy which produces both traded and non—traded

goods. This production structure relaxes the constraint that was imposed by

the small country assumption. Due to its relative size the economy is a

price taker in the world traded goods market but it is obviously large in the

market for its own non—traded goods. Thus, the relative price of non—traded

goods may       not    be viewed as given to the small economy but rather it is deter-

mined endogenously by the market—clearing conditions. In extending the

analysis we first specify the stochastic characteristics of the production

structure       and then proceed to determine the optimal intervention index.
           111.1 Equilibrium in the Market for Non-Traded Goods
           Production of traded and non-traded goods is assumed to be carried
along   a production possibility frontier which is assumed to be concave to

the origin. Denoting the nominal prices of traded and non-traded goods by

     and   P'    respectively, we define the relative price of non-traded goods

by   q pN/pT Production of traded goods xT is                 assumed to depend negatively

on   the relative price according to

(35)            XT =   X
                           T      p
                               (q)e

where p, which denotes the real shock, is defined in equation (1). Pro-
duction of non-traded goods               is assumed to depend positively on the

relative    price according to

(36)              =    xN(q)e         ;   '-- N(—a2/2,   a)
                                                     26


where        denotes a stochastic shock that is specific to the production of
non—traded goods. Thus, p may be viewed as an aggregative real shock
which moves the transformation schedule in a uniform way while w may be
viewed      as a sector specific real shock.

            On the demand side it          is   assumed that the demand for the two   goods
is    homothetic and that the share of spending on non—traded goods
depends negatively on the relative price. Measuring income as the value of
production in terms of traded goods and denoting the share of spending
on non—traded goods by ,             we    can describe the equilibrium in that market (when
income equals spending as under flexible exchange rates) by equation (37):

(37)           i(q)[qXN (q)ew + XT (q)]ep           = qXN (q)ew+p


In    equation (37), the left-hand side denotes the demand for non-traded goods
while the right-hand side describes the supply. Equation (37) implies that
the    equilibrium relationship between the               relative price and the specific
real    shock may    be   expressed as


(38)           q =   qe-mW

where q denotes the equilibrium relative price in the absence of shocks

and where m denotes the elasticity of the relative price with respect to

the relative price shock, i.e.,

                                 1
               itt
                                            N       T
                          —   i) + 1   +        +

where   n    denotes the elasticity of the share of spending on non—traded goods (defined

to be positive) and where                 and       denote, respectively, the elasticities

of supply of non-traded and traded goods with respect to their relative price.

            111.2 The Optimal Intervention Index

            When the exchange rate is freely flexible, the demand for real balances
                                                      27


 equals   the supply at each moment of time. Assuming, as before, that the                     de-
mand is proportional to income and                   is   subject to a stochastic shock c, money

market equilibrium obtains when


                   N      w     T
                                                 =          t
 (39)        k[qX (q)e + X (q)]e
                                                     stip*e>e
where   M is defined in        equation (15)10 and where the denominator on               the right-
hand    side denotes the price level P. The parameter 0 denotes the percentage

change in the exchange rate that is necessary to ensure stock equilibrium

in the money market. By differentiating equation (39) and using (38) for

the equilibrium relative price we note that 9,                    the   percentage change in the

exchange rate that is required to clear the money market under                     a freely   flexible

exchange rate regime is11


(40)           =       + < +   -    5   + ij(l   -    m)



As before, 0 denotes the global shock. In this case, however, it also con-

tains terms that reflect the effects of changes in the relative price which

result from the various shocks. It is relevant to note that when the

specific real shock (w) is zero, the required change in the exchange rate

is, as before, 1I+X+E—cS.

          The above analysis characterized the equilibrium under a freely flexible

exchange rate regime. When the exchange rate is managed, only a fraction y

of the stock disequilibrium in the money market is allowed to be eliminated

through changes in the exchange rate. In terms of equation (39), when the




      10Since the economy produces both goods, permanent income in this case
is defined as the value of production in terms of traded goods when the
relative price is q.

           deriving equation (40) we have used the envelope theorem for move-
ments along the transformation curve according to which     -           = 0.          -
                                              28


exchange rate is managed the domestic currency price of traded goods be-

comes p =                          and the money market remains in stock disequilibrium.
               St_lp*e<e'O,
Under such circumstances, the value of income diverges from the value of

spending by the resultant flow demand for real balances (as indicated by

equation (13)). Consequently, the demand for non-traded goods is not de-

scribed any more by the left-hand side of equation (37)—-which was only

appropriate for a freely flexible exchange rate regime. Rather, the demand

for non-traded goods is equal to

                            c(L -M)
              (q)       —
                                   T
                                  Pt

where        denotes the value of output in terms of traded goods. By substituting

the previous expressions for Y, Lt                 and P and equating the demand for

non-traded goods to the supply, we obtain the equilibrium relative price of

non—traded goods:


(41)         q=qe
                0
                       —       — (1 —   vez

where
                        mctk
             Z —                        < 1
                    imctk + (1 —




Equation (41) reveals that the equilibrium relative price is influenced by

both the specific shock w and the global shock 0. The sensitivity of the

equilibrium price to the specific shock depends on the elasticities of demand

and supply which determine the value of the parameter m. This sensitivity

is independent of the exchange rate regime. On the other hand, the dependence

of the equilibrium price on the global shock depends on the intervention

index   y.   The   higher the value of y the smaller is the effect of the global
                                        29


shock. In the extreme case for which y = 1, the exchange rate is freely

flexible and the equilibrium relative price depends only on the specific

real shock w. In that case equation (41) coincides with (38).

         In order to find the optimal intervention index we turn to the speci-

fication of the objective function. We first note that the objective function

 (12) needs to be specified in greater care once there are traded and non—traded

goods. In order to avoid an index nl.]mber problem we express the value of

consumption and production in terms of the general price index which is

assumed to be a Cobb—Douglas function of the prices of the       two goods. Thus,
if we denote the values of spending and income (nasured in terms of traded

goods) by        and ' respectively,   their corresponding values in terms of

the general price index are c/q' and Y/q and         the   loss function becomes




            E[—- E(—)]2

Substituting the previous expressions for the real values of consumption and

income and   expending   in Taylor series we approximate the discrepancy between

real   consumption and expected real income by

(42)
             [- E()] [( + ) k((p
             q       q
                                              +   ) + (x + E -     - @y +
                                                                                   q0
where y denotes the permanent value of income in terms of traded goods and
where   q denotes the percentage change in the equilibrium relative price of

non—traded goods. In equation (42), ii+w and (+€-5-O-y+qtp) may be referred to,

respectively, as the real shock and the monetary shock)2 Using equation (40)



           may be seen, the real shock does not include the effect of the
relative price change, q, since, due to the envelope theorem, the change in
price does not affect the value of production. The effect of q is classified
as a monetary shock since it induces a change in the price level (equal to i4i).
                                                      30



as the definition of the global shock U and substituting from eauation (41)

for the relative price change, the discrepancy between consumption and

permanent income can be expressed as

                c        Y                                                 —
(42')                                [u + wit)   —   (1— y)(l —
                                                                     it)z)cLkO
               —t—
               q
                   E(—)]
                     q                                                     q0


            Minimizing   the loss function amounts to choosing i so as to minimize
the squared discrepancy between .t+wit) and (1-y) (l-it)z)c&O. Following the same
logic of the signal extraction problem of the previous analysis, individuals
who observe the global shock U (through its effect on the exchange rate)
attempt      to estimate the     real    shock component which in this case is composed

of   the ordinary real shock p plus                    which represents the effect of the

specific real shock on the real value of aggregate output in terms of the

general price level. Computing the least squares estimate of relevantre—

gression coefficient yields the optimal intervention index:


                    =   —    +       i               cov(p+wit),O)
(43)
                                 1


         As in the earlier       sections, the magnitude of the optimal intervention
index depends on the structure of the economy. In general, the optimal value
of y* declines when the variance of the real shock rises. In this context
both 2 and a2 are viewed as real shocks. Also, consistent with the previous
        p   w
results a higher value of ctk            is   associated with a higher value of y.

        The new results of this section concern the                     relation between   the optimal

intervention        index and the share of the non-traded goods sector (which may
characterize the degree to which the economy is open), as well as between the
optimal     intervention index and the elasticities of demand and supplies of
                                      31


traded   and non—traded goods. It can be shown that as long as the covariance

between the real shock and the global shock is positive, a higher value of

is associated with a lower value of y*:


(44)                0



Thus,   a high share of spending on (and production of) non-traded goods, tends
to   reduce the desirability of greater flexibility exchange rates. This result

seems to conflict with some of the well-known arguments on the relationship

between the openness of the economy and the optimal exchange rate regime

[e.g., McK.innon (1963)1. Likewise, by noting that m—-the elasticity of the

relative price of non-traded goods--depends negatively on n,       and T, it

follows that


(45)            >   0,       >   0,         > 0




Thus, the   higher is the degree of flexibility in the structure of an economy

the larger becomes the need for increased flexibility of exchange rates.

         These results can be rationalized by noting from equation (41) that,

ceteris paribus, a given monetary shock induces a larger change in the relative

price of non—traded goods the higher is the relative share of that sector

and the lower are the elasticities of demand and supply. For a given exchange

rate the change in the relative price is reflected in a change in the nominal

price   of non—traded goods which in turn affects the aggregate price level in
proportion to the relative share .    The    induced change in the price level
mitigates   the initial disequilibrium and thereby reduces the need for ex-

change rate flexibility. When all goods are internationally traded so that

the internal relative price structure cannot be adjusted, the necessary

changes in the price level can only be obtained through changes in the exchange
                                         32


rate.    In contrast, the presence of non—traded goods provides for a flexible

internal price structure which is capable of inducing some of the necessary

adjustments in the price level. It follows that the need for exchange rate

flexibility is reduced the higher is the degree of price level flexibility

which, in turn, depends negatively on the elasticities of demand and supply,
                                                               13
and positively on the relative share of non—traded goods.

         This discussion of the relationship between internal price flexibility

and the optimal exchange rate regime has implications for the choice between

tariffs and quotas as alternative forms of coirnnercial policy. In some respects

the imposition of an import quota (in contrast with the imposition of an

import   tariff) may   be viewed as transforming a traded coirifflodity whose relative

price   is   determined in world markets into a non-traded commodity whose price

is   determined in the domestic   market. It follows that the desirability of

exchange     rate flexibility is lower for economies with import quotas than for
economies with equivalent import tariffs since the former enjoy a greater
degree of internal price flexibility than the latter. Put differently,
ceteris paribus, a rise in the degree of exchange rate flexibility provides
an incentive to convert quota protection into tariff protection.
       Inspection of equation (43) and its comparison with equation (16) re-
veals that     even when the specific shocks are zero, the optimal intervention

index for an economy with non—traded goods is smaller than the corresponding

coefficient for an economy that produces only traded goods. Therefore, the

mere existence of non-traded goods raises the desirability of greater fixity

of exchange rates. The explanation is that even in the absence of specific



       13The conventional result that    depends positively on y reflects the
assumption that both the foreign currency price of traded goods and the domestic
currency price of non—traded goods are given. In that case changes in the ex-
change rate are the only source for changes in the price level and, as a result,
the required change in the exchange rate is larger the smaller is the share of
traded goods (i.e., the higher      is y).
                                       Our analysis shows that this dependence
is reversed when the price of non—traded goods is flexible.
                                          33



supply shocks changes in demand will be absorbed in part by changes in the

price of non—traded goods. The induced change in the price level will

mitigate   the initial disequilibrium and thereby reduce the need for exchange
rate flexibility. Finally, it can be seen that in the special case for which
  =   0, equation (43) coincides with (16).


IV. Concluding Remarks
          In this paper we have analyzed aspects of the economics of managed
float. We have shown that the choice of the optimal exchange rate regime
depends on the nature      and   the origin of the stochastic shocks that   affect

the    economy. Generally, the higher is the variance of real       shocks which

affect    the supply of goods, the    larger   becomes the desirability of fixity
of    exchange rates. The rationale for that implication is that the balance

of paynnts serves as a shock        absorber which mitigates the effect of real
shocks    on consumption. The importance of this factor diminishes       the larger
is    the economy's access to world capital markets.       On. the other hand, the

desirability of exchange rate flexibility increases the larger are the van-

ancaes of the shocks to the demand for money, to the supply of uoney, to

foreign prices and    to   purchasing power parities. All of these shocks exert

a similar effect and their sum was referred to as the effective monetary

shock. We have also shown that the desirability of exchange rate flexibility

increases the larger is the propensity to save out of transitory income.

When we extended the analysis to an economy which produces traded and non—

traded goods it was shown that the       desirability   of exchange rate flexibility

diminishes the higher is the share of non—traded goods relative to traded goods
and the lower are the elasticities of demand and supply of the two goods.
         As a general comment it     should be noted that in this paper monetary
                                     34


policy   and foreign exchange intervention were treated as being close sub-

stitutes. In fact, as a first approximation, in our framework, these two

policies are non—distinguishable. It is believed that this feature of the
model is much closer to reality than would be the other extreme in which

monetary policy and foreign exchange policies are viewed as two independent

policy instruments.

         The special role of the exchange rate should also be noted. In our

framework the exchange rate (and thereby the price level) is determined to

a large extent by considerations of asset market equilibrium. This character-

istic is in accord with the recent developments of the theory of exchange

rate determination.

         An important characteristic of the approach is that the choice of an

exchange rate regime is an integral part of a general optimization process.

It   calls, therefore, for an explicit specification of the objective function
as   a prerequisite to the analysis. This feature is emphasized since such
a specification of the objective function has been neglected by much of the

writings in the area.

         A limitation of the analysis is that except for the discussion in

section 11.6, the model did not incorporate explicitly the implications of

an integrated world capital market which reflects itself in the capital

account of the balance of payments and which prevents insulation from Sto-

chastic shocks to world interest rates. It should be emphasized, hoever,

that the mere access to world capital markets and the ability to   borrow   are

unlikely to alter the essentials of our analysis since they are unlikely to

eliminate the occasional need for using international reserves. Most countries

cannot expect to be able to borrow any amount at a given rate of interest.

Rather, the borrowing rate is likely to rise when the country's net debtor
                                         35



position rises. This rise reflects the deterioration of the quality of the

loans which is due to the deterioration of the economy's credit worthiness.

As a result, countries will find it useful to hold and use international reserves

in order to reduce the likelihood of facing a steeply rising cost of borrowing.

In that sense, the holdings of international reserves may be viewed as a form

of forward borrowing that is likely to continue even when capital markets

are highly integrated.

           It should be noted that the present specification of the nature of

the shocks is somewhat biased in favor of government intervention

since to some extent the shocks have been presund to originate from the

instability of the private sector rather than from the actions of government

policies.      Furthermore, the concept of the optimal intervention index that
is   implied by the optimal managed float was developed as a policy prescription

for the monetary authorities. This was motivated by realism and could be

rationalized     in terms of the presumption that, compared with the private
sector, the monetary authorities possess superior information concerning
their own actions. In principle, however, much of the optimal mix could
also be performed by the private sector.
          Finally, it is relevant to note that as a practical matter it is un-
likely that a policymaker will be capable of implementing policies with
sufficient precision so as to distinguish between cases in which, for example,
     =   0.2 and those for which     = 0.3. Thus, when the optimal intervention
index    turns out to be about 0.3   or less, it is likely that the practical
policy    would be that of a fixed exchange rate; likewise, when the optimal

intervention index turns out to be about 0.7 or more, it is likely that the

practical policy would be that of flexible exchange rates. In that sense

the choice of an exchange rate regime may be viewed as the outcome of the

search for a second—best solution and the analysis in this paper should be

interpreted as providing a qualitative guide     for   such a choice.
                                             36


                                       REFERENCES

Aizenxnan, Joshua, "Optimal Managed Flexibility of Exchange Rate," un-
          published manuscript,      University of Chicago, 1980.

Boyer,    Russell S., "Optimal Foreign Exchange Market Intervention," Journal
          of   Political Economy 86,    no. 6, Decextber 1978, 1045—55.
Buiter,   Willem, "Optimal Foreign Exchange Market Intervention with           Rational
          Expectations,"     unpublished manuscript, London School of Economics, 1977.

Enders, Walter and Harvey E. Lapan, "Stability, Random          Disturbances    and the

          Exchange Rate Regime," Southern Economic Journal 45, July 1979, 49—70.

Fischer, Stanley, "Stability and Exchange Rate System in a Monetarist Model

          of the Balance of Payments," in R. Z. Aliber (ed.), The Political

          Economy of Monetary Reform, Montclair, NJ: Allanheld, Osmun           and   Co.,

          1976, 59—73.

__________ "Long—Term         Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimal Policy
          Rule,"   Journal   of   Political Economy 85, 1, February   1977,   191—206.

Flood, Robert P., "Capital Mobility and the Choice of Exchange Rate System,"

          International Economic Review 20, no. 2, June 1979, 405—16.

Frenkel, Jacob A., "An Analysis of the Conditions Necessary for a Return to

          Greater Fixity of Exchange Rates," Report for the Department of

          State, U.S. Government, Contract No. 1722—520100, 1976.

                 "The Demand for International Reserves Under Pegged and Flexible

          Exchange Rate Regimes and Aspects of the Economics of Managed Float,"

          in H. Frisch and G. Schwödianen (eds.), The Economics of Flexible

          Exchange Rates, Berlin: Duncker and Huxrtblot, supplement to Kredit

          und   Kapital,   Heft 6, 1980. Also reprinted in D. Bigman and        T. Taya

          (eds.), The Functioning of Flexible Exchange Rates: Theory, Evidence

          and Policy Implications, Canüridge: Ballinger, 1980.

Gray, JoAnna, "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal of

          Monetary Economics 2, no. 2, April 1976, 231-46.
                                          37


Kenen,    Peter B., "The Theory of Optimum Currency Areas: An Eclectic View,"
          in R. A. Mundell and   A.   K. Swoboda (eds.) Monetary Problem of the
          International   Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969,

          41—60.

Laffer,    Arthur B.,   "Two Arguments   for   Fixed Rates,"   in   H. G. Johnson and

          A. K. Swoboda (eds.) The Economics of Coitmon Currencies, London:

          Allen & Unwin, 1973.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation Trade-

          offs," American Economic Review 63, no. 3, June 1973, 326—34.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Leonard A. Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment and the

         Price Level," Journal of Political Economy 77, September/October 1969,

          721—54.

McKinnon, Ronald I., "Optimal Currency Areas," American Economic Review

         52, September 1963, 717—24.

Modigliani, Franco and Hossein Askari, "The International Transfer of Capital

         and the Propagation of Domestic Disturbances under Alternative Payment

         Systems," Banca Nazionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review 26, no. 107,

         December 1973, 295—310.

Mundell, Robert A., "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas," American Economic

         Review 51, November 1961, 509—17. Reprinted as Chapter 12 in his
         International Economics, 1968.

_________ "Uncommon Arguments for Common Currencies," in H. C. Johnson and
         A. K. Swoboda (eds.), The Economics of Common Currencies, London:

         Allen & Unwin, 1973.

Poole, William, "Optimal Choice of Monetary Instruments in a Simple Stochastic

         Macro—Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics 83, May 1970, 197-216.

Stein, Jerome L.., "The Optimum Foreign Exchange Market," American Economic

         Review 53, no. 3, June 1963, 384—402.
