                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS ON THE DISTRIBUTION
           OF INCOME AND WEALTH: THE UTAH EXPERIENCE,
                            1850—1900


                           J. R. Kearl

                         Clayne L. Pope

                      Working Paper No. 754




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                        September 1981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Development of the American Econonr. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #754
                                                    September 1981




    INTERGENERATIONAL EFFECTS OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME AND WEALTH:

                      TIlE UTAH EXPERIENCE, 1850-1900

                                    ABSTRACT


     The relationship between the wealth or income of parents and children

is an important economic issue in both positive and normative senses. In

this paper, we estimate elasticities of sons' income or wealth with respect

to the. wealth of their fathers for a sample of households in nineteenth

century Utah. We find the elasticity relating the wealth of fathers to

sons to range from .10 to .34 depending on the variables held constant

suchas occupation, age and residence. Elasticities based on observation

of the wealth of fathers and sons in the same year were higher than those

based on a lagged value of the fathers' wealth. The death of the father

prior to observation of the sons' wealth increased the elasticity about

three fold. The elasticity between the income of sons and wealth of

fathers was low (.09 to .21) but significant even though the sons' incomes

were observed fifteen years after the wealth of fathers. In general, the

data suggest a persistent relationship between the economic status of

parents and their children with substantial regression toward the mean so

that an economic elite was unlikely to be based upon intergenerational

transmission of economic success.




                                                      J. R. Kearl
                                                      Clayne L. Pope
                                                      Department of Economics
                                                      Brigham Young University
                                                      Provo, Utah 84601
                                                      (801) 378—2327
                                                                          2




              Intergenerational Effects on the Distribution

                          of Income and Wealth:

                     The Utah Experience, 1850-1900


     Does our economy create an aristocracy of wealth? Regression toward

the mean is a well established principle in statistics, biology and much

of the, natural world. But how quickly does the level of economic rewards

regress toward the mean between generations? This is an important economic

issue in both positive and normative senses. Social historians have

considered the question of intergenerational mobility to be central to

judgments that might be made about some ideal of social justice.' Socio-

logists have used large quantities of occupational data to examine inter-

generational mobility.2 Scholars concerned with the distribution of

income have been quickly led to consideration of parents' income, education

and IQ as well as less quantifiable factors upon the level of income of

children.3 The key issue is the extent to which each individual starts as

a "tabula rasa" upon which choices are made and combined with luck to

determine economic achievement. In most of this work, there is an implicit,

if not explicit, assumption that intergenerational influences conflict

with the ideals of social justice.

     There are, however, few studies that have explicitly measured inter-

generational correlations of income and wealth. Nenchik has examined the

relationship between the wealth of wealthy parents and their children

using a sample from Connecticut for a period from 1930 onward.4 He

estimates the elasticity between the wealth of parents and children to be

between .69 and .79 depending on the variables included in the regression
                                                                         3


and the estimating procedure. Such elasticities are consistent with

regression toward the mean but suggest that the process was quite slow

since an elasticity of 1.0 would imply that no regression toward the mean

had taken place. Certainly the level of wealth in the sample (only parents

with net wealth of more than $40,000 were in the sample) affected the

estimate of the elasticity. Flenchik also found that the number of siblings

affected the wealth of the child, presumably through division of the

parents' estate amàng more heirs.5 Lebergott has also examined intergen-

erational wealth movements for the very wealthy in a more casual way but

over a longer time period. He concludes that for his sample of very

wealthy, in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, there is substantial

regression toward the mean.6 Studies of intergenerational mobility for

England have been completed by Harbury, McMahon, and others. This research,

finding little intergenerational mobility, is also generally confined to

the very elite.7

     It is useful to divide the factors that influence the distribution of

economic rewards into three conceptual categories. There are, first, a

set of household or individual characteristics, such as education, occupa-

tion, place of residence or perhaps family size in some contexts, that can

be acquired or changed by individual decisions. Such characteristics,

which we label choice variables, involve decisions households make, often

in response to the signals of the marketplace. We assume that households

try to acquire those characteristics that maximize income and wealth.

Hence, an increase in the return to a particular characteristic (e.g. an

occupation) induces more households to obtain that characteristic.     This

movement (e.g. occupational change) would continue until the return to

that characteristic matches the cost of acquisition for the marginal
                                                                          4

household. That individuals respond to market signalled opportunities and

that the market responds to the choices that individuals make by making

the characteristic relatively less attractive serves to dilute the

able effect of choice variables upon the individual level, and consequently

upon the aggregate distribution, of wealth and income. In general, the

choice-market leveling process would be more pronounced on income, a flow,

than on wealth, a stock.

     Households also have characteristics which, in contradistinction to

choice variables, are not under the control of the individual and therefore

cannot evoke a choice-market leveling process although the market may

respond in a variety of ways to such characteristics. Characteristics

such as race, gender, IQ and birthplace are not matters of choice so that

a household may not be able to change these characteristics regardless of

the relative return or penalty associated with them. We consider such

variables as Ricardian since they share the essential characteristic that

land possessed in Ricardo's model of distribution--namely inelastic supply.

Clearly, such Ricardian characteristics as sex and IQ do affect the level

and distribution of income and wealth. In addition, an ex ante choice

variable is Ricardian ex post in the sense that one can choose a new

alternative but one cannot change the historical path of past choices nor

their cumulative effects. For example, a previous occupational choice may

affect current and future income; that previous choice is currently a

Ricardian characteristic since it cannot be changed regardless of the

return conditional on alternative choices in the past and even though the

characteristic itself may be changed.8 Or, for example, the wealth of a

household may be influenced by the decision and timing of a decision to

migrate to a particular place. The migration decision is volitional ex
                                                                         5


ante but may continue to affect the level of wealth long after the choice

has been made so that a clear difference in wealth positions is observable

between those who did and those who did not migrate to a particular place.9

     The final influence upon the level and distribution of income and

wealth is stochastic. Attempts to explain the distribution of earnings or

income with observable variables usually fall short of explaining as much

as fifty percent of the variance. Perhaps as a consequence, stochastic

theories of income distribution have been a dominant theme in the distri-

butional literature.'0 Moreover, if markets adjust quickly in ways

consistent with income or wealth maximizing choices, a model of income

determination comprised of choice variables and a random element would

yield results that suggest that the stochastic factors were all important

since the income differentials from different choices would have been

quickly narrowed by market forces.

     We have developed these arguments more extensively elsewhere and have

tried, in particular, to separate the three differing effects.11 In this

paper we push the analysis a different direction with some tentative

explorations about the nature and importance of intergenerational factors

in determining the individual level and aggregate distribution of income

and wealth. We view the impact of parents on the income or wealth of

their children as another kind of Ricardian effect. Parents' wealth or

income, their financing of educational investment for their children,

decisions about the number of siblings a child will have, parents' age at

 death and decisions about inter vivos gifts or inheritance are to a large

 degree, if not completely, beyond the control of children. Any of the

 mentioned parental characteristics as well as others may affect the distri-

 bution and level of wealth and income of children. It may be useful,
                                                                           6

 however, to consider separately the effects that such parental character-

 istics have on subsequent choices that children make from pure transfers

 of income or wealth between generations. We consider, then, in this paper

 general intergenerational correlations and attempt a partial decomposition

of these correlations into effects attributable to pure transfer and those

attributable to choices that children make. A residual category may

reflect the effect of parental characteristics on environment or perhaps

IQ issues that we also partially address.

     The following section considers more fully intergenerational rela-

tionships in the determinants of income and wealth. Next, the data set

collected for nineteenth-century Utah will be briefly described since we

test against these data. The major section of the paper will explore a

number of intergenerational patterns within the Utah economy of that

period. A short conclusion follows.


INTERGENERATIONAL TRANSMISSION OF ECONOMIC REWARI)S

     Parents   influence the income and wealth of their children through

many diverse channels. The principal task of the researcher is to tease

out the marginal effects on wealth and income of children of the various

intergenerational transmission mechanisms, and, importantly, to find the

interactive elements of the story. For example, parents may clearly

increase the wealth of their children through bequest. The extent of this

material inheritance is affected, however, by family size if the inherit-

ance pattern tends to be multigeniture. In general, one would expect

interactions between demographic variables, such as family size and death

age of parents and the mechanisms, such as material bequest, education,

occupational choice and IQ, by which parents influence the economic

success of their children. Indeed, the persistent demographic trends
                                                                         7


toward smaller families and longer individual life expectancy suggest

interesting possibilities in terms of intergenerational economic patterns.

     Does the trend toward fewer children increase or decrease economic

mobility between generations? It could be argued that the trend toward

the two-child family that seems to characterize modern industrialized

societies will reduce the intergenerational mobility especially if family

size is inversely correlated with income and education. The educational

level of the childrn is affected by the educational level of the parents.12

One would expect the decline in family size to tighten the relationship

between the educational levels of highly educated parents and their children.

Such parents will be able to invest more time and money in their fewer

children. One would also expect that parents would have more ego involve-

ment in the education of each child when there are fewer children. Thus,
                                   toward the mean in the educational levels
one might expect more regression

 of children relative to the educational levels of parents when family size

 is larger. If this is true, the decline in family size should reduce

 intergenerational economic mobility and increase the influence of parents

 on children's economic rewards.   It should be noted that families with

 lower levels of educational attainment are also likely to educate children

 to higher levels when family size is smaller. Thus, the asymmetric rela-

 tionship between the decline in family size and both income and educational

 levels serves to decrease economic mobility.

      Similar interactions between family size and occupational choice

 might be expected.13 Parents with high status occupations will have

 stronger effects on the occupational status of children if family size is

 small. Thus regression toward the mean of the occupational hierarchy is
                                                 occupational status families.
 reduced with smaller family size among higher
                                                                         8

It is doubtful that there are offsetting effects at the other end of the

occupational scale.

     Thus there are likely to be predictable relationships between family

size and education and occupation; similar arguments could be made for IQ.

These are all ways in which parents might affect children's characteristics,

either choice or Ricardian. However, direct material bequest is clearly a

way that parents with wealth can directly influence the wealth position,

and perhaps income position as well, of their children.

     Parents who happen to be in the upper strata of the income or wealth

distribution due to high educational attainment, high IQ, good occupational

choice or luck can prevent what regression toward the economic mean that

might be in store for their children by giving them wealth that will

ensure their relative position. Obviously, the strategy that parents

follow in inheritance disbursement will be crucial. Primogeniture, for

example, will tend to generate a more unequal distribution than a multi-

geniture system.14 Further, if parents offset the inequalities in the

economic condition of their children by giving larger inheritances to

children whose economic fortunes are less bright, they will narrow the

range of inequality and, at the same time, keep their children from moving

downward economically as might otherwise be the case.15 Larger family

size combined with multigeniture reduces the impact of inheritance. Since

the poor leave little or no wealth to their children, the downward trend

in family size interacts with inheritance to reduce intergenerational

economic mobility.

    Regression toward the mean occurs because parents who were economi-

cally successful are unable to pass on the characteristics (and luck) that

made them successful and those who were unsuccessful are similarly unable
                                                                         9


to pass on unsuccessful traits (and bad luck). It seems plausible that

smaller family size will reduce the overall regression toward the mean

across generations so that there will be less intergenerational economic

mobility, ceteris paribus.

     A common advertising theme for life insurance companies is to show

the son who would have gone to college to become a doctor if his father

had not died an early death leaving the family impoverished because of the

loss of the father's income stream. A common theme of TV dramas concerns

the schemes of children to do away with elderly parents who are consuming

their wished-for inheritance by refusing to die. The death age of the

parents is likely to affect the economic transmission mechanism between

generations just as family size does. The trend in life expectancy, to

the extent that it reflects some increase in adult life expectancy, gener-

ates two offsetting effects on intergenerational economic patterns.    The

reduction in the probability of the death of a father and (to a lesser

extent) mother during working age will tend to improve the economic posi-

tion of children. Conversely, the longer life expectancy with retirement

may have the effects of reducing the material inheritance of the children

from their parents.16

      Conjecture about the potential intergenerational economic relation-

 ships is a poor substitute for intergenerational data. Unfortunately,

 such data are quite rare. Intergenerational samples tend to be small,

 often concentrated in the most wealthy strata of the distribution and

 difficult to analyze. 1enchik's sample contained 173 cases suitable for

 regression. Brittaints data contain about 250 brothers so that there are

 fewer than 125 parents in the sample.17 Larger and more numerous samples
                                                    mechanism of economic
 are needed if the intergenerational transmission
                                                                          10

status is to be understood. The date for Utah in the nineteenth century

holds promise as one addition to the sparse intergenerational data bank.


UTAH DATA SET

     Nineteenth-century Utah is uniquely suited for the creation of an

intergenerational sample. This uniqueness is generated by the conjunction

of several data sources. The first of these is the U.S. census. The

censuses of 1850, 1860 and 1870 are unusual in that each contained question

about wealth. In 1850, the census marshal asked each household to estimate

the value of the real property of the household. In 1860 and 1870, the

marshal also requested, in addition, the value of personal property so

that the sum of the real estate and personal property give an estimate of

total wealth. The households were not to consider mortgage or liens

against the wealth so that the estimate is of gross wealth. The census

wealth estimate would probably be lower than gross wealth obtained from

probates since it is likely that individuals underestimated their personal

property for the census marshal because of the diversity of personal

wealth. The probate usually has some kind of itemization of personal

wealth and is, therefore, likely to be higher.18 The census also contains

data on occupation, birthplace, sex, city and county of residence, age and

household size. We have collected the census data described above on all

households in the Utah census for the 1850-1870 period. We then linked

together any households that appeared in more than one census. The linkage

was accomplished by hand rather than computer. Name spellings often

deviated since the census marshal wrote the names. Age, birthplace and

occupation were useful sources for linkage. We later used demographic

records to check the linkages made. During this period of time Utah was

growing rapidly due to migration of Mormons from the mid-western U.S. and
                                                                         11


northern Europe. Thus, of the 19,137 households appearing in the 1870

census, 2411 households also appear in the 1860 census; 211 households

also appear in 1850 but not 1860; while 480 households appear in all three

censuses.

     Most of the households of nineteenth-century Utah belonged to the

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons). The Church kept

extensive records of contributions made by members. Members were asked to

pay a tenth of their income to the Church. In some years, the Church

recorded their payment and the percentage this payment was of one tenth of

the households income.19 These Church records are obviously not a perfect

source of income estimation, but they do compare favorably with the few

alternatives. For example, an examination of the individuals who paid

income tax during the Civil War in the U.S. and contributions to the

Church indicate that the income estimated from the Church records would on

average be higher than the income estimated from the tax records. We have

collected data on all the individuals on the Church records for twelve

different years between 1855 and 1900. We have linked these records

together for a sample of 8600 individuals some of whom are also in the

census records.

     The Mormon Church encourages its members to do extensive genealogy

research resulting in the intergenerational linkage of many nineteenth-

century Utah families. The Genealogical Society Library of the Church in

Salt Lake City contains a large collection of forms called "family group

sheets" that list the vital statistics on a family. These family group

sheets greatly facilitate the intergenerational linkage of households.2°

We combined the family group sheets (vital statistics and kinships), the

Church records (income and place of residence) and census records (wealth
                                                                          12

and occupation) to create an intergenerational sample of fathers, Sons and

brothers. Currently there are twelve potential income observations (1855,

1857, 1859, 1861, 1866, 1870, 1875, 1880, 1885, 1890, 1895, and 1900),

three potential wealth observations (1850, 1860 and 1870) and demographic

data on family members (date and place information on birth, marriage and

death). Clearly, for any given combination of observations on both fathers

and sons the sample size shrinks quickly. For example, if we consider

Sons who made contributions to the Church in 1885 for whom we also have

the percentage those contributions were of income and relate this to

fathers with wealth in 1870, our sample size shrinks to 469 father-son

combinations. If we further constrain the sample to cases where the

father had died before 1885, the sample is reduced to 170. We hope to add

wealth observations for later years (through probate and tax records) and

more individuals to the intergenerational sample.

     A feature of the Utah sample that provides opportunity but creates

difficulties is that a percentage of the population practiced polygyny

(polygamy) during this period. The Mormon Church encouraged wealthier

members to marry more often so that there will be a correlation between

wealth, income and number of wives. Furthermore, polygyny will signifi-

cantly affect the bequest patterns and therefore the intergenerational

patterns. We have not really come to grips with the analytical problems

intrinsic in this feature of the data.

     Before moving to a summary of the intergenerational patterns within.

the Utah data, it may prove useful to examine the distributional structure

of Utah in the nineteenth century as well as some of the findings to date

concerning the determinants of household wealth. The period from 1850 to

1870 was a time of rising inequality in Utah. Table 1 compares the level
                                                                          13

of inequality in Utah to that of the United States as a whole.     In 1850,

shortly after Mormons had settled in Utah, the distribution of wealth as

measured by value of real property was more equal in Utah than it was in

the U.S. But, there was a definite trend toward more inequality as

reflected by the data for 1870. The wealth held by the top 1% is actually

higher in Utah than the U.S. though the Gini coefficient is lower. There

is no way, at present, to ascertain whether or not the trend toward more

inequality continued beyond 1870. It is unlikely that the distribution of

wealth or income .became more unequal than that of the U.S.

     While Utah is experiencing an increase in inequality, there is sub-

stantial economic mobility during the 1850-1870 period as measure by the

movement of households within the distribution of wealth from one census

year to the other. Table 2 reports the movement of 2192 households rela-

tive to each other between 1860 and 1870. The households are divided into

deciles for 1860 and 1870 so that a transitional matrix is formed to
                                                    21   Random movement of
measure the economic mobility within the economy.

 households would imply an expected value of .1 in each cell of the matrix

 with expected mean decile in 1870 equal to 5.5 regardless of the initial

 decile in 1860. The upper tail of the wealth distribution displays consi-

 derable immobility while much of the rest of the matrix suggests near

 randomness. Thus, the Utah economy, perhaps like many others, was fairly

 open to movement except at the very top.

      Regressions reported elsewhere have shown some of the important

 influences upon the level of wealth for households of the 1850-1870

 period.22 In addition to the anticipated effects of age and occupation
                                     of residence, birthplace and sex of the
 upon wealth, time of entry, place
                                                household wealth. For an OLS
 household head have significant impacts upon
                                                                             14

 regression including age, age2, occupations, county of residence, birth-

place, sex of household head, migration between census years and duration

measured by first appearance in the census, duration was influential upon

the level of wealth, contributing 231% higher level of wealth ceteris

paribus. Foreign birth of the household head reduced wealth to about 80%

of the control group level; rural residence about 60% of the control group

level; female headed household about 76% of that level. In more complex

regression formulations, it becomes clear that the path of choices that

the households made about occupation and place of residence retained

influence upon wealth over time.23 Someone moving from a craft to a

farmer had a different wealth position ceteris paribus than someone who

remained a farmer for both periods of observation. This result is not

surprising but should be kept in mind when considering the intergenera-

tional effects since part of the influence of parents is to give children

an economic legacy in terms of an initial place of residence (urban-rural)

and probably occupation as well.

     To summarize, Utah during this period is characterized by rising

inequality, high levels of economic mobility for the same household

observed at two different points in time, and substantial influence by

Ricardian elements such as birthplace, sex of household head and decisions

taken earlier. The stage is then set to examine intergenerational rela-

tionships that may exist. It should be emphasized that the results reported

here are preliminary since the data set is still in the process of creation

and may contain errors of construction as yet undetected.


INTERGENERATIONAL CORRELATIONS WITHIN THE UTAH SAMPLE

     We assume a specification throughout the work      reported here that

transforms   either the income or wealth observations   by the natural logarithm.
                                                                         15

Other variables are not transformed, hence the specification is log-log

when wealth or income appears as a regressor (e.g. father's wealth) and

log-untransformed otherwise. When a regressor has been transformed by the

natural logarithm, the regression coefficient is interpreted as an elasti-

city; when no transformation has occurred the coefficient is interpreted

as the percentage change in wealth or income attributable to the regressor

(characteristics) of interest. Thus,

                          n
                i    a
               w. = e 0       j   j and
                                              i
                                          ln(w.) =
                                                     a0
                                                          +   f3x.i
where one of the X (jth characteristic of ith individual) is ln(wi
                                                                 father )
and the other variables are those described in Table 3.

     We first consider simple models of the contemporaneous correlation of

Sons' and fathers' wealth, Table 4. While the results reported in Table 4

use data for 1870, essentially the results are obtained when 1860 data are

used. In 1870, then, the simple elasticity, adjusting only for age and a

possible life cycle (ln(W) = a + bage + cage2 + dln(FW)) is .302. For

this sample, fathers were about thirty years older than sons and held

about two-thirds more wealth on average, with the respective means being

$812 and $1353. However, the contemporaneous correlation is lower than a

comparable correlation when the father is dead. That is, among those

whose father has died, there is a higher correlation between a son's

wealth and father's wealth prior to death than between living sons and

fathers. This obviously suggests that inheritance matters in this economy

since inheritance cannot be a factor in a contemporaneous relationship

between the wealth of sons and their fathers. However, contemporaneous

elasticities greater than zero suggest that something more than direct

transfer is a part of the relationship we observe and that the correlation
                                                                          16

may reflect some indirect influences of parents on children through IQ,

educational levels, occupational choices, cultural influences, nepotism as

well as direct, inter vivos, transfers. It would be useful to separate

the contemporaneous correlation between wealth of fathers and sons into

the marginal effects of each component. To do so requires endogenization

of all intergenerational influences--a formidable exercise, and one that

is not possible with our data. We can only consider, as a consequence,

some of the influences on son's wealth and possible relationships between

those influences and parental influence.

     We do not have data on education, likely to be a key intergenerational

variable. However, for nineteenth century U.S. society, education beyond

basic skills was probably not as important to wealth accumulation and high

income as education is for the twentieth century. We can explore other

variables however. Consider first, equation 1 of Table 4. We have expanded

the specification to include birthplace, age, the portfolio division

between real and personal wealth, county of residence, and father's age

and wealth. We find a pronounced life cycle in wealth holdings, with

wealth increasing with age at a decreasing rate and then declining slightly

in later years. Foreign birth reduces an individual's wealthholdings by

29 percent relative to US born individuals with otherwise comparable

characteristics. This is an obvious effect of parental choice on the

wealth of children.

     The portfolio variable is also a significant determinant of wealth

since a 10% increase in the share of one's wealth held in real estate

increased wealthholdings by 4.7%. This portfolio effect reflects the fact

that there were significant pressures against the land supply suitable for

productive activity in Utah so that capital gains on land exceeded capital
                                                                         17


gains derived from other forms of wealthholding. Neither time of entry

into the economy CT) nor county of residence (based on an urban-rural

dichotomy with U70 indicating residence in Salt Lake County) were signifi-

cant determinants with wealth.

     The elasticity of son's wealth with respect to father's wealth is now

.26. Father's age appears to have no impact on son's wealth but is retained

in the regressions to attempt to normalize father's wealth for life cycle

influences. Thus, in equation 1 we have adjusted for son's age, birthplace,

portfolio decisions, county of residence and father's age; yet, the elas-

ticity of wealthholding between father and son has only fallen by 14% from

.301 to .26.

     In equation 2, occupation is added to the variables included in

equation 1. The occupational responses given in the census have been

classified into five categories--white collar and professionals, craftsmen,

service workers, laborers, and farmers. The occupation of farmer is added

to U.S. birth and rural residence as the control or reference group. One

would expect some of the contemporaneous influence of parents upon the

economic position of their children to be transmitted through the selection

of occupation by the children. While the occupational classifications do

Increase the proportion of the variance in wealth that is explained, the

elasticity of son's wealth with respect to father's wealth only falls

slightly from .26 to .22. An occupational classification of white collar

or professional significantly increases wealth while classification of

laborer reduces wealth substantially. The effects of birthplace and

portfolio holding are diluted slightly with the addition of occupation as

a variable. In terms of simple correlations, there is virtually no rela-

tionship between occupational choice of sons as craftsmen or service
                                                                          18

 workers and father's wealth. Higher father's wealth increases the probab-

 ility of the sons being a white collar or professional (simple correlation

 is .20). Lower father's wealth increases the probability that the son

will be a laborer (simple correlation is -.25). But, clearly, occupational

 classification is not the major transmission mechanism for the parental

 influence upon son's wealth. Nevertheless, the intergenerational wealth

elasticity falls from .31 to .22 or by 27 percent when the effects of

birthplace, portfolio choice and occupation are controlled for. There are

two interesting observations about this change. First, it is clear that

children of wealthy parents make choices different from children of less

wealthy parents--when we allow for sons to have differing characteristics,

the impact of fathers' wealth declines. Second, there remains a strong

impact of father's wealth on son's holdings, that is independent of some

individual characteristics such as age, birthplace, portfolio composition,

and occupation.

     Presumably, if this independent impact is through the environment,

genetics, social contacts, etc., the effect should be independent of the

time of measurement. We have already noted that comparable findings hold

for 1860 contemporaneous data. However, if one selects a sample of fathers

in 1860 with Sons in 1870, and estimates a specification comparable to

those reported in Table 4 but with fathers 1860 wealth rather than the

contemporaneous observation, the elasticity falls from .22 to .10 (results

are summarized in Table 5). The coefficients of the sons' other charac-

teristics (age, birthplace, county of residence and occupation) are similar

for 1870 and 1860 even though the samples are different. The exceptions

to these similarities are the portfolio variable where the effect is

significantly higher in 1860 and the classification as laborer in 1860

which has less effect than the same classification in 1870.
                                                                         19


    We know that there is considerable wealth mobility from 1860 to 1870

but that mobility is not a satisfactory explanation of the fall in the

elasticity of the intergenerational effect since there is no reason to

believe that the 1870 observation on father's wealth is superior to the

observation in 1860. We simply do not expect the kind of decay in effect

suggested by the results and the results are puzzling.

     Using a sample of sons with fathers holding wealth ten years earlier
                                                          since we can
does allow us to get at bequest a little more precisely

select those Sons whose fathers died in the decade between 1860 and 1870.

One such specification is reported as equation 2 in Table 5. The sample

is, unfortunately, small with only 64 cases. We find, however, that the

intergenerational wealth elasticity increases threefold, to .34. The

major difference between this sample and the one where the elasticity is

around .1 is that the father is dead. Hence, we must be picking up an

 inheritance effect. Note that the size of the elasticity suggests substan-

 tial regression toward the mean but not independence of son's position

 from father's position. The suggested inheritance effect is, moreover,
                                                of the wealth in Connecticut.
 less than that suggested by Menchik's sample

 There are several plausible reasons for the lower estimated elasticity.

 The Utah population is much poorer and represents the whole spectrum of

 the wealth distribution while Menchik's sample is the richest extreme of

 the wealth distribution. A segment of the Utah population practiced

 polygamy so that the typical pattern of wealthholding (parents, then
                                              after mother's death) has no
 mother after father's death, then children
                                      Finally, family size is much larger in
 meaning for the polygamist family.

 the Utah sample. Nevertheless, the increase in the intergenerational
                                        restricted by the death of the father
 wealth elasticity when the sample is

  is quite large.
                                                                         20

    The structure of the sample changes when the limitation of prior

death of the father is imposed upon the data. The percentage that are

foreign born increases slightly while the effect of foreign birth falls by

36%. The mix of wealth shifts in favor of real wealthholding rather than

possession of personal wealth. Further, the elasticity of wealth with

respect to the portfolio choice increases by 47%. This result suggests

that fathers tended to bequeath land to their sons if there was an inheri-

tance and that such bequests of land enhance wealth because of the in-

creased capital gains of land relative to personal wealth. Those whose

father had died prior to 1870 were slightly older, which is to be expected,

and tended to be farmers, again reflecting the inheritance of land. The

Sons in the sample restricted to the death of the father prior to 1870

were wealthier than the average son in 1870 ($1119 compared to $846) while

the fathers in that sample are poorer ($863 compared to $1119). This

structural change is due in large part to the life cycle effect.

     Table 6 reports the intergenerational effect of father's wealth upon

the income of the sons. The data necessary to compute the estimate of the

      income from the Church records exists for the largest sample in 1885

so that year will be the focus of the regressions for income. Equation 1

gives the results for all sons on whom we have income data for 1885 and

equation 2 is confined to those sons whose fathers had died prior to 1885.

The structures of the two samples in terms of age, birthplace and county

of residence are quite similar. The primary structural change between the

two regressions is the older age of fathers in 1870 for the sample with

fathers dying prior to 1885. Son's income and father's wealth have higher

mean values for the prior death sample ($457 and $1620 compared to $358

and $1366 respectively).
                                                                         21

    Equations 1 and 2 of Table 6 show similar effects of age, birthplace

and county of residence upon income. Unlike the wealth patterns we have

reported, the life cycle for income does not peak within the plausible age

range although it does have a concave path relative to age in both equa-

tions. Foreign birth reduces income (effect is not statistically signi-

ficant in equation 2) but the effect is not as large as it is on wealth.

County of residence has a larger impact on income than it does on wealth

with residence in the urban county increasing income significantly.

Father's wealth in 1870 has an impact on the income of the son in 1885

with an elasticity of .135 where all Sons are considered and an elasticity

of .212 where only sons whose fathers have died are considered.

     We obviously do not know what the contemporaneous elasticities are

since our last observation for wealth is in 1870. Hence, we do not know

whether the contemporaneous elasticities would be larger than those reported

here. It is striking, however, that we find a fairly large impact that

persists over the decade and one half interval, again suggesting that

father's wealth is correlated with unmeasured sons' characteristics that

are independent of time (e.g. genetic, cultural, environmental, etc.). In

addition, we find a spread in the impacts for Sons with deceased fathers

that is consistent with explicit intergenerational transfers of wealth

(which then affect the income stream of the recipient).

     It now remains to examine the effect of family size and early death

of a father upon the wealth and income position of Sons in the sample. It

was postulated earlier in the paper that larger family size should attenuate

the relationship between the economic position of a father and son. It

was also suggested that early death of a father would adversely affect the

 economic position of children. Table 7 is a rough attempt to examine the
                                                                            22

  initial relationship between some demographic variables and intergenera-

  tional patterns of wealth and income. Two variables are entered into

 these regressions to reflect family size and premature death of a father.

 SIB is calculated by subtracting infant mortality from the the children of

 a father. It should be noted that many of the siblings counted under this

 variable may be half brothers or sisters to the individual being examined

 in the regression since the practice of polygyny created a very complex

 kinship network. The mean number of the SIB variable varies from 8 in the

 early part of the period to 13 in the latter years. FDE is a dummy vari-

 able that indicates that the father died before
                                                   age sixty.
      The sibling variable is significant in only one of the four regres-

 sions reported in Table 7. In equation 3 where the sample is constrained

 to Sons whose fathers have died, an increase in the number of siblings

 living to adulthood reduces income by a small amount. For example a

farmer in Salt Lake County who is U.S. born, fifty years of age, whose

father was average in age and wealth in 1870, would have a 13% lower

income in 1885 if he had ten siblings instead of five. In each of the

regressions where the SIB variable has been entered, the coefficient has

been negative though not often significant.   Similarly, the dummy for
death of the father has a negative coefficient but is not significant in

either case.

     Even though the early death of the father and family size are not

statistically significant variables in the simple regressions or speci-

fications reported here, their inclusion as variables does change the

elasticity of intergenerational wealth. Inclusion of the SIB variable

raises the elasticity between father's and son's wealth by 23% from .22 to

.27. This is the expected direction of change of the elasticity suggesting
                                                                         23

that family size does interact with the father's wealth. The inclusion of

the SIB and FDE variables also increases the elasticity of intergenerational

wealth in equation 2 of Table 7; but in this case the effect is much

smaller. This is a curious result since the sample of equation 2 is

confined to Sons whose fathers have died so that the inheritance effect is

measured. The effect of introducing demographic variables to the income

equations for 1885 is to reduce the elasticity between son's income and

father's wealth in both instances. The results of the introduction of

both a sibling variable and a variable for the death age of the father

indicate that there may be offsetting relationships between wealth, income,

family size and perhaps the death age of the father. For example, one

would expect an increase in the number of siblings to reduce the material

inheritance and possibly dilute other intergenerational mechanisms.

However, economic success may induce a larger family size for parents so

that family size may proxy for economic success of the father not fully

captured by the measure of wealth in 1870.


CONCLUSION

     The Utah data for the nineteenth century indicate that there is a

persistent relationship between father's and son's wealth. This rela-

tionship exists prior to inheritance of wealth by a son upon the death of

his father, and consequently reflects the genetic or cultural inheritances

that might be. In addition to these inheritances, the father determines

 the initial position in terms of residence and to a lesser extent occupa-

 tion from which the son makes choices. That endowment of an initial
                                             Ricardian heritage of an indi-
 position is an important component of the

 vidual. The fact that introduction of birthplace and urban residence

 change the intergenerational wealth elasticity is evidence of the impact
                                                                          24

that the initial position from which a son started within the Utah economy

is important. The intergenerational elasticity increases with the death

of the father as expected.

     The introduction of the demographic variables of family size and

early death of the father proved to have little impact in a simple OLS

regression. The coefficients displayed consistent plausible signs but

appeared to have little effect. The suspicion that there are strong

multidirectional relationships between these variables and economic vari-

ables suggests that a more rigorously specified set of equations may be

needed to fully explore the demographic issues relative to intergenera-

tional economic patterns.

     Much more work needs to be done on the Utah data in order to bring

the sample to full usefulness as a testing ground for intergenerational

economics. The death of the mother should be added as should birth order

and the more complex aspects of the marriage structure implied by poly-

gamous marriages. We intend to add more data in order to possibly increase

sample size and to add estimates of wealth through use of probate or tax

data. Nevertheless, this preliminary exploration provides sufficient

evidence to demonstrate that the economic position of parents provides

another Ricardian influence to the determination of the level and distri-

bution of income and wealth. The magnitude of this influence is not

extremely large and regression toward the mean appears to be a dominating

tendency within the intergenerational economic process.
                                                                       25

                                   NOTES

     'See, for example, Stephen Thernstrom, The Other Bostonians (Cambridge,

Mass., 1973) and Edward Pessen, Riches, Class and Power Before the Civil

War (Lexington, Mass., 1973).

     2Peter Blau and Otis Dudley Duncan, The American Occupational

ture (New York, 1967).

     3See Christopher Jencks et. al., Inequality (New York, 1972);

Christopher Jencks et. al., Who Gets Ahead? (New York, 1979); Zvi

Griliches and William Mason, "Education, Income and Ability," Journal of

Political Ecooiiiy (May/June Supplement, 1972), pp. 74-103; Paul Taubman,

Sources of Inequality of Earnings (Amsterdam, 1975); Paul Taubman (ed.),

Kinometrics: Determinants of Socioeconomic Successes Within and Between

Families (Amsterdam, 1977).

     4Paul Menchik, "Inter-generational Transmission of Inequality: An

Empirical Study of Wealth Mobility," Economica (November, 1978), pp. 349—362.

     5lbid., p. 356.

     6Stanley Lebergott, The American Economy (Princeton, 1976).

     7c. D. Harbury and P. E. McMahon, "Inheritance and Characteristics of

Top Wealth Leavers in Britain," Economic Journal (September, 1973),

pp. 810-833. For a survey of inheritance literature, see Gian Singh

Sahota, "Theories of Personal Income Distribution: A Survey," Journal of

Economic Literature (March, 1978), pp. 1-55.

     8See our working paper, "Choice and Ricardian Elements in the Distri-

bution of Income and Wealth."

      9J. R. Kearl, Clayne L. Pope and Larry T. Wimmer, "Household Wealth

 in a Settlement Economy: Utah, 1850-1870," Journal of Economic History

 (September, 1980), pp. 477-496.
                                                                                 26

      10Sahota, "Theories of Personal Income Distribution: A Survey,tt

pp. 7-9.
     11
          Kearl, Pope and Wimmer, "Household Wealth .    .   ."; Kearl   and Pope,

"A Ricardian Theory .      .   . ."
      t2For example, see Jencks et al., Inequality, Ch. 5.

     13Blau and Duncan, Occupational Structure.

     14James E. Meade, The Just Economy (Albany, 1976); Menchik, "Inter-

generational Transmission of Inequality"; Allan Blinder, Towards an

Economic Theory of Income Distribution (Cambridge, 1974).
     15
          J.                                     .
               Wedgewood, ,,The Influence of Inheritance on the Distribution of

Wealth," Economic Journal (1928), pp. 38-55; Gary Becker, "Theory of

Social Interactions," Journal of Political Economy (November/December,

1974), pp. 1063-1093; Gary Becker and Nigel Tomes, "Child Endowments and

the Quantity and Quality of Children," Journal of Political Economy (August

Supplement, 1976), pp. 5143-5162.

     16These effects may not be large. If one examines changes in adult

mortality rates moving from level 11 to level 22, male life expectancy at

age 65 only increases 27% even though life expectancy at birth increases

54%. However, mortality rates at age 45 decline 84.5 per 1000 to 25.5 per

1000. Ansley J. toale and Paul Demeny, Regional Model Life Tables and

Stable Populations (Princeton, 1966), pp. 12, 23.

                A. Brittain, The Inheritance of Economic Status (Washington,

D.C., 1977).

     8We have taken a small casual sample of probates that occurred

within two or three years of the census record. The personal wealth was

consistently higher on the probate inventory than the census record.
                                                                          27

     19The Church contributions were recorded at the local level by a


"Bishop", the local lay officer of the Church. The Bishop would also

record the percentage of a "fullt' tithing paid where a full tithing was

defined as one tenth of income.

     20Mark Skolnick et al., "Mormon Demographic History," Population

Studies. Part I appears in Vol. 32 and Part II in Vol. 33.

     21Each cell represents an estimate of the probability of moving from

one decile to another. The "deciles" are uneven in size because of heaping

on even values such as $500 or $1000.

     22Kearl et al., "Household Wealth in a Settlement Economy: Utah,

1850-1870."

     23Kearl and Pope, "Choice and Ricardian Elements. .   . ," working
paper.
                                                                                   28




                                      Table 1

               Comparison of Wealth in Utah and the United States

                                      1850                           1870

                      United States          Utah    United States          Utah

Mean real wealth            $1001             $201         $1782            $644

Proportion holding

   real wealth                .41              .70            .43            .64

Share of wealth held

   by top one percent         .30              .14            .24            .27

Share of wealth held

   by top ten percent         .73              .52            .70            .61

Mean wealth of foreign

   born/mean wealth of

   U.S. born (whites)         .49            .77               .61           .70

Gini coefficient for

        real wealth           .86            .69               .84           .74

Gini coefficient for

   total wealth                                                .81          .70


Note:        The sample procedures are such that the means and Gini coefficients

             are based on all males over age twenty and for the U.S. are based

             on all male heads of household over age twenty for Utah. The top

            percentiles are based on males over age twenty in both instances.

Source:     United States: Soltow Men and Wealth. Utah: see text.
                                                                                 29
                                                         Table 2
                       Relative Movement of Households Within the Distribution of Wealth, 1860-1870
                                           1870 WEALTH DECILE                                Mean Decile, 1870
                  1         2       3       4       5      6        7       8         9       10      N
           1    .170      .106    .145    .145    .085    .081     .089   .072    .068      .033    238   4.449
           2    .179      .184    .143    .161    .081    .058     .076   .054    .031      .031    223    3.920
           3    .147      .137    .157    .147    .108    .108     .078   .078    .039      .010    204    4.089
           4    .113      .118    .108    .151    .167    .113     .108   .065    .038      .022    186    4.628
          5     .055      .046    .114    .126    .122    .110     .151   .092    .089      .050    271    5.457
           6    .097      .082    .092    .082    .158    .117     .153   .133    .051      .021    196    5.161
1860
WEALTH     7    .060      .084    .130    .107    .088    .116     .116   .153    .084      .051    215    5.215
DEC ILE
          8     .081      .031    .085    .085    .090    .094     .166   .135    .135      .099    233    6.199
           9    .055      .037    .032    .041    .051    .106     .088   .138    .240      .212    217    7.280
          10    .050      .014    .014    .023    .054    .032     .054   .108    .189      .464    222    8.257
          N      224       194     224     234     217     203     238     223        214   221    2192
          N:     Number in Decile, .N      2192
Note:      1 is poorest decile, 10 is wealthiest decile.  The value in each cell gives the proportion
           of the households in a particular decile in 1860 who are in a particular decile in 1870.
           For example, the proportion of households in the poorest decile in 1860 who remain in the
           poorest decile in 1870 is .170. Decile boundaries are based on the sample of 2192 house-
           holds who we found in the census in both 1860 and 1870 rather than boundaries based on the
           whole population in 1860 and 1870. The boundaries yield unequal decile sizes because of
           heanin on certain wealth values  i.e. SS00 or Si000.
                                                                      30



                                Table 3

                              Definitions

 Variables
  1. LSW7O      Natural Logarithm of a son's wealth as reported for
                1870.

  2. LFW7O      Same as above for a father in 1870.

  3. LFW6O      Same as above for 1860.

  4. Age        Son's age in the year wealth or income is observed.
           2
  5. Age        Variable 4 squared.

  6. FBE        If foreign born, FEE      1.

  7. Port 7    Ratio of the value of wealth in the form of real
               estate to total wealth.

 8. T          1860 minus the year the household is first observed
               in Utah.

 9. W          Occupation classified as white collar or professional.

10. C          Occupation classified as skilled craftsman.

11. S          Occupation classified as a service worker.

12. L          Occupation classified as an unskilled laborer.

13. U70        If county of residence was Salt Lake County in 1870,
               U70 = 1.

14. U85        Same as above for 1885.

15. FAGE       Father's age in the year that wealth is observed.

16. Sib        Number of siblings or half-siblings (father's side)
               who do not die in infancy.

17. FDE        If father died before age 60, FDE = 1.

18. N          Sample size.

19.            Explained variance of regression.

20. F          F value for either the equation or the variable in
               question.
                                                                               31


                                     Table 4

           Contemporaneous Intergenerational Wealth Regressions


                                     1                            2

Dependent Variable:        Mean          B      F         Mean     B          F

LSW7O                      6.70                           6.70

Explanatory Variables:

Age                      32.63      .163     21.4       32.63     .16        20.9
Age2                      1136    -.0017     13.9        1136     -.0017     13.3
FBE                         .30   -.288         7.5        .30    -.262       6.4
Port7                       .56    .473        5.9         .56        .431   4.98
T                           .45    .0072         .4        .45        .004    .16
W                                                          .05        .47    4.3
C                                                          .08    -.31       3.0
S                                                          .05    -.01         0
L                                                          .16    -.31       5.3
U70                         .15   -.0028            0      .15        .10      .5
LFW7O                     7.21     .260        26.0      7.21         .22    18.1
FAGE                     63.3      .0029         .2     63.3          .002     .1
Constant                          1.09                            1.51
N                         277                             277
R2                         .35                            .38
F                        18.3                           13.7

Equation 1 and 2 are based on all combinations of fathers and sons in the
sample with wealth greater than zero in 1870.

Variables are defined in Table 3.
                                                                                 32

                                     Table 5

           Intergenerational Wealth Regressions:     1870 and 1860

                                     1                               2

Dependent Variable:        Mean          B      F           Mean         B       F

LSW7O                      6.74                             7.02

Explanatory Variables:

Age2                      34.9      .0988      7.9      40.3             .236   2.8
Age                       1301    -.0010       5.1      1691         -.003      3.1
FBE                        .31    -.199       3.8        .34         -.128       .3
Port7                      .57     .985      26.1        .63         1.450      8.0
T                         1.84     .014        1.8       4.8             .012    .1
W                          .04     .650        8.9       .02             .766   1.0
C                          .08    -.140         .7       .11         -.754      5.8
S                          .06     .071         .1       .06         -.360       .7
L                          .16    -.050      14.3        .06         -.760      3.3
U70                        .18    -.198       2.6        .19             .518   3.4
LFW6O                     7.02     .101       3.7       6.76             .337   5.0
FAGE                     56.4     -.002         .1     63.5              .010    .4
Constant                          3.51                             -1.62
N2                        317                          64
R                         .33                         .50
F                     12.49                          4.25

Equation 1 is based on all combinations where father's wealth is greater
than zero in 1860 and son's wealth is greater than zero in 1870.

Equation 2 is a subset of combinations in equation 1 where the father died
before 1870.
                                                                               33

                                     Table 6

                      Intergenerational Income Effects

                                 Equation 1                      Equation 2

Dependent Variable:       Mean        B         F         Mean        B        F

LY085                     5.88                            6.125

Explanatory Variables:

                         50.6       .037       52.2       51.0        .025    11.4
Age2                     31690 -.00002         51.9      22691     -.00001    11.4
Age
FBE                        .14    -.251         4.6        .12       -.151      .6
U85                        .10     .381         9.4        .11        .496    6.74
LFW7O                     7.22     .135        10.3       7.39        .212     9.1
FAGE                     54.9     -.007         1.9      61.7         .007         5
Constant                          3.98
                          469                             170
N2                       .187                             .17
R
F                      17.74                             4.6

Equation 1   is based on all father son combinations where father's wealth
is greater   than zero in 1870 and son's income may be calculated in 1885.
Equation 2   is a subset of the sample of equation 1 where the fathers had
died prior   to 1885.
                                                                                                        34

                                               Table 7

          The Effect of Family Size and Early Death of Father on
             Intergenerational Wealth and Income Relationships


                          Equation 1               qtion 2                Equation 3        Equation 4

Dependent Variable:           LW7O                       LW7O                 Y085              Y085
                          B            F           B               F      B           F     B           F
Explanatory Variables:

Age2                      .069        4.6          .243         2.8     .021         8.1    .038    52.4
Age               -   .0004                    -
                                                   .003
                                       .7                        3.1 -.00001         8.1 -.00002    52.1
FBE                   - . 008         1.7          -.18          .52    -.19          .9   -.283       5.7
Port7                     .474        5.5          1.42      7.33
U70                        108         .6              .50      2.8
W                          .44        3.5          .736          .85
C                         - . 29               - .736
                                      2.5                    5 . 15
L                     - .378          7.5      - . 738          3.0
S                         .008             0   - .361           .631
Sib                   -   .008        1.7      -
                                                   .013          .21     -.028   11.0      -.003       .48
FOE                                            - . 448           .02      -.15       .81
LFW7O                     .27        23.7                                 .201       7.8    .087    4.28
PAGE                      .005       .611          .010          .27    -.0054    .322     -.006       1.5
LFW6O                                              .343         4.8
U85                                                                       .508    7.2        .40    10.3
N                                    277                           64             170                469
R2                                   .37                        .50                19                   18
F                                  13.11                     3.53                4.62              14. 14

Equation 1 is based on the father son combinations with wealth greater than
     zero in 1870.
Equation 2 is based on the combinations where the father died between
     1860 and 1870 but son has wealth greater than zero in 1870.
Equation 3 is based on combinations where the father died between 1870 and
     1885 with son's income available in 1885.
Equation 4 is based on all combinations where father has wealth in 1870 and
     son has income in 1885.
