                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          PERMANENT INCOME, LIQUIDITY, AND EXPENDITURE
            ON AUTOMOBILES: EVIDENCE FROM PANEL DATA




                         Ben S. Benanke


                      Working Paper No. 756




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                         September 1981




Partial support was provided by the National Science Foundation.
Jon Zucker gave excellent research assistance and wrote much of the
data appendix. The author would like to thank George Fenn and
Robert Hall for comments. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #756
                                               September 1981




                 Permanent Income, Liquidity, and

                   Expenditure on Automobiles:

                    Evidence from Panel Data




                             Abs tract




     Several recent papers have tested the permanent income—cum—

rational expectations hypothesis using data on nondurable or semi—

durable consumption. We show how this approach can be extended to

the case of durables. An application to panel data on automobile

expenditures reveals no evidence against the permanent income

hypothesis. This result is unchanged in subsamples segregated by

family holdings of liquid assets.




                                          Ben Bernanke
                                          Assistant Professor of Economics
                                          Graduate School of Business
                                          Stanford University
                                          Stanford, California 94305

                                          (415) 497—2763
                             —1-




1. Introduction

     The validity of the permanent income—life cycle hypothesis (PIH)

as an explanation of consumer spending is an important issue in macro-

economics.' Since this hypothesis was posed (separately) by Friedman

 (1957) and by Modigliani2, it has been frequently put to empirical

test.3 Evidence both pro and con has been advanced.

     Recently, this question has been illuminated by the realization

that the hypothesis of rational expectations, in conjunction with the

PIH, imposes strong restrictions on the stochastic properties of con-

sumption conditional on income. In pioneering articles, Hall (1978)

and Sargent (1978) used these restrictions to test the joint

rational expectations — permanent income hypothesis in the U.S. time

series data. Flavin (forthcoming) has shown that, properly interpreted,

the Hall and Sargent papers concur in rejecting the joint hypothesis.

     Noting the relatively low power of time series tests, Hall and

Mishkin (forthcoming) followed by applying these methods (and several

innovations) in panel data.4 The results of their analysis of the

relation of food consumption to income change were ambiguous; the PIH

could not be clearly accepted or rejected.

     One feature of this recent research has been the small amount of

attention paid to the durables component of consumer expenditure: Of

the papers mentioned, only Sargent's does not completely eliminate

durables from the measure of consumption. The reason for this neglect

is that the theory, as developed, is a predictor of actual consumption;

what is observed, however, is not consumption but expenditure. The
                           —2—




distinction between the time of buying and the time of using being

much less important for nondurables than for durables, it is the

former component that has been the focus of the empirical applications.

     It would seem that, in the exclusion of durables, an important

and interesting part of the story has been left out.    The durables

component of expenditure is large, the most volatile, and the most

cyclically sensitive. Further, if the PIH fails in a quantitatively•

important way, it is most likely to be revealed in the pattern of

durables purchases. For example, as Mishkin (1976) has pointed out,

durables (automobiles in particular) are large, primarily debt—financed

illiquid assets; moreover, expenditures on durables are more easily

rescheduled than expenditures on nondurables. Thus, durables purchases

should be relatively more sensitive to liquidity constraints or

 imperfections in the consumer loan market ——   the most plausible sources

of failure of the PIH.5

     This paper attempts to fill the lacuna by testing the joint

 rational expectations and permanent income hypothesis for the case

 of automobile expenditures. An effective test is permitted by the

 availability of panel data which record the incomes and car expendi-

 tures of 1434 families over four years. As a bonus, the data also

 include family holdings of liquid assets for each year. This permits

 a simple test of Mishkin'S "liquidity hypothesis," a principal opposing

 view to the strict PIH.

      The results of this study differ rather sharply with those of

 previous papers, especially the work using
                                              time series. We find no
                          —3—




evidence that liquidity constraints or capital market imperfections

are important in even the timing of family car purchases. The response

of expenditure to transitory income changes is as predicted by the

permanent income model.

    The plan of the paper is as follows. Part 2 describes the model

to be estimated. Part 3 outlines the estimation procedure. Results

are reported in part A. Part 5 discusses Monte Carlo simulations that

tested the robustness of the estimates to specification error. Part 6

concludes.
                           —4—




2. Automobile Expenditures and Revisions to Permanent Income

    This section presents a model of the response of family automobile

purchases and sales to new information about family income.   The basic

approach is the same as that of Hall and Mishkin's innovative study,

to which the reader is referred for additional motivation and

clarification.

     Let us begin by assuming that families base their consumption

plans on their rationally expected level of permanent income.   As

usual, "permanent income" (Y) is defined (relative to current—period

information) as the flow of income which, if sustained at a constant

level for the rest of the family's life, would just exhaust expected

earnings and wealth.

     An immediate problem is that permanent income is unobservable by

the econometrician. In many previous studies, both of automobiles and

other consumer goods, permanent income has been proxied for by some

weighted average of recent actual incomes. However, as With (1960) and

Lucas (1976) have shown, the validity of this procedure depends inti-

mately on the stochastic process generating income; in general, using

a finite—lag average as a proxy is highly restrictive.   Accordingly, the

income process should be explicitly modelled.

     We will follow Hall-Mishkiri in representing the family's total

disposable income in year t, Y, as being comprised of three parts
                                                  6
 (which we assume that the family can distinguish).

These are

     1. the deterministic component, Y• This is the pattern of

 lifetime income that can be projected from the basic demographic
                              —5—




characteristics of the family (e.g., age of the head, occupation, family
                        —          .                    .          7
size). We assume that        is fixed and known in advance.

     2. the lifetime prospects component,                     which is stochastic,

depends on the individual family's current evaluation of its talents,

special skills, and long—run opportunities. Since any change in this

component is (virtually by definition) unanticipated, it is naturally

modelled as a random walk:



                             L =       L
                                               +
     (2.1)
                                    —1

where the      are i.i.d.,

     3. the windfall component, Y .
                                                   Y,   also stochastic, is

meant to capture purely transitory changes in income. For our data,

inspection of the covariograin strongly suggests that                  can be

modelled as simple white noise:



     (2.2)                   Y =


where the fl are i.i.d., N(O,

    A first step in our estimation below will be to eliminate Y

from the income series. This will allow us to restrict our attention

to the stochastic part of income, Y, defined by



                                           —
     (2.3)
                                 —6—




We will also make use of the first difference of stochastic income,


' given      by



                                       +       —
     (2.4)            Yt - Y—1



     An issue of interest is the relation between revisions to permanent

income and changes in the three components of current income. This relation is

easy to find: All changes in the deterministic component Y are anticipated

and do not affect Y. The current innovation to the lifetime prospects

                          a permanent increase in expected income and
component, E , represents
is thus fully reflected in the revision of           .   In   contrast, the

current innovation to the windfall component, fl ,            is   a one—shot

addition to wealth; as such, it will increase             only at the rate

that an addition to principal increases an annuity. In summary, we can

write the current revision to permanent income as



                       P —   P             +
     (2.5)                   '—i

where        is the rate of payout of an annuity with a term equal to the

 lifespan of the family.

     The standard assumption that consumption is proportional to

permanent income, in conjunction with (2.5), gives the Hall (1978)

 "random walk consumption" result:         Under the permanent income and

 rational expectations hypotheses, changes in consumption flows should

 be unpredictable.9 Note also that the covariance of (non—deterministic)
                                   —7—




consumption and current income changes is proportional to              +

Thus, when most income changes are permanent (G/o is large), consump-

tion is very sensitive to current income)°

    The consumption—related variable in which we are specifically

interested is family expenditure on automobiles, either purchases or

sales, gross of depreciation. As with income, we assume that total

expenditure Et is made of a deterministic (or non—family—specific)

component and a stochastic component:



     (2.6)                Et =         +
                                           Et



Assuming that the deterministic component              can be eliminated from

the data, we concern ourselves here only with the stochastic portion

of expenditure, Et.

     Under the familiar model of continuous stock adjustment,12 stochastic

expenditure is given by



                      Et =         —         +
     (2,7)                   A(K

where A is the rate of stock adjustment; K and                   are desired and

actual car stocks (exclusive of the deterministic component) at the

beginning of the period; and               (i.i.d., N(O,cr)) is a white noise

term capturing random influences on expenditure.

     By assuming smooth adjustment of the car stock we are ignoring

(or at least relegating to the error term) the truncated dependent

variable problem raised by Tobin (1958). While incorporating these
                                   —8—




considerations into our analysis poses no difficulty in principle,

it would transform a computationally easy procedure into one that is

extremely burdensome. Section 5 below discusses the implications of

assuming continuous adjustment. The results of Monte Carlo simu-

lations, to be reported, suggest that the biases introduced are small

and easily corrected.

     To make the desired car stock K operational, we assume local

linearity of the Engle curve for automobile services.'3 This, plus

the assumption that services are proportional to stocks, implies



        (2.8)              —       = cL(Y —    Y1)

where           measures the relation of desired stocks to permanent income.

By (2.5), (2.8) is equivalent to



        (2.9)              —
                               K1 = ct(c   +



     To close the model, we write the evolution of the automobile

stock            as



        (2.10)            Kt =   (l_S)Ki +

where           is the rate of depreciation.14 Equation (2.7), (2.9), and

(2.10) define a unique stochastic expenditure path, given a history of

random disturbances E,         n, and   0, and initial conditions f or K and K*.
                                     —9—




        Now let us drop the assumption of perfect capital markets. How

should the expenditures of a family that is constrained in its borrowing

and lending opportunities deviate from the above model? The argument

presented by Mishkin (1976) is based on the observation that consumers

with unfavorable balance sheets find it difficult to borrow. A series

of short—run financial reverses may threaten insolvency and the loss

of accumulated equity in debt—financed assets. Thus the family should

try to maintain a buffer of financial assets over debt obligations.

This leads to a dependence of car expenditure on the short—run level
                                                         15
of financial liquidity, as well as on long—run income.

    A second possible effect of imperfect capital markets is drawn

from the work of Darby (1972). If consumers do not have good short—run

lending opportunities, they may choose to hold part of transitory income

as durable goods. Thus automobile purchases may follow from portfolio

considerations.

        In the context of our model, both of these arguments suggest that

car expenditures may be Increased (dampened) in the short run by the

effects of windfall gains (losses) on current financial holdings. We

generalize (2.7) to



                                 —         +   +
        (2.11)      Et =   X(K       K)

where     y is a parameter that measures the response of expenditure to

current windfall income.

    Note that the specification (2.11) allows windfall income to

affect short—run car stocks only; the long—run target K, to which
                            —10—




converges, does not depend on the         term. This is an important and
                                            16
desirable property of this specification.

    We would like to test if I > 0.      The procedure by which this js

done is described in the next section.
                               —11—




3. Estimation Procedure

     The outline of the estimation approach can be briefly stated.

We begin by finding the deviations of each family's car expenditure and

changes in income from the corresponding deterministic paths. These

deviations can be written as linear functions of unknown parameters and

unobservable, family—specific shocks. Under the assumption of normality,

it turns out that the average variance—covariance matrix   of   expenditure

and differenced income is a sufficient statistic for the data. A

maximum likelihood procedure can be used to extract estimates of the

parameters, including the variances of the unobservable shocks.

    For the interested reader, the rest of this section provides more

detail. Others may   wish   to go directly to the results in Section 4.

     The basic data are the changes in real disposable income and the

expenditures (purchases and sales) on automobiles of the families

followed by the survey. (See the introduction and part 1 of the data

appendix.) The estimation procedure required the data in the form of

deviations from the deterministic paths. We assumed that the deter-

ministic components were functions of family demographic characteristics

and of year dutnmies)7 Ordinary least—squares regressions in the

pooled data were run for income change and car expenditure against the

explanatory variables. (See data appendix, part 2.) The residuals of

these regressions for each family and year were used to represent the

nondeterrninistic components of income change and expenditure.

     Inspection of these residuals revealed considerable heteroscedas—

ticity across families of different income sizes. Since the estimation

will assume that the sample families have identically distributed income
                                   —12—




innovations, a heteroscedasticity correction was necessary. The
                                           18
data appendix, part 3, gives details.

      The next step is to write nondeterministic income change (y)

and car expenditure (E) solely as functions of unobservables)9 For

y this is easy; we already have (2.4). For E, this task is compli-

cated by the fact that our expenditure data are gross rather than net

of depreciation.     It is shown in an appendix that current gross

expenditure can be expressed, for any k, as



                                                             +   + ak+lLK
        (3.1) E =          bjLiZt + bk÷lL'(X(K -       K)
                     1=0


where



                                   +              + y(ri —
        (3.2) Z X(K —        K1)          —




                   = X(c(c   + rI)) +         —    +         —




The   L1 are lag operators, and the a. and b. are parameters depending on
X and S. Define an arbitrary beginning, or "base", year          t   Let
      and (K, — Kr?) be the base year (non—deterministic) car stock and
the   base year difference between desired and actual stocks, respectively.

These can be thought of as unobserved random variables with uncor—

ditional means of zero and an unspecified covariance. Then, by (3.1),

expenditure for any year depends on the history of disturbances sand on

the base year stock variables.

        For a given family 1, let x1 be the column vector of unobserved

random variables
                                  —13-




     (3.3)
                      (61964,. .,61970,fl1963,


                       O1963,...1970,K1963,(K* K)1963 )



We assume that x. is multivariate normal with covariance matrix .
                 1
   is supposed to be diagonal, except for the covariance of the last

two terms. The variances on the diagonal are



     (3.4)             v(c) =

                                  2
                       V(n) =


                       V(e)
                                  2
                    V(K1963) =


                    - K)1963) =



Define   q. to be the column vector in which is stacked the i—th family's

history of income change and expenditure. Then, using (2.4) and (3.1),

the model to be estimated can be expressed in the form:



     (3.5)                        = Ax.



Where A is a 6 x 25 matrix which depends on unknown parameters. The

covariance matrix for the representative family is


     (3.6)                c(P) = ALA'
                                 —14—




P is a vector of unknown paramters:



     (3.7)     P =                22222

The log—likelihood of a sample of size N is



               L(P) =   -   log det (P) -
                                               i=l q.1(P)q
     (3.8)




plus an inessential constant. Maximization of (3.8) with respect to

the unknown parameters produces estimates with the usual desirable

properties. A numerical maximization routine written by Bronwyn

Hall (1979) was available for the estimation.

     We did not attempt to estimate the full parameter vector P. The

annuity rate         was exogenously specified to be equal to .03.20

Following estimates by Cagan (1971), we set the annual rate of stock

depreciation         equal to a constant .25.21

     We found by experiment that, although we could estimate the

variance of K1963, the variance of (K963 - K1963) and its covariance

with K1963 could not be econometrically identified. Using Monte Carlo

simulations as a guide, we tried different exogenous values for these

terms. The results were found to be essentially invariant to the

treatment of (K963 — K1963); moving the variance and covariance terms

over a reasonable range affected the estimates,except for that of

by one percent or less. In the estimates reported in the next section

we simply assumed
                                —15—




     f   \               *
                       K1963
                               —
                                   1(1963




That is, families are assumed to have had no gap between desired and

actual car stocks in the base year.
                              —16—




4. Estimation Results

    The parameter estimates that maximized (3.8) for the sample are

given in Table 1. The four variance parameters (1—4) are measured

in millions of 1972 dollars; they have been scaled up to offset the

cross—sectional heteroscedaSticity correction.
                                                                   of
     The   model fits the data well. The variance parameters are
reasonable magnitude22 and are sharply estimated.   We find the varianceS

of innovations to lifetime prospects and windfall components of incone

to be similar in size.23 The estimated variance of 0 ,
                                                          the   expen-

diture disturbance, is about 80% of the total variance of automobile

expenditure; presumably this includes the effects of non—continuOU

stock adjustment and errors of measurement in E.

     The annual rate of stock adjustment, A, is found to be .694.
                                                       only about one
Since a given family's car expenditures are non—zero

year in three, this may appear high.    However, it is probably the

case that expenditures are more likely to be made in years in which

significant changes to desired stocks have occurred. Thus A must

 exceed one—third.

     The estimate of       says that a one dollar increase in permanent

 income will lead, in the long run, to a 25.9 cent increase in the

 value of the family's car stock. We made several checks of this

 estimate:
                                                 stocks, we were able
      1) Using reported characteristics of car

 to construct estimates of each family's car stock value for each

 year. These values were not used in obtaining the above estimate
                  Table 1

            PARAMETER     ESTIMATES

               ENTIRE SAMPLE




Parameter         Estimate                  Parameter Definition
                Ct—statistic)




,                 5.64
                (18.26)
                                      Variance of windfall shocks
                                      to income


2.                4.79                Variance of lifetime shocks
                (11.08)               to income


3. o              1.96                Variance of random influences
                (19.71)               on expenditure


4. cT            25.11                Variance of initial stocks
                (15.22)


5. X               .694               Annual rate of stock
                (18.55)               adjustment


6. a               .259               Response of desired stock to
                 (6.09)               changes in long—run income


7. y              —.0136              Sensitivity of current expen—
                (—0,71)               diture to current transitory
                                      income
                                 —17—




of a , except in the constructing of series for the value of car

sales unaccompanied by purchases. Using two—stage least—squares to

eliminate transitory income effects, we regressed each family's

average real stock value over the period against average disposable

incoflie, age of the head, age squared, and a constant. The estimated

coefficientof income (a measure of a) was .219. See the data

appendix, part 4.

     2) The Surv?y of Current Business has recently reported aggre-

gate constant—dollar automobile stocks for 1964—79. A simple regression

of stocks against real personal disposable income and a constant gave

an estimate of a of .227.

     These confirmations that a is in a reasonable range increase

our confidence in the model.24

     The estimate of greater interest is that of y, the parameter

that measures the "excess" sensitivity of expenditure to windfall

income. Recall that, for a family that faces constraints in the

capital market, we expect '   > 0. The actual estimate of y is
negative, small, and insignificantly different from zero. Thus we

have found no evidence of excessive sensitivity of cai expenditure

to transitory income change, and, a f.ortiori, no evidence of

 imperfections in the capital markets faced by consumers.25

     This conclusion runs counter to the results of the previously

mentioned work by Mishkin (1976,1977), in which time series data was

used to find a link between durables expenditure and consumer holdings

 of liquid assets and debt.26 We performed an additional test for
                     Table 2

                PARAMETER ESTIMATES

            HIGH FINANCIAL ASSETS SUBSAMPLE




Parameter                 Estimate            Parameter Definition
                        Ct—statistic)




                            6.61              Variance of windfall
                           (8.06)             shocks to income


2. a2                      11.69              Variance of lifetime
                           (8.68)             shocks to income


3.                          3.79              Variance of random
                          (13.03)             influences on expenditure


4.                         39.12              Variance of initial
                           (8.57)             stocks


5. X                         .624             Annual rate of stock
                          (10.96)             adjustment


6.   ct                      .237             Response of desired
                           (4.42)             stock to changes in
                                              long—run income



7. y                         .023             Sensitivity of current
                           (0.498)            expenditure to current
                                              transitory income
                                   —18—




liquidity effects, as follows: Family financial assets,

including bank deposits and holding of stocks and bonds (but

not currency) are available for each year. Real financial assets

were regressed against demographic variables to permit the creation

of a "fitted" level of financial assets for each family. The sample

was ranked by the average level of fitted financial assets over the

period. The basic model was then re—estimated for the top third and

the bottom third of the sample. The presumption was that, if the

liquidity hypothesis is correct, a greater sensitivity to windfall

income would be found among those with small financial holdings.27

The outcome of this exercise is contained in Tables 2 and 3.

     Surveying the results, we see that the "rich" are more likely

to experience lifetime rather than windfall income changes, while

for the "poor" the reverse is true.28 The high—financial—asset

group had larger initial car stocks and more car expenditures, but

a lower marginal propensity to buy cars than the low—asset group.

The rate of stock adjustment was comparable in the two subsamples,

with, surprisingly, slightly faster adjustment by the low—asset people.

     Most importantly, estimates from neither subsample can support

the hypothesis that    >   0.   Of the two point estimates, the negative

 (and marginally significant) one was associated with the low—asset

group, the positive one with the high—asset subsample. This is the

opposite ordering that would be predicted by the liquidity hypothesis.

 Based on this evidence, there is no reason to believe that liquidity

 considerations affect even the timing of automobile expenditures.
                     Table 3

                PARA4ETER ESTIMATES

            LOW FINANCIAL ASSETS SUBSAMPLE




Parameter             Estimate                  Parameter Definition
                     (t—statistic)




i. a2                    3.50                Variance of windfall
                       (12.49)               shocks to income


2. a2                    1.66                Variance of lifetime
       C
                        (4.76)               shocks to income


3. a                      .959               Variance of random
                       (10.11)               influences on expenditure


4. a2                   10.37                Variance of initial stocks
    k
                        (5.65)


5. A                      .687               Annual rate of stock
                      (10.49)                adjustment


6. a                      .461               Response of desired stock
                        (4.00)               to changes in long—run
                                             income


7. y                    —.053                Sensitivity of current
                      (—1.96)                expenditure to current
                                             transitory income
                                   —19—




5. The Discontinuous Adjustment Problem

    The well—known desirable properties of maximum
                                                         likelihood   esti—

                                                  specification of the model.
ination are, of course, contingent on proper
                                         considerations29 suggest that
However, both experience and theoretical
                                          the statistical model is only
NL can be an effective approach when

approximately correct. We tested the robustness of our estimates to

various specification errors by Monte Carlo simulations, with generally

good results.
                                                        interest was the
     A possible specification error of particular
                                                  Since Tobin (1958) it has
assumption of continuous stock adjustment.

been standard in cross—sectional studies to model purchases of durable
                                   the gap between desired and actual
goods as taking place only when

 stocks exceeds some threshold level.30 This discontinuous adjustment

 is consistent with the fact that family purchases of a given durable
                                   computational considerations forced us
 are zero in most years. While
                                         it is important to know what potential
 to ignore discontinous adjustment,

 biases exist.31

      In terms of the notation of this paper, the discontinOUs adjustment

 model is



                       E = X(K —         ÷    +
      (5.1)                        I()            yn

                           IE*     if E*>L
                                       t   or E*<L
                                               t
                       Et =    otherwise


                                               the family will buy or
 where t and L are the thresholds beyond which
  sell automobiles. The specification is closed by adding equations (2.4),

  (2.9), and (2.10).
                                —20—




     This model, in conjunction with a normal random number generator,

was used to create artificial data sets. The variances of the distur-

bances and the thresholds were chosen so that the purchase frequency

and other characteristics of the actual data were approximated. The

other parameters were varied over plausible ranges. Each run simulated

the behavior of 200, 300, or 400 "families" over fifteen "years". Only

the last four years were assumed to be "observed"; the purpose of the

first eleven "years" was to generate appropriate random initial con-

ditions. The average income—expenditure covariance matrix for the final

four years was input to the basic estimation procedure (which assumes

continuous adjustment), and the results were compared to the "true"

parameters of the simulation.

     While the cost of a completely formal robustness analysis did not

seem justified, sixteen simulations and estimations were performed.

These seemed sufficient for making the following observations:

     1) The sample sizes used (one—third or less of the actual sample

size) were adequate to allow low—variance estimates of all parameters.

     2) Estimates of the income disturbance variances were easy to

obtain.

     3) We observed a small positive bias in the estimate of c, in

the vicinity of .03. Twelve of the sixteen simulations led to an

estimate of ct that was too high. The empirical standard deviation

of the estimation of c was about .05 for samples of 400.

     4) Estimates of y showed a bias of approximately —.025.

Except for this bias, y was tightly and reliably estimated: In

every simulation and estimation run, even those in which other estimates
                           —21—




were unusually inaccurate, y fell in the range (y—.Ol, y—.04).

    We conclude that violation of the assumption of continuous stock

adjustment does not pose a severe problem for our results. Correction

of the full—sample estimate of y for the empirical bias gives a

value that is positive but still very close to zero. The marginally

significant negative y found in the low—asset sub—sample is shown

by the simulation studies to be an artifact. However, no additional

explanation can be offered for the positive y in the high—asset group.
                              —22—




6. Conclusion

    This study tested the joint rational expectations — permanent

income hypothesis using panel data on automobile expenditures. Although

it would seem that durables purchases would be especially sensitive to

failures of the PIH, no evidence against the joint hypothesis was found.

    How can the conclusion that automobile expenditures depend on the

consumer's long—run view of his income be squared with the short—run

volatility of car sales in the aggregate? While this must be left to

future research, it is not anticipated that the reconciliation will be

difficult. First, the estimates presented imply that a one—dollar

increase in current disposable income that is expected to be permanent

will lead to a seventeen—cent expansion in car sales the first year.

(In comparison, average car sales are about five percent of disposable

income.) This, in conjunction with the fact that aggregate income

contains a significant random walk component, leaves room for powerful

accelerator effects. Second, by construction our study eliminated some

non—income factors that may be important for car sales in the aggregate:

Relative prices, interest rates2 and "confidenc&'33 all may contribute

to observed short—run variations. Thus, we may hope to explain cycles

in aggregate automobile purchases without reliance on an "excessive"

sensitivity of expenditure to current income.
                                                  —23—




Appendix. Derivation of the expression for gross automobile expenditures

The model for gross expenditures (using the notation of the text) is




                                   Et =                   -       +         +
(1)                                          A(K


      Where Et. K, and Kt are defined to be net of their deterministic

components. K evolves as



                                             (1       -               +
                                                                          Eti
(2)                                Kt =                   5)Kti

Differencing (1) gives:



(3)       Et =   A(K
                       -
                            K_1)
                                      -
                                           A(Kt
                                                      -
                                                          Kt_i)   +         - 8-i.     +       - _i Ei
                                                                                                    +




Differencing (2) and substituting:



(4)       Et =   A(K
                       -
                            K1)       -
                                           Eti                c5Kti) + Bt -                + y(r - r1)   +
                                                                                                             Ei
or



                                          + (1
(5)                        Et =   Z               -
                                                          X)Ei    +
                                                                          XcSKti


       where


                                            - K1)             +       -            +       -
                           Z      X(K.
                                                —24—




Using (5) it can be shown that, for any k >                         1




                              Et =            + bkLkE        +
(6)                                                              a,KLkK



       where

                                 c.       3
                                          E
                                         i=0 bL Z.
                                                     I




                                 a0 = 0


                                 b0 = 1


                               a.1 = a. (1         — 5) +
                                                                 Xb
                               b.1 = a. + (1             -
                                                             X)b.


       and L is the lag operator.



Proof of (6) is by induction. For k = 1, (6) reduces to (5). Now suppose that

(6) is true for k. Substitute (5) and (2) into (6) to get




                          +                                               +                     +
 (7)       Et =   Ckl         bkLk(Zt+ (l_X)LE + XLKt)                        akLk((1_)LKt          LEt)


       This implies




                                                                                            +
 (8) E =       (ckl   +
                          bkLkZt)
                                     +
                                         (ak
                                               +
                                                   bk(l_X))LkEt
                                                                              +
                                                                                  (ak(l-)       X5bk)LkKt


       which is just

                                                             +
 (9)                      E = ck     +
                                         bk+lLkEt                aklLk+lkt
                                       —25—




       Q.E.D.


 (9)    is equivalent to


(10)      Et =         bjL'Zt +   bk+lL'(X(K
                                               -
                                                   Kt)
                                                         +   + ak+1LKt
                 i=O


       which is used in the text.
                                   —26--




Data Appendix

        This appendix describes data sources. and construction, and provides

details on some preliminary steps in the estimation procedure.

        The primary source of data was the Hendricks—Youmans (1976) four—year

panel study of consumer behavior. Their study was conducted at the

University of Michigan's Survey Research Center as an adjunct to the

annual Survey of Consumer Finances. 1434 families, representing a

national cross—section, were interviewed each year from 1967 to 1970.

        1. Data construction. The basic variables in our study were real

family disposable income and gross expenditures on automobiles. These

were constructed as follows:

        Total income is reported each year in current dollars. It

includes capital and mixed labor—capital income, as well as wages and

salaries. Unrealized capital gains do not appear to be included. Federal

taxes were estimated from the family data by the survey—taking group.

We estimated Social Security and state income taxes for each family:

        1) Total family income was allocated into wages, non—wage taxable,

and non—taxable income. The appropriate Social Security tax rate, subject

to the legislated ceiling, was applied to each of the first two categories

to estimate Social Security taxes.

        2) For each state and each year, we found the ratio of state

personal income taxes to Federal personal income taxes paid by inhabi-

tants of the state.34 The applicable ratio was applied to each family's

estimated Federal taxes to calculate the family's state taxes for that

year.
                                 —27—




    Sales taxes and property taxes were not deducted, on the grounds

that they should be treated as part of the price of the associated con-

sumer good.

     Income measures were converted to 1972 dollars by the implicit
                                                     component of GNP.
deflator for the personal consumption expenditures

     The survey contained annual data on gross expenditures on auto-

mobiles for each family. However, car sales that were not trade—ins
                                                    data with a car sales
were not reported. We augmented the expenditure

series constructed from data on family car stocks.

     Each family reported the number of cars owned in each year and a

                                                We estimated the value of
list of characteristics of the primary car.

the primary car in a manner to be described.     When the number of cars

owned was unaccountably too low, based on previous stocks and expendi-

tures, it was assumed that a sale had taken place. If it could be

determined that the primary car had been sold without an accompanying

purchase, the value of the primary car was included in the sales series.
                                                   assumed that the tilastli
 If it was not the primary car that was sold, we
                                                 This car was valued at
 of the n cars owned by the family was sold.

 1/n times the value of the primary car.

      Valuation of the primary car was achieved by fitting a regression

 of the purchase prices of cars bought during the sample period against

 the characteristics of those cars. Using the characteristics of the
                                           primary car values.
 primary cars, the regression predicted

      The predicting regression was
                                            —28—




 (DA.1)      RPCAR = 2635         —   364 AGECAR + 310 CONV +   220 MIDSIZE
                        (66.7)        (—74.8)       (3.86)      (2.74)



                   + 658 LGSIZE
                         (16.0)

                                                   R2 = .732



 Variables are defined as follows:

      RPCAR =    real   purchase price of car

     AGECAR = age of the car in years, if age < 10; otherwise AGECAR = 10

          CONV   1, if    the car is a convertible; otherwise CONV       0


    MIDSIZE = 1,    if the car is intermediate—sized; otherwise MIDSIZE =     0

and LGSIZE = 1,     if the    car is large—sized; otherwise LGSIZE = 0.


 The t—statistics are in parentheses.
      Automobile expenditures were deflated by the automobiles component

 of the Consumer Price Index.



  2. Elimination of deterministic components. A first step in the

  estimation procedure is to remove the "deterministic' components of

  family income and automobile expenditure. As in Bhalla (1980), our

  approach was to extrapolate time series profiles from the essentially

  cross—sectional data. The prediction regressions for the first difference

  of real disposable income and for real automobile expenditures were:
                                           —29—




(DA.2)       DY = —52.3 AGE + .434 (AGE )2 + 1491 DADULT +                             32.8 OCCMED
                       (—1.08)            (0.74)            (11.30)                   (0.22)

                   + 89.4 OCCHI + 1843 YR1 +               1598 YR2 + 1658 YR3
                           (0.58)            (1.90)        (1,65)            (1.71)

                                                                      = .045



and



(DA.3)       EXP       =     13.0 AGE —     .176 (AGE )2     + 96.3 ADULT + 215 0CCMED
                            (0.76)         (—0.86)               (2.65)              (4.02)

                       + 298 OCCHI — 18.9 YR1                +   34.5     YR2   —   15.8 YR3
                             (553)            (0.06)             (0.10)             (—0.05)


                                                                        = .156



The variable definitions are


      DYt =        change in real disposable income between years t and t+1

              =    real automobile expenditures in year t
      EXPt

              =    age of head of household at end of year t
      AGEt

              =    number of adults in household at end of year t
  ADULTt

              =    ADULTt+l - ADULTt
 DADULTt

              =    1       if 30 < 0CC < 59, 0 otherwise
 OCCMEDt

              =    1 if 60 < 0CC, 0 otherwise
  OCCHIt

         where 0CC = Duncan socioeconomic status score of occupation of
                               family head. The scale is 0—100, with higher scores

                               corresponding to higher status. Because the score is

                               not reported for 1970, we assumed 0CC1970 = 0CC1969 for

                               each family
                                     3O




    YR1, YR2, YR3        year dummies, l968•-7O.

Pooled data were used. The     'deterministic" components of     income change

and expenditure were taken to be the predictions of these regressions

for each family.



3. Heteroscedastidustment. The data were adjusted for heterosce—

dasticity in the innovations to income, A simple Wald approach was used:

First, the four—year average disposable income for each family was calcu-

lated. The range of average incomes was then broken up into $5000

intervals. (The large interval size was chosen in order to keep induced

bias at a minimum.) The normalizing factor assigned to each family was

the mean of all incomes falling in the same interval as the income of

the family. Income and expenditure were divided by the normalizing factor

before estimation

4. Alternative estimate      of    ci..   To find an alternative estimate of the

sensitivity of long-run car stocks to permanent income, we ran the

following regression:


        (DA.4)CARSTOCK     2625 + .219 YPERN — 152 AGE1968 + 1.67 (AGE1968)2
                          (8.02)          (26.0)      (-.8.84)



                                                   R2 = 0.116


where

     CARSTOCK =    estimated   value of family's car stock, averaged over

                   sample period
                                   —31—




            =a                             income, from a first—stage regression
    YPERN        proxy for permanent

              of average disposable income against age, age squared, the

              number of adults in the household, occupational dummies,

              and a constant.



                                                  levels. The sample was
5. Partitioflfl the sample by liquidity
                                                 reported in Section 4. First,
subdivided in order todo the estimation
                                   financial assets for each year in the
the holdings of real, liquid
                                                             1968—70,
sample period were calculated for each family. Pooling years
                                          demographic data as follows:
liquid assets was fitted against



                 FIN =   —2116     + 1.64 AGE + 2.60 (AGE)2 — 230 ADULT
     (DA.5)                                                            (0.85)
                         (—0.79)     (0.01)              (1.68)



                     + 3760 OCCMED          +   7200 OCCHI
                         (9.22)                 (17.7)


                                                           R2 = .121




Predicted liquid assets for each family were averaged over the sample

period. Families were then ranked according to average predicted liquid

assets, and the sample broken into thirds.
                               —32-




                               Notes




 1. For example, it is central to the debate over the effectiveness of
     temporary income tax changes as countercylical instruments. See
     Blinder (1981).

 2. See, e.g.,Modigliani—Brumberg (1954) and Ando—Modigliani (1963).

 3. The older reserach is surveyed in Ferber (1973) and Mayer (1972).

 4. Hall—Mishkin used Michigan's Panel Study of Income Dynamics,
     which contains histories of 2309 families over the period 1969—75.

 5. For this reason Hall—Mishkin single out the extension of their
     approach to durables as an important topic for further research.

 6. The Hall, Sargent, and Flavin time series studies treated all
     income changes as homogeneous; the assimption that families can
     distinguish different types of income change seems more reasonable.
     Earlier work tried to operationalize this assumption by breaking
     income down by source (see, for example, Taylor (1971)); but the
     identification of, say, capital income with windfalls is arbitrary.
     The use of an unobservables model here avoids these problems.

 7. Alternatively, Y could be called the non—family—specific component.
         is supposed to capture "standard" income profiles for each demo-
     graphic group, from which changes in the fortunes of individual families
     can be measured as deviations.

 8. We did experiment with alternative ARNA processes for windfall income;
     processes with two or less free parameters could be identified in the
     context of our model. Our findings were not sensitive to these
     changes.

 9. This assumes that income is exogenous with respect to consumption.
     Sargent's article has a discussion of the implications of this.
     The income—exogerieity assumption is more easily avoided in time
     series than in panel data; see Diewert (1974) for an application
     to durables.

10. The point that the sensitivity of consumption to current income
     under the PIH depends on the stochastic process of income is ampli-
     fied by Flavin and by Blinder.
                               —33—




11. Because of the durable—goods feature of this problem, we depart
     from the Hall—Mishkin specification at this point.

12. Stone and Rowe. (1957).

13. At best this is an approximation. Estimation within high— and
     low—income subsamples showed that in fact the marginal propensity
     to buy cars is lower for the rich. However, this fact did not
     affect the estimates of the other parameters, which were about
     the same in the subsamples as in the total sample..

14. Geometric mortality is a standard assumption. For alternative
     models of durables stock depletion, see Williams (1972).

15. For an early statement of this idea, see Nugent (1939), especially
     p. 135. Mishkin's analysis can be viewed as the opposite face of
     the precautionary demand for money literature (see, e.g., Whalen
     (1966)). We find this treatment of dynamic liquidity management
     under uncertainty to be much richer than the older, static model
     of liquidity constraints, in which spending is affected only when
     cash reserves literally reach zero.

16. Specifically, (2.11) implies that expenditures deferred (or moved
     up) this year are made up at rate A in future years, leaving no
     long—run effects. Alternative specifications tried assumed 1) that
     deferred expenditures are made up completely in the next year,
     and/or 2) current deferrals depend on a moving average of past
     and present windfalls, rather than just the current windfall. The
     results were not significantly affected by these changes.

17. Year dummies were included to eliminate aggregate influences such
     as the business cycle, interest rates, and the relative price of
     automobiles; we wanted to avoid the possibility of one or two
     macroeconomic events dominating the results. Using the year
     dummies in fact made little difference, confirming the observation
     that aggregate disturbances explain only a small part of the
     variation in individual family circumstances.

18. In the original application of this approach, Hall and Mishkin did
     not make a cross—sectional heteroscedasticity correction. This
     is a potentially serious omission, since it gives some large—income
     families as much as one hundred times the average weight in the
     estimates. We also suspect that it is this omission that pushes
     the Hall—Mishkin results away from acceptance of the PIH.

19. The use of income changes and car expenditure levels is not
     asymmetrical: Expenditures are the first difference of stocks,
     which depend on (permanent) income.
                                      —34--




20. The parameter estimates were not at all sensitive to changes in .
     Specifically, the convenient assumption that    is constant across
     the sample, rather than dependent on the age of the gamily head,
     was not a factor in the results.

21. Wykoff (1970) disputes the constant depreciation rate assumption,
     claiming that depreciation is at a greater rate in the first year.
     The effects of experimentation with the depreciation rate were
     confined largely to the estimates of the stock adjustment
     parameter, A.

22. a is inflated in some degree by the assumption that the unidenti-
     fiable term G      equals   zero,

23. The Hall—Mishkin result that a2 is about twice a2 may be due to
                                         fl                E
     the cross—sectional heteroscedasticity in their data. Our uncorrected
     data also implied a relatively larger variance for windfall income.

24. In addition, Monte Carlo simulations, reported below, found an estimated
     bias in a of approximately .03. Correction of a by this quantity
     brings it very close to the alternative estimates.

25. Few previous studies of automobile expenditure have explicitly con-
     sidered the influence of transitory income. An exception is
     Katona and Mueller (1968) who, applying a rather different approach
     to family data, tend to support the no—effect result.

26. In his comment following Mishkin (1977), Robert Gordon pointed out
     some difficulties in interpreting the time series tests of the
     liquidity hypothesis. The use of cross—sectional data helps us
     avoid those problems in the teat reported below.

27. The division of the sample by fitted rather than actual financial
     assets was done to avoid simultaneity problems, e.g., as when a
     family cumulates financial assets in anticipation of a car purchase.
     The estimates of y were about the same when the sample was divided
     according to actual financial assets.

28. We had no prior reason to expect this result, but it was obvious
     even from casual inspection of the autocovariograms of income.
     Again, variances are scaled to offset the heteroscedasticity
     correction.

29. For example, see MaCurdy (1981) on ML properties when disturbances
     are incorrectly assumed to be normal.

30. Dagenais (1975)   and   others have expanded on the basic Tobit model.
                                 —35—




31. Determination of the bias analytically seems intractable. The
     problem Is complicated by the time series aspect and by the inclusion
     of car sales as well as purchases.

32. Hamburger (1967).

33. Hymans (1970) and Juster—Wachtel (1972) have stressed the itnpor—
     tance of survey measures of consumer sentiment in predicting
     short—run car sales. For formal analyses of the "confidence"
     phenomenon as a result of the interaction of uncertainty and
     Irreversibility, see Cukierman (1980) and Bernanke (forthcoming).

34. Sources were 1) for federal personal income taxes by state:
     Internal Revenue Service, Statistics of Income: Individual Income
     Tax Returns; 2) for state personal income taxes, Commerce Clearing
     House, State Tax Handbook, various years.
                                   -36-




                             References


Ando, Albert and Franco Modigliani, "The Life—Cycle Hypothesis
     of Saving," American Economic Review, 53, March 1963, 55—84.

.Bernanke, Ben, "Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Bhalla, Surjit, "The Measurement of Permanent Income and Its Application
     to Savings Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, 88, August 1980, 722—44.

Blinder, Alan, "Temporary Income Taxes and Consumer Spending," Journal
     of Political Economy, 89, February 1981, 26—53.

Cagan, Phillip, "Measuring Quality Changes and the Purchasing Power
     of Money: An Exploratory Study of Automobiles," in Z. Griliches,
     ed., Price Indexes and Quality Change, Cambridge: Harvard Univ.
     Press, 1971.

Cukieriiian, Alex, "The Effects of Uncertainty on Investment Under Risk
     Neutrality with Endogenous Information," Journal of Political
     Economy, 88, June 1980, 462—75.

Dagenais, Marcel, "Application of a Threshold Model to Household Purchases

     1975, 275—85.
                                           —
     of Automobiles," Review of Economics and __________
                                              Statistics, 57, August


Darby, Michael, "The Allocation of Transitory Income Among Consumer
     Assets," American Economic Review, 62, December 1972, 928—41.

Diewert, W. E., "Intertemporal Consumer Theory and the Demand for Durables,"
     Econometrica, 42, May 1974, 497—516.

Ferber, Robert, "Consumer Economics: A Survey," Journal of Economic
     Literature, 11, 1973, 1303—42.

Flavin, Marjorie, "The Adjustment of Consumption to Changing Expectations
     about Future Income," Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Friedman, Milton, A Theory of the ConsumptionFunction, Princeton, N.J.:
     Princeton Univ. Press, 1957.

Hall, Bronwyn, MONENTS: The Moment Matrix Processor User's Manual,
     Version 1.1, 1979.

Hall, Robert, "Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle—Permanent
     Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence," Journal of Political
     Economy, 86, December 1978, 971—87.

__________ and Frederic Mishkin, "The Sensitivity of Consumption to
     Transitory Income: Estimates from Panel Data on Households,"
     Econometrica, forthcoming.
                               —37—




Hamburger, Michael, "Interest Rates and the Demand for Consumer
     Durable Goods," American Economic Review, 57, December 1967,
     1131—53.

Hendricks, Gary and Kenwood Youmans, Consumer Durables and Installment
     Debt: A Study of American Households, 1967—70, Inter—university
     Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor, 1976,
     Report # 1CPSR7497.

Hymans, Saul, "Consumer Durable Spending: Explanation and Prediction,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1970:2, 173—206.

Juster, F. Thomas and Paul Wachtel, "Anticipatory and Objective Models
     of Durable Goods Demand," American Economic Review, 62,
     September 1972, 564—79.

Katona, George and Eva Mueller, Consumer Response to Income Increases,
     Washington: Brookings Institution, 1968.

Lucas, Robert, "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," in
     K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, Eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor
     Markets, Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1976.


MaCurdy, Thomas, "Asymptotic Properties of Quasi—Maximum Likelihood
     Estimators and Test Statistics," National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Technical Paper #14, June 1981.

Mayer, Thomas, Permanent Income, Wealth, and Consumption, Berkeley:
     Univ. of California Press, 1972.

Mishkin, Frederic, "Illiquidity, Consumer Durable Expenditure, and
     Monetary Polity," American Economic Review, 66, September 1976,
     642—54.

___________ "What Depressed the Consumer? The Household Balance Sheet
     and the 1973—75 Recession," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     1977:1, 123—64.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Brumberg, "Utility Analysis and the
     Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross—Section Data,"
     in Post—Keynesian Economics, K. Kurihara, ed., New Brunswick, N.J.:
     Rutgers Univ. Press, 1954.

Muth, John, "Optimal Properties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts,"
     Journal of the American Statistical Association, 55, June 1960,
     299—306.

Nugent, Roif, Consumer Credit and Economic Stability, New York: Russell
     Sage Foundation, 1939.

Sargent, Thomas, "Rational Expectations, Econometric Exogeneity, and
     Consumption," Journal of Political Economy, 86, August 1978,
     673—700.
                                   —38—




Stone, Richard and D. A. Rowe, "The Market Demand for Durable Goods,"
     Econometrica, 25, July 1957, 423—43.

Taylor, Lester, "Saving out of Different Types of Income," Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, 1971:2, 383—416.

Tobin, James, "Estimation of Relationships for Limited Dependent Variables,"
     Econometrica, 26, January 1958, 24—36.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, Survey of Current Business, various
     issues.

Whalen, Edward, "A Rationalization of the Precautionary Demand for
     Cash," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80, May 1966, 314—24.

Williams, Ross, "Demand for Consumer Durables: Stock Adjustment
     Models and Alternative Specifications of Stock Depletion,"
     Review of Economic Studies, 39, July 1972, 281—96.

Wykoff, Frank, "Capital Depreciation in the Postwar Period: Automobiles,"
     Review of Economics and Statistics, 52, May 1970, 168—72.
