                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PARTIAL RETIEEMENT AND THE ANALYSIS
                      OF RETIREMENT BEHAVIOR



                         Alan L. Gustman

                      Thomas L. Steinmeier

                      Working Paper No. 163




               NATIONAl BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                         September 1981




The research reported herein is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies and was supported by the Office of Policy,
Planning and Research, LMSA/PWBP, U.S. Department of Labor under
contract No. J—9—9—O—0175. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research
or the Department of Labor. We would like to express our appre-
ciation to Gary Fields, Meir Kohn, and Olivia Mitchell for their
helpful comments. Useful comments were also received in a seminar
presented at the NBER.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #763
                                                      September 1981



            Partial Retirement and the Analysis of Rtirement Behavior



                               ABS TRACT




     This paper examines the phenomenon of partial retirement. Topics

covered include: (1) the quantitative importance of partial retirement,

(2) institutional constraints in addition to mandatory retirement which

limit the opportunity to retire partially in the main job, (3) the effect

of these constraints on the specification of the relevant structural equa-

tions in a life cycle retirement model, (4) the impact of standard explan-

atory variables on four outcomes —— complete retirement, partial retirement

both in and outside the main job, and non—retirement, (5) the importance

of partial retirement even for those who do not face mandatory retirement,

are not covered by a pension and are healthy, (6) the sensitivity of

results based on a dichotomous retirement variable to whether the par-

tially retired are classified as retired or not retired.

     A number of studies have either treated partial retirement inappro-

priately or have adopted unrealistic assumptions about the opportunity

set facing potential retirees. Our findings call their results into

question.




                                           Alan L. Gus tman and
                                           Thomas L. Steinmeier
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Dartmouth College
                                           Hanover, N.H. 03755

                                           (603) 646—2641
                                           (603) 646—2531
       Between full—time work and complete retirement, many individuals
pass   through a state of partial retirement. Some of these older workers

reduce their work effort in the same jobs they held as prime age workers,

it    many more   partially   retire    by taking    another job. Much previous

work   has either ignored or     mistreated     this phenomenon of partial retire-
ment. In this paper we will document the important of partial retirement
and    consider   a number of   consequences    of inappropriately analyzing its
role in the retirement decision.
       Much of our effort is aimed at answering six questions and providing
related information pertaining to partial retirement. The six questions
are    as follows:

        1. How important      is partial retirement, both in absolute terms and
relative to full retirement and non-retirement?

        2. Do individuals who partially retire do so by reducing their

work effort in the jobs they held as prime age workers, or do they

partially    retire   outside their "main jobs?"

        3. What   opportunities are      available    to older workers wanting to
retire partially in      their   main   jobs?   That is, what evidence is there
for institutional limitations which would prevent older workers from
partially    retiring in their main jobs?1           And if   such limitations are
found, how should theoretical and          structural    econometric models of the
retirement process be      modified     to account for them?


        1For a discussion of cooperating factors and           resulting   limitations
on the worker's opportunities to determine the length of work day, see
Deardorff and Stafford (1980).
                                      2



       4. How is partial retirement, both within and outside the main
job,
     influenced by the standard set of policy related and other ex-
planatory variables normally included in studies of retirement behavior?
       5. Is partial retirement both in and        outside   the "main   job"   an

important option for those who are        not   forced out of their main job by
ill health, mandatory retirement, or enticed out by attractive pension
benefits?

        6. Is partial retirement important enough so that estimated probe-

bi].ities   of retirement and the   estimated responsiveness of the retirement

               to policy related and other explanatory        variables   depend
probability

strongly on    whether partial retirement is incorporated in the analysis?

That is, is partial retirement important enough so that if a study is

to analyze correctly the determinants of retirement, it must also consider

partial retirement?

        The paper is divided into four main parts. The first section examines

basic descriptive statistics drawn from          the Retirement   History Survey.

 These statistics indicate the extent and nature of partial retirement

 and provide answers to the first two questions posed above. In addition,

 they are used to examine the   sensitivity of measurement to the definition
 of    retirement adopted. Findings in      this section indicate that partial
 retirement   is a more important phenomenon          than is suggested by most

 studies of retirement behavior. They also indicate that partial retire-
                                                 the main job, would be an even
 ment, especially partial retirement in

 more important phenomenon in the absence of institutional constraints

 placing   lower limits on time spent at work.
         Section 2 sketches a number of different models of retirement
 behavior. In this section, we illustrate           how differences in the
                                       3


opportunities for work on a full—time or part-time basis in the main job
and for employment outside the main job affect the specification of the
relevant structural equations in a life cycle retirement model. Particular
attention     is paid to the possibility   that different people face different

constraints    on their ability to reduce hours in their main job, and    even
to   remain   in their main job   at all past a certain   age.

       The next section presents empirical results for a basic retirement

equation in which there are four outccznes: full retirement, partial

retirement in the main job, partial retirement outside the main job and

nonretirement. The results frt this section are used to answer the

last   three questions posed above. Findings are     suirunarized and conclusions

are presented    in the final section.




                                                                                    (
                                      .4




              I. The Extent and Nature of Partial Retirement

     This section contains descriptive statistics relevant to the

phenomenon of partial retirement. Most of these data are from the Retire-
                                                                        who were 58 to
ment History Survey, a longitudinal sample of individuals

63 years old when they were initially surveyed in 1969. They have been

reinterviewed every two years. Responses from four survey years (1969,

1971, 1973, and 1975) are pooled. This procedure means that there is

a greater number of observations for those in the middle ages of the

survey than for those in age brackets falling in the extremes for the

group sample. Our analysis is restricted to white males who are not

self-employed in their main job.1

     It is useful to begin by considering how the frequency of full and

partial retirement is affected by the definition of retirement used.

One obvious way to define retirement status is to use some objective

measure based on wages or hours. Another is to accept the individual's

self—description of retirement status. For each survey year the question—

aire asks whether the respondent considers himself to be completely

retired, partially retired, or not retired. In Table 1, we relate the

responses to this question to observable indications of work effort

reduction, either in the form of a reduction in hours per week worked,

or in the form of a reduction in wages which may be associated with an




         inCl Cfl( ral , Lite 5;(' if (lflJ)iOye(1 lidVe d h ijle r p r. Oft] hi ii t:y
 being   partially retire than do those who are I1tjRii—emI)loyecI (çuinn
                                                                        difficulty in
 1980). They were dropped from this study because of              the

 imputing a meaningful wage rate to such individuals.
                                        5


easier or more flexible job. The horizontal axis of this             table   measures
the    ratio of the cuzrent wage the individual is receiving to the wage

that the individual received in his main        (lifetime)   job.1 For this

purpose,      the main job is taken to be the job that the individual held
at age 55 (as long as the individual worked at least 30 hours per week
in this job), or if wages and hours information is unavailable for this
job, the longest job that the individual has held if information is
available for that job.2 The vertical axis of this table similarly
measures      the ratio of current weekly hours to weekly hours in the main

job.

       The top part    of   the table considers wage and   hours   information for
people      who report that they arepartially retired. Most of the indi-
viduals who      indicate they are partially retired do in fact exhibit a
substantial reduction either in hours worked or in the wage rate they
are receiving for working. For example, 68 percent of these people have
reduced      either their wages or their hours by over 40 percent from the



       1
      All nominal wages in this study have been deflated to 1967 using
the adjusted hourly earnings index. (Economic Report of the President,
Table B—35)

       2
           The wages and hours in the main job- are measured as of the time the
individual      terminated the job or, if he was still in it in 1969, as of
that year. This procedure was necessitated by the data. By defining
the main job as the full-time job held at age 55 we do not mean to imply
that there is no turnover in the main jobs. Data pertaining to such turn-
over are presented in Table 2 and are discussed below. We do, however,
take the job held at age 55 to be representative of the full-time oppor-
tunities available to the individual during prime working years. In
requiring information for the main job, and in defining the main job as
we do, there will be a tendency to eliminate from the sample those in
occupations which are characterized by very high turnover, eg., construction.
                                     6




                                 Table 1


                Wage and Hours Distributions by

                     Reported   Retirement Stntus



                                 current    wage/main lob wage
                0—20      20—40%         40—00%   b0-00    80— 100?       1   oO:
crren hours!    —
mainjob hours             Self-reported as Partially Retired
                           (Percentage of 1417 observations)
       0-20%        .1%      .3           1.2                  .6         4.4
   20—40          .7        2.6           4.9      3.5        2.5         6.7
                                                   3.1        2.5         4.7
   40-60
   60-80
                 1.1
                  .6
                           4.0
                            2.8
                                          5.1
                                          2.8      2.6
                                                          -
                                                               .     -—
                                                                          4.4
                                                                           25
   80-100         .6        1.6           2.1      1.9        1.7
   >100          3.5        2.0           2.5      3.0        3.0         12.5

                            Self—reported as Not     red
                          (Percentage of 9691 observations)
                     0%         0           0        0           0            .1
       0-20%
                     0          0           .1       0           0            .8
   20—40
   40-60             0          0           .1      .1          .2
                     0          .3          .3      .3          .6         3.2
   60—80
                    .1          .5          .8     1.3         3.2         7.6
   80—100
                    .6      1.1            2.3     5.4        15.0        55.1
   >100
                                           7



levels of wages and hours that they exhibited in their main jobs.
(Those exhibiting such a reduction fall in the cells above and to the
left of the dashed line in the table.) Prom the infonation in the table,
it appears that for those reporting partial retirement, a reduction in
wages from the main job, suggesting an easier or more flexible job, is
slightly more coimnon than is a comparable percentage            reduction in hours
worked. The statistics for individuals who report themselves as not

retired are presented in         the lower part of the table. Relatively few of
these    individuals exhibited a substantial reduction in either wages or

hours from the levels found in the main job; only 8 percent had reductions

in either wages or hours that were as large as 40 percent.

        Table 1   indicates that some people consider themselves to be partially
retired even though they are working more, and for higher             wages, than

they    did in their main jobs, while others consider themselves not retired

even though they have experienced a substantial drop in hours or wages.

Nevertheless, there is a close correspondence between observed changes

in wages and      hours   and   reported   status. Indeed, although in our   empirical
analysis we classify people into different retirement categories based on

reported status, we obtain similar findings when we base the definition

of full-time work on an objective measure —             i.e.,   working at least 60%

of the hours for at least 60% of the wage paid in the main job.1



     1The advantage of measuring the dependent variable by self-reported
rather then objectively measured retirement status is that fewer obser-
vations need be eliminated from the sample using the former definition.
An alternative definition, one which does not distinguish between retire-
ment and part—time work, classifies as partially retired all these who
work less than some number of hours. (E.g., Zabaiza, Pissarides and
Barton, 1980).
                                         8


      Table 2 reports on the percentages of individuals by age according
to their response as to whether they are retired, partially retired or
not retired, whether they are still in or have left the main job, and
whether or not the individual has faced or will face mandatory retire-
ment in the main job. Note that the number of people in their late 60's
who report they are partially retired is substantial. Indeed, among those
65 or over who are working the number who are partially retired is compa-
rable to the number who are working full-time. Around 20 percent of the
people in this age range who do not face mandatory retirement on the main
job are partially retired at any point in time. For those who will or
have faced mandatory retirement on the main job and are 65 or above, the
comparable figure is 11 percent.
        e comparison of interest contrasts the information in columns 1
and 2   with that   in 3   and   4.   This comparison suggests that while a person

who   is   not retired is much more likely to be working in the same job as

the one he held at age 55, a person who reports that he is semi—retired

is considerabley more likely to be in a different job from the one held

at 55.

        Table 2 also provides information on the relation between retire-

ment status and     mandatory retirement on the main job. Compared to indi-
viduals who do not face mandatory            retirement,   those who are facing

mandatory retirement in the future have a higher probability that they

will  still be working full-time in their main job and a reduced proba-
 bility that they will either have taken another full-time job or
                                                                  will
 have partially retired in any kind of a job. After the mandatory retire-
 ment age, a few people are able to remain in their main jobs, indicating
 that for these individuals, either the mandatory retirement requirement
                                          9



                                        Table 2


                       Retirement Status, Job Changes, and
                                  Mandatory Retirement


                Not Retired           Partially Retired      Retired
             In Main Not in           In Main Not in
    Age       Job        Main Job      Job     Main Job                  Observations
               Among Those Not Facing Mandatory Retirement
58—61         61.12   21.17        1.57     3.61      12.52                  2796
62—64         33.53      18.60          3.01       10.82      34.04          3984

65—69          7.63        7.79         2.92       17.30      64.36          3866




                 Among   Those Facing Mandatory       Retirement
                                   in the Future
58—61         76.96       9.99          0.50        2.61       9.95          2222
62—64         48.81      10.69          1.40       5.98       33.12          2778
65—59         11.12       6.55         1.66        9.54       71.14          1268



             Among    Those Having Faced Mandatory Retirement
58—61        11.76       11.76       5.88   29.41       41.18                 17

62—64         4.92        3.28         1.64       21.31      68.85            61

65—69         1.16        2.42         0.45       11.10      84.87          1117


*
 Note     that for an observation to be included in this table, it was
 necessary that we could determine whether or not there is mandatory
 retirement in the individual's main job. The probabilities of
 partial retirement for those included            in this table are    somewhat below
 the  probabilities for the entire sample. For example, the probability
 in the entire sample of a white male who is 65 or above reporting he
 is partially retired is about 19% compared to a weighted average of
 17% for the same age group in the above table.
                                        10



must have been waived, or that the initial response was           incorrect.

Nevertheless, most people who were subject to mandatory retirement

and   have passed the mandatory retirement age do indeed leave their main
jobs, and are correspondingly more likely to be retired cctnpletely)
while a substantial fraction of individuals face mandatory retirement
in    their main job, and must either find another job or retire after

mandatory retirement age is reached, of more interest to us is the finding

that a large group of people is induced to leave their main job even

though      they are   not   subject to mandatory retirement provisions, presumably
because they find an         alternative   job that is more attractive in sane way,
such    as offering easier work or more flexible hours.

        Although Table 2 indicates that a significant number of people of

different ages are partially retired, it does not tell us how likely

any particular individual is to become partially retired at sane point

in his life. In the extreme, these figures might reflect either a



        1
                                         this table alone, we cannot be
            It should be recognized that fran
sure that the differences in retirement probabilities seemingly
                                                                 associated
with mandatory retirement are not,  at least partially, the result of a
correlation between mandatory retirement and some excluded factor (eg.,
the availability of a pension, or perhaps more troubling, the opportunity
for an older individual to retire partially on the           main job). The retire-
ment equations we estimate below will attempt to standardize for sane,
but not all, of these other influences. In particular, the  Retire-
                                                         which main jobs
ment History Survey provides no objective information on
offer the opportunity for partial retirement and which do not.  Figures
which do provide sane information on the opportunities for partial
                                                                    retire-
ment are discussed below.
                                   11



situation in which one in five or six    individuals   partially retires and

remains in that state for a number of years, or it might reflect a

situation in which a large number of individuals partially retires but

remains   in that state for a relatively short   duration. Table 3, which

reports on   the relation between the fraction    of individuals who were

partially   retired during at   least one of the four survey years of the
Retirement History Survey   according   to age in the last survey year, 1975,
suggests that   the actual situation falls between these extremes, with

at least one-third of such individuals becoming partially retired at

some   time during their lifetime.1
       Two implications of the data in Tables 2 and    3   should be emphasized.

First,    since they indicate that partial retirement is an important

phenomenon, they imply that if a dichotomous measure of retirement status

is used, as it is in many studies, (eg., Clark and Johnson, 1980, and

Quinn, 1977) findings may differ in a non-trivial way depending on

whether the partially retired are classified with the retired or with

those still working. Second, it also means that a model of retirement

behavior which excludes the possibility of partial retirement is mis-

specified with respect to an important aspect of behavior, and raises

the possibility that any resulting specification errors may be large.

Thus the descriptive statistics raise the possibility that inappropriate

treatment of partial retirement in analyses of retirement behavior may

have   important consequences. These 'implications underline the importance
                                          S



     1The table is confined to individuals for whom retirement status
is self reported for all four waves of the survey.
                           ha




                        Table 3

Percentage and Number of individuals Indicating
  They Were Partially Retired

   In Any   of   The Four Waves of The Survey*


                                           P C   ported
                                          Re tirernnnt
                                            SLatus


  Age in 1975                percentage                   Number

      64                          23.5%                    1389

      65                          25.5                     1228

      66                          32.3                     1195

      67                          33.2                     1221

      68                          33.4                     1208

      69                          38.0                     1115



     *
         Data
           are confined     o those who responded to
  all four waves of the     S urvey.
                                      12


of the last of the questions posed in the introduction.

      The data in Table 4 indicate the percentages, by occupation and

industry,    of those in our    sample who report that they are semiretired.
Axxng occupations, professionals, managers, craftsmen and       operatives
are least likely, and      farmers   sales workers, private household workers

and   service   workers are most likely to report they are semiretired.

There are analogous differences anng industries. Individuals in

manufacturing, transportation, communication and public utilities, and

public administration are least likely to report they are semiretired,
while individuals      in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, finance,

insurance and real estate, personal services, wholesale and retail

and   construction    are most likely to report they are semiretired. These

distributions are     in   accord with general notions about which occupations

and   industries   provide opportunities for part-time work.1

      Our   primary   data source, the Retirement History Survey, does not

contain any     direct evidence   as to whether these differences in the

proportion of semiretired workers reflect differences in the opportunities

for a worker to phase into retirement by reducing hours of work on the

main job. A question was asked on the University of Michigan Survey

Research Center's Panel Study of Income Dynamics which does provide



     1There is some direct information on flexible retirement
arrangements. Consistent with the figures presented in Table 3,
according to a 1979 survey by the Bureau of National Affairs, only
10% of responding manufacturing companies offered tapered retirement
programs where hours could be gradually reduced as the individual
phased into retirement, and just 3% of manufacturing companies made
such programs available to all employees. On the other hand, 27
percent of what they call non-business concerns (universities, hospitals,
etc.) had such programs, with all employees eligible in 19% of the
responding non—business concerns. For related data on industries and
occupations which provide opportunities for part-time work, see
Deutermann and Brown (1978).
                                           Table 4

                  The   Distribution By Occupation and Industry of Older
                              Individuals c'ho Are Semi-Retired

   Occucation   of               Percentage              Industry of             Percentage
      Current Job               Semi-Retired             Current Job            Semi-Retired

Professional                        11.0               Agri, forest,
                                                          Fisheries                 31.9
Farmers                             31.8                                            12.7
                                                       Mining
                                    10.7               Construction                 17.5
anagers
                                                       Manufacturing                 6.2
Clerical                            15.4
                                                       Trans, Corn &
                                    26.6                  Public Util.               9.8
Sales
                                                       Wholesale   &
   -
                                    11.7                                -
Crattsrnan                                                Retail   trace            18.9

Ceratives                           10.9               Finance, Ins. &
                                                          Real Estate               23.3
?riate (Household)                  38.9               Service (except
                                                          personal)                 13.7
Service (except
   Private Household)               22.0               Personal Service             28.1
                                                       Entertainment        &
                                    34.5                                               -
Farm Labor                                                Recreation                14.D
                                                       Public Admin.                10.0
Labor (except farm
      &   mine)                     16.9               Non   Response
Non—response                        25.6

All                                 15.6               All                          15.6
                                       13



strong evidence that on many jobs, workers are not free to work less.

Using yearly observations from 1971 to 1975 for 25 to 54 year old males,

56% of those for whom one can determine whether they are at alower limit

to time worked on their job indicate that        they   could   not work less even

if   they wanted to. For full time workers who are        between    55 and   65   years
of age, the comparable figure is 60 percent.
     These findings are contrary to the assumption used in many studies
(for instance, Gordon and Blinder) that workers are free to vary their
hours continuously between zero and full—time work. And, because the
required   information is      not reported on the PSI these figures do not take into
account    that some individuals, although technically free to reduce hours

on their   main job, would face severe      penalties in doing so because their

pensions    are   determined   by a formula based on final average salary.
       In sum, we find that partial retirement is a relatively con
phenomenon among older workers. The partial retirement occurs primarily
in jobs other than the individual's main lifetime          job, despite the fact

that   an individual's wage rate is likely to be higher in the main job


       1
      The skip pattern in that question is such that some people are
not asked whether they could reduce time at work if they wished to.
Specifically, if the person indicated that there was no more work
available on the job, and that he would like to work more hours,
he was never asked if he could work less if he wanted to. This
problem affected approximately 27% of the sample.
                                          14


than in    other jobs. The descriptive statistics suggest that         institutional
limitations-—directly        onor indirectly through pension and mandatory
                                  hours

retirement regulations-—prevent a number of people from reducing hours
worked on their main jobs. Indeed, without these limitations, partial
retirement might well be even more prevalent than it actually is.


             II. Variations on the Life Cycle Model of Retirement
                  Behavior arid Implications for Estimation
         In this section we explore models of retirement behavior and
modifications required by various limitations on the opportunities for
partial retirement. First, we briefly describe the standard life cycle
model of retirement behavior. We then discuss how differences in
opportunities for partial retirement are reflected in the specification
of the utility function and the opportunity set facing each individual,
and how this influences the retirement decision that emerges from the
standard life cycle model.
         The basic retirement decision may be viewed as the solution to a

lifetime utility maximization             problem. In the simplest fori of   this


problem,     the   individual is assumed to live for T years, and      at each
point in time he may choose both his level of consumptiOn and his work
effort. The total utility that the individual achieves from his de-
 cisions    is   given by:


 U   =     u[C(t),   H(t), t; a]dt                                               (1)




 where C(t) is consumption at time t, H(t) is labor supply at time t,
                                      15


and a is a    vector of parameters which influence the shape of the indi-

vidual's    utility function. The    utility   function is assumed to be

separable    over time, and   labor supply is measured in units suh that H (t)

must lie between 0 and 1.       The individual maximizes this utility
function    subject to the budget constraint:



!e_rtC(t)dt =         + feH(t)w(t)dt                                            (2)




where r is the real interest rate, K0 is initial wealth, and W(t) is

the wage offer at time t.

        This problem is of the form that may be analyzed with the theory

of optimal control.1 With some minor assumptions about the boundedness

and             of the function u, optimal control theory assures that
       continuity

a solution to the problem does exist. That is, there is a consumption
path   C*(t) and a labor supply path H*(t) which satisfy the budget con-

straint and which yield a higher total utility than any other pair of

paths   which also satisfy the constraint.      The optimal   paths   will in

general   vary with   the parameters a in the utility function and with         the
wage path w, so that    the optimal paths should more completely be        written

as C*(t; a, W) and H*(t, a, W).

       Consider now the effect of introducing alternative job environ-

ments, i.e., altering the opportunity set facing the worker. The job




     For studies which utilize control theory in analyzing the           retire-
ment problem, see Reimers (1977), Samnartino (1978), and Clark and
Johnson   (1980).
                                      16


environment contemplated in the basic model is one in which the indi-
vidual is free to vary his hours on the job without affecting the wage
rate which is available to him. A second job environment analyzed in the
literature requires that the labor supply decision be an all-or- nothing
one, so     that the person must either work full-time or retire (Burbidte

and Robb,    1980). This   is imposed on the model by requiring that    H(t)

take   on   only the extreme values 0 and 1.1 A    third environment would be

one   in which the   worker   is subject to mandatory   retirement provisions

in his main job at age R, after which he must work in another job,

possibly at substantially reduced wages, if he desires to continue to

work.2 Analytically, this environment differs from the first only in

that it specifies that there is likely to be a sharp drop in the wages

available to the worker after age R. Before mandatory retirement H(t)

refers to hours supplied to the main job, and after mandatory retirement

it refers to hours     supplied   to the alternative job.

       Two further environments assume that there are always two jobs

available to the individual, and that some aspect of the main job becomes

more   onerous over time, ultimately causing the individual to choose an
alternate     "semiretirement" job or to retire completely. These environ-


      1The    restriction that H(t) can
                                     be only 0 or 1 introduces a compli-
 cation into the optimal control problem, namely, that the control set
 is ne longer convex [e.g., 0.5 is a linear combination of 0 arid 1 but
 is not itself a permissible value for H(t)], as required by the optimal
 control theory. This kind of complication, which is also found in many
 of the other extensions examined in this section, can be overcome by
 a technique described in Gustman and Steinmeier (1981). The important
 point for purposes of the present discussion is that even with this
 complication, the control problem still possesses a determinate solution
 for the optimal paths of consumption and labor supply.

               Boskin arid Hurd   (1978) and Gordon and Blinder (1980) consider
mandatory retirement, but only in a context where hours worked are fully
variable at the wage offered on the main job.
                                      17



ments    recuire that both the utility function and the budget constraint
be    modified to allow for both     jobs. The utility function would become


U =    i u[C(t),     H1(t), H2(t), t; a]dt                                  (3)




where the subscripts indicate the labor supply to the two           jobs.   Normally,
not    both H1 (t) and H2 (t) can be positive—that is, the individual may
choose one job or the other, but not both. The corresponding budget
constraint is


feC(t)dt =             + fet[H1(t)w1(t)      +
                                                 H2(t) W2(t)]dt             (4)




where      (t) and      (t) are the wages in the two jobs. In one of these

environments,    the main job   becomes increasingly difficult to perform

as    the individual becomes older (e.g., the job may involve hard physical
labor).     This is reflected in the fact the H1(t) reduces the value

of the utility function more than would a similar nber of hours                   (t)
                                                                            H2
in    the transition job. (For a related analysis,       see Quinn, 1977.) The
other   environment limits work in the main job       to be either full-time or

not   at all, while    part-time work is permitted in the transition job.

This may be introduced in the model        by constraining H1(t), but not H2(t),
to be either 0 or 1.
     For each of the five job environments described above, the optimal
control problem will have as a solution a determinate pair of paths for
consumption   and labor    supply.   However, these paths will in general not

be identical. This means that the paths of consumption            and labor supply
are dependent not just on the parameters a which influence the shape of
the utility function and the waqes offered to the individual, but [hey
also depend on the type of job environment within which the individual

muet make his decisions This may be explicitly indicated by writ.inq

the optimal paths more completely as C (t a, W, c) and 11* (t; a, W,

e), where e is an index of the type of      job   environment relevant to the

particular individual.

     Social    security and/or private pensions may also be     introduced into

tile models.      The Social Security system has two effects on the model.

One is   to reduce the net wage in any period by the amount of the      Social

Security   tax:




W (t) = (1 —
 n
                  s)W(t)


where W(t) is the after-tax wage and s is the Social Security tax rate.

The second effect is to introduce additional payments to the individual

which are determined fr a caitplicated relationship involving past

wages,   past employment choices, and    several Social Security parameters.

These    benefits are given by the expression b(W, H, t;     S) where W and H

are the time paths of wages and hours, respectively1 and S is a vector

of Social Security parameters. w(t) and b are introduced into model

of retirement behavior through the budget constraint.

        Private pensions may be introduced into the models in much the

same way as Social Security. Instead of the Social Security tax rate

s there is the pension contribution rate p, and the private pension

benefit formula f(W, H, t, P) replaces the Social Security benefit
                                       19


formula    b. P is a vector of parameters which determine the shape of the
benefit function. For        Social Security and private pensions, changes
                            both

in the contribution rate and the benefit formula, by changing the shape
of the lifetime budget constraint facing the individual, may be expected
to affect optima]. consumption and labor supply paths over time. Thus,
C*(t)   and   H*(t), in addition to being functions of a, W, and e, may also
be considered as functions of the contribution rates s and p         and the
vectors S and P which determine the nature of the benefit formula.



Implications for Estimation.

       The optima]. path of labor supply H*(t) provides a basis for the

retirement equations estimated in the next section. The path is a

function of wages, the individual characteristics which cause utility

functions to vary from person to person, the specific job environment

facing the individual, and the contribution rates and benefit formulae

for Social Security and     pension    plans. By defining complete retire-

ment, partial    retirement, and full-time work in terms of the labor supply
path   H* (t), the retirement status of an individual can be made a function

of   these same variables.1 In a model with a single job, for instance,
partial retirement might be defined as the reduction of labor supply
below full-time work, and complete retirement might be defined as the
cessation of labor supply. In terms of H*(t), partial retirement would
occur if   O<H*(t)<1, and   complete   retirement would occur when   H*(t) = 0.


     1The arguments of the reduced form relations would not be
                                                               altered
even if one were to modify the life cycly model to meet objections as
to its utility in explaining
                             savings and consumption behavior such as
those raised by Kurz (1981).
                                        20


In a model with two jobs, partial retirement might be alternatively defined
to occur when the individual leaves the main job and enters the transition
        It should be clear that       these   definitions contain   a   degree of
job.
arbitrariness, a problem which is compounded if only           two retirement       states


—working and        retired—are      considered. In this latter case, it may

                                                 whether someone who is
make a great deal of difference to the estimates

still working but      at   considerably reduced hours is considered to be

retired or working.

       The   retirement status, however defined, can thus       be estimated as

a   function of age and of the variables which cause budget constraints
and utility functions to vary among individuals. The problem, of course,
is that without a specific derivation of the retirement equation from
the structural model (which is usually impossible without severely
simplifying     assumptions or questionable approximations)t we have little

idea    about the form that this function might take. After all, the
function is being implicitly          defined as the solution to a control

problem, and       one might suspect that the resulting form would be rather
                                                              to
complicated. For this reason, it would be very dubious to try
estimate the retirement equation with a method which assumes a linear
or some other rigid functional form. Rather, methods which can deal
 with flexible functional forms and let the data tell us about the shape
 of the function are required in this problem. One relatively easy-t0
 use technique that satisfies this requirement is the discrete multi
             analysis algorithm described in Bishop, Feinberg, and           Holland
 variate
                                                          almost as well in most
    (1975). Another technique which probably does

                   with                         variables and with a liberal search
    cases is OLS          dummy   explanatory
                                       21


 for interaction terms among the duitny variables. Both of these methods
 use a potentially very large number of parameters to fit any function
 reasonably well.


             III. Estimates and Implications of the Retirement
                    Equation
     This    section addresses the last three questions raised in the intro-

duction. The basic empirical model          estimated   here is a retirement

equation    of   the kind developed   in   the last section. In this model, the

dependent    variable is the   probability that an individual will fall in a

given retirement category (completely retired, partially retired in the
main job, partially retired outside the main job or not retired)    The
explanatory variables are as follows:2

        1lndicators of retirement used in other studies include pension
acceptance (Boskin and Hurd, 1978), hours per week of work (Zabaiza,
Pissarides and Barton, 1980) and a measure of labor market flow out of
one job, and conditionally into another (Burkhauser and Quinn, 1980).
Both hours of work per week and rates of flow from one job into others
are imperfect indicators of retirement status.           some individuals
partially retire by cutting weeks, not hours, or by obtaining easier
jobs. These individuals are not counted as partially retired when an
hoi.irs  per week criterion is used. In the  case       of the flow criterion,
note that the flow out of a particular job includes individuals who
are leaving one main job for another, others who are leaving one partial
retirement job for another, and still others who are moving from either
a partial, retirement job or a main job into retirement. However, this
flow excludes those partially retiring within the main job.
     Two of the studies noted above utilize a dependent variable that
consists of the probability of falling in one of three states—full
retirement, partial retirement and non-retirement.  (Boskin and Hurd and
Zabalza, Pissarjdes and Barton.) However, both studies are based on
models which incorporate a utility function specified not over the
lifetime, but for a single period.
     2
      We recognize that a number of these variables may be endogenous
to the analysis. These include the two wages, pension or social security
coverage, mandatory retirement provision on the job, and health status.
A complete life cycle model might explain each of these in terms of the
full opportunity set available to the individual and expected productivity
over the life cycle, but that is beyond the scope of this paper.
                                    22



                                                              (58-59, 60—61, 62,
1.    A nasu.re of age consisting of eight categories

      63, 64, 65, 66—67, 68—69)
                                                  1967 dollars) in a non-
2.    A measure of the usual hourly wage (in

      retirement job, adjusted to age 63 in accordance with the age—wage

      profile estin'iated from a wage equation.      There are four categories

      (<$2.00, $2.00—3.00, $3.00—4.25, and >$4.25/hr.)

3.    A measure of the wage in a partial retirement job, adjusted to the

      66—67 age range with an age-wage profile estimated for partial

      retirement jobs. There are four categories (<$1.25, $1.251.75,

      $l.75—2.60, and >$2.60/hr).

4.    A measure of pension coverage in the main job, with three categories

      (no coverage, private sector pension coverage, and         public   sector


      pension coverage).

 5.   An indicator of Social Security coverage, with three categories

       (covered, not covered, and uncertain coverage due to missing

      information).

 6.   A measure of mandatory retirement provisions in the main job, with
      four categories (currently below the mandatory retirement age,
       currently above the mandatory retirement age, not subject to
       mandatory   retirement   provisions1 and   uncertain   about mandatory

       retirement provisions due   lack of information).
                                     to

 7.    A dichotomous measure differentiating between those who report they
       are healthy and those who do not.
 8.    A measure of marital status with three categories (never married,
       married with spouse present, and other)
                                        23



9. A dichotomous indicator of whether the individual is supporting

       his or his spouse's parents.

10. A    dichotomous variable indicating whether or not there are         children

       under 18 in the home.


       Three other variables which the analysis of the last section suggested
should    included in the equation had to be omitted due to a lack of
           be

adequate date in the Retirement History Survey. These are an indicator
of   whether or not he individual was in a job environment which permitted
a gradual reduction in work effort, a set of parameters describing the
various pension plans, and an indication of the difficulty of work in
the main job) To the extent that these variables enter the retirement
decision, and      to   the extent that they are   correlated   with other variables
which are       included in the equation, the omission of these variables will

lead   to standard omitted variables bias.



       1
      Unfortunately the PSID, which doescontain information on the ability
of workers to reduce hours, is inadequate in other ways, e.g., there are' few
older workers and no information on mandatory retirement. It is possible
using the data in the Retirement History Survey to impute, in a crude way,
the value of pensions. But no information is available in the Retirement
History Survey on the crucially important effect of additional earnings on
the marginal value of pension wealth, or on whether part—time work on the
main job will affect adversely the level of earnings used to calculate
pension benefits. For a discussion of the relation between the marginal
val of the life—time pension stream and the increment in lifetime income
associated with additional work, see Fields and Mitchell, 1981.
                                         24



   with  regard to social security, a large number of parameters (the
contribution rate s and the vector S which determines the nature of the
                        from the model   of retirement behavior discussed in
benefit   formula)

Section II have been reduced to a simple dichotomOUs
                                                                  variable. This
was done because        the break points and   the   marginal   tax rates between

those points in the Social Security system do not vary across indi-
viduals once the wage offer curve, age, and marital status are stand-
ardized for.1
        Since   the    single wage job environments described in the previous
section    can   be    subsumed under two—wage environments, separate wages for

non—retirement and partial
                                   retirement jobs were included in the retire-
ment equation         for everyone. Where values of these wages were not

directly observed, values were imputed separately for the wages in non—

retirement    partial retirement jobs using wage equations estimated
                 and

from those who did have observations on the type of wage in question.
                                                                +

The   variables in the wage equations included education, health, age,
 residence      in an SMSA,   and additionally   for the non-retirement wage

                                                       and the tenure that would
 equation, occupation, pension eligibility,

 have   accrued to the individual had he remained in his main job.


        11t would be      inappropriate   to include as an exogenous explanatory
 variable in a retirement equation the current value of social security
 wealth. This measure is endogenous to any  life-cycle labor supply
 decision. At best, one could include a  measurf   full social security
 wealth  (i.e., a measure of social security wealth which is independent
 of work effort), but since full social security wealth is largely
                                included in the model (wage in the main
 determined byvariableS.alreaY
 job, marital status, and social security  eligibility), the inclusion
 of this variable would result in an unidentified or very weakly
 identified model.
                                            '25


           Al]. wages   are adjust:orl to a standardized age            isi ng the aqe—wiqe
 profile from the estimated wage equation. We are assuming for purposes

 of our ompi r i e       ann 1 yn i   that: waqo   rrf   in   1   nw'   tin inc   101 e. The o --
 fore,      the standardized wage       measurc      tN hei qht:         of the prof I    .   Usn

 of   this standardized wage variable is therefore cons intent with the

 theory developed above, in which labor supply at any moment influenced

by the course of events over the entire life cycle.

           It was recognized that the imputation procedure might be subject

to selectivity bias, and a test for selectivity bias was carried out.

Essentially, we estimated a reduced form equation explaining the
                                                                                         probability
of full or part—time work and included a cateqorica3 variable based on

this probability in the wage equations. The test did indicate that: self—

selection was present in the wage equations, hut: corrections for this

problem had Only a very minor effect on the estimated parameters of the

retirement equation —           usually   changing parameter estimates by only

a few tenths of a percentage point. Accordi.nqly, the reported results

do not standardize for the effects of selectivity bias.1 Additional

details of the procedure to correct for selectivity bias are found in

Gustman arid Steinmeier (1981).

       The empirical estimates are based on discrete rnultivarjate analysis,

a technique which Haberman (1978) has shown to he exactly equivalent to

multinomial logit when the explanatory variables are categorical, and



       1
           These results are available on request.
                                         .26



when equivalent sets of interactions are included. Unlike multinomial

logit, however, discrete multivari.ate analysis jermitsa relatively

easy search for complex interactions, which are expected both because

the retirement equation is the solution to a complicated life cycle

labor   supply problem, and because previous wurk on retirement behavior
leads us to expect complex interactions amonq such explanatory variables
as health status, mandatory retirement provisions, pensions, and Social
Security   coverage, and wage offers. The test for the siqnificance of

particular interactions is a likelihood ratio test utilizing a test
                  7                  2
statistic (AG ) which has a x distribution iind'r the nul]. hypothesis
                                                                       1
that the interaction in question has no effc ri tb dependcnL variable.
Effect of the Explanatory Variables on Partii1 :ct irment
       The estimation produces a set of parameters which, by themselves,
are   tedious to interpret. Results are much       more eailyunderstO0d!f they
are   presented       in terms of how the sample would respond to changes in
the various explanatory variables. Table 5          indicates   the sample-
weighted average impact of each of the explanatory variables on the
four retirement status probabilities. The entries in the table are
calculated by first finding the estimated impact of the variable in
question   oil the computed probabilities for each individual in the

sample, holding all other explanatory variables at the values actually

observed for that individual, and then by avera'inq the responses across




              discrete multivartate modeL; 1L(' "I ret ':hi,i1 ," i 5iqnificant
                              that all implied lower order interactions also
        'Sinne
 higher order term requires
 be included.
                                       27




the   individuals in the sample.     For   exanipin       I i(;ure5 tn   I:hc column

entitled    "Private   Pension" are the calculated probabilities for a sample

which was like the actual sample in all respects except that everyone

had a private pension, less the probabilities calculated for a similar

sample in which no one had a private pension.

        Column 1 of the table reports the     effeeL   of variation in t1' wmjn

offer   on the main job between the highest and lowest categories. It

can be seen that the major effect of a high wage offer in a nonretirernent

job is to reduce the probability of partial]v retiring outside the main

job and to    increase the   probability    of not retiring at all. The       change

(des]   me) in   the prohabi] .Ly of partially rctirnq ntside the rndn job

is particularly large when compared to the percentage of respondents

who actually do partially retire, as shown in Table 2. The effects of

variations in the wage in the partial retirement: job, as reported in

column 2, are numerically ouch weaker.




                                                   in t-he main iob to
      2Tho ncn—respons3veiio;n of partial. r(Liycnhr i
full-time wages may be attributed to the fact that, for those who have
the option of partially retiring in the main oh, ldqh full—time wages
and high partial reLirement wages go together.
                                          Table 5
  Estimated Impact of Explanatory Variables on Retirement Status.
                                   Explanatory Variables
Retirement     Wage In Wage In                        Above     Be low
Status         Non -Re -  Partial                     Mandatory Mandatory
and            tirement Retire - Private Public Retire- Retire —
Age            Job        ment Job Pension Pension ment Age ment Age
Not
Retired   58—5 9        .028     .001             .007      —.011       — .892      .006
          60—61         .057     .004            —.021      —.027       —.433       .004
           62           .071     • 006           —.036      —.054       —   .530       .009
           63           .085     .009            —.105      —.067       —.410          .014
           64           .085     • 010           —.062      —.019       —.330          .011
           65           .057     .006            —.138      —.016       —.174      —.   045
                                 .005            —.063      —.019       — .079      .019
          66—67         .039
          68—69         .026     .004            —.023       .019       —.072      —.012

Par—      58—59         .000     • 005           —.005           .016       .354   —. 013
                                    .005                                —.012      —.005
tially    60—61         .000                     —.007      —.012
                                                                        — .026     — .010
Retired    62           .001        • 010        —.013      —.022
in Main    63           .001        .008         —.013      —.012        .016      —.015
Job        64           .003        .012         —.008      —.021       —031       —   .015
           65           .005        .014         —.033      —.041       —.035      —.013
          66—67         .004        .009         —.011      —.023       — .019     —   .017
          68—69         .003        .007         —.015      —.023       —.02 1     —.002

Par—      58—59     — .025      —.001             .010           .007       .606       .007
tially    60—61     —.048       —   .002          .021           .028       .229   -.011
Retired    62       —.063       —.002            —.019           .033       .013   —.017
                                                 —.001           .008              — .023
Outside    63       —.085       —   .003                                    .256
of Main    64       —. 096      —.003              .020          .024       .080   —.05 3
                                — .002             .013          .052   —.062      — .044
Job        65       —    .097
          66—67     —.113       —.001            —.016       —.018      —.004      —.046
                    — .093              000        .037      —.038      —.075      —.. 047
          68—69                     .

          58—59      —.004      —. 004            —.013      —.012      —.068           .000
Retired   60—61      — .008     — .007             .006          .011       .215        .012
                     —.009      — .013                           .043       .542        .018
            62                                      .069
            63       —.001      —.014               .118         .071       .137        .024
            64            — .018
                         .008                       .050         .016       .281        .057
            65            —.018
                         .036                       .158         .004       .271        .102
         66—67   .070     — .013                    .090         .059       .103        .044
         68—69   .065     —.011                     .002         .042       .168        .061

"The figures in this  table  are              calculated   as:

   Column 1:       Pr  (Ret. Status/Highest Wage category)
                   -Pr  (Ret. Status/Lowest Wage category)
   Column 2:       Pr (Ret. Status/Highest  Wage Category)
                   -Pr (Ret. Status/Lowest  Wage Category)
   CoLumn 3:       Pr  (Ret. Status/Private Pension) — Pr (Ret. Status/No Pension)
   Column 4:       Pr  (Ret. Status/Public Pension) — Pr (Ret. Status/No Pension)
   Column 5:       Pr (Ret. Status/Above Mandatory Retirement Age)
                   -Pr  (Ret. Status/Not Subject to Mandatory Retirement)
   Column 6:       Pr  (Ret. Status/Below Mandatory Retirement Age)
                   -Pr (Ret. Status/Not Subject to Mandatory Retirement)
                                            29
                                   Table   5 (continued)
      Estimated Impact of Explanatory Variables on Retirement Status
Retirement                                    Explanatory Van able s"
Status
and                     Social     Health Never   Widowed, Children Supporting
Age                     Security   Status Married Divorced at Home Parents
Not          58—59       .006       207      —.021      —.033     .012    .027
Retired      60—61       .013       .320     —.025-     —.048     .020    .053
              62        —.088       .358     —.035      —.071     .036    .083
              63        —.073       .352     —.050      —.081     .035    .099
              64         .030       .210     —.047      —.083     .039    .113
              65        —.038       .171     —.043      —.065     .020    .101
             66—67      — .063      .083     —.026      —.041     .011    .078
             68—69      —.045       .022     —.018      —.027     .006    .063
Par—         58—59       .002      —.009     —.001       .002    —.004   —.002
tailJ.y      60—61      —.017      —.008     —.003       .001    —.003   —.002
Retired       62        —.011      —.006     —.008       .001    —.007   —.001
in Main       63         .016      —.007     —.005       .002.   —.005   —.001
Job           64        —.018      —.015     —.012      —.002    —.009    .002
              65         .003       .008     —.012      —.004    —.008    .005
             66—67       .018       .007     —.009      —.003    —.005    .003
             68—69       .016       .007     —.006      —.003    —.003    .005
Par—         58—59       .009      —.037     —.001       .001    —.004   —.005
tially       60—61       .006      —.026     —.003       .002    —.008   —.013
Retired      62          .044      —.016     —.004       .000    —.017   —.021
Outside      63          .070      —.027     —.005      —.002    —.019   —.026
of Main      64         —.016       .021     —.010      —.011    —.021   —.024
Job           65         .063      —.011     —.018      —.021    —.024   —.017
            66—67        .076       .026     —.027      —.030    —.024   —.021
            68—69        .018      —.060     —.023      —.033    —.025   —.012
Retired     58—59       —.018      —.161         .023    .030    —.004   —.020
            60—61       —.002      —.287         .032    .045    —.008   —.038
              62         .055      —.336         .047    .070    —.012   —.062
              63        —.013      —.318         .059    .082    —.011   —.072
             64          .004      —.217         .069    .096    —.009   —.091
              65        —.028      —.169         .073    .090     .012   —.088
            66—67       —.031      —.116         .062    .075     .018   — .060
            60—61        .011       .031         .047    .064     .022   —.055

 -'The Figures in this table are calculated as:
       Column 1:        Pr (Pet. Status/Eligible for Social Security)
                        -Pr (Ret. Status/Not E].egible for Social Security)
       Column 2:        Pr (Pet. Status/Healthy) - Pr (Ret. Status/Not Healthy)
       Column 3:        Pr (Ret. Status/Never Married)
                        -Pr (Ret. Status/Married, Spouse Present)
         Column    4:   Pr (Ret. Status/Widowed, Separated, or Divorced)
                        —Pr (Ret. Status/Married, Spouse Present)
         Column    5:   Pr (Ret. Status/Children at Home)
                        —Pr (Ret. Status/No Children at Home)
         Column 6:      Pr (Pet. Status/Supporting Parents)
                        -Pr (Pat. Status/Not Supporting Parents)
 -"See    next page.
                                   30



                            Table 5 (continued)

-"The following groups of variables interacted significantly in their
  effect on retirement status:
                                                               degrees
                                                                 of
          Group of variables                             G2freedom prob-value
                                                        25.1       9          99.7%
1. wage in partial—retirement job
                                                        79.8      18         100.0
2.   social security, pension
                                                        46.2      18          99.9
3. social security, mandatory retirement status
                                                       234.4      42         100.0
4. social security, age
                                                        20.9       9          98.7
5. children at home,     pension
                                                        18.2       9          96.8
6. supporting parents, mandatory retirement status
                                                        51.9      18         100.0
7. marital status, pension
                                                        91.0      27         100.0
8. pension, manôatory retirement status
                                                       122.4      27         100.0
9. pension, wage in non—retirement job
                                                       113.4      63          99.9
10. mandatory retirement status, age
                                                       100.0      63          99.7
11. health, pension, age



     The reader is reminded that since discrete multivariate models are
     "hierarchical ," the inclusion of all higher order terms implies that
     lower order   terms involving subsets of the same variables are also
     included.
                                         31



     Results      presented in the next two columns indicate the relation
between   pension coverage and retirement          outcomes. A person with a
private   pension   exhibits    a lower probability of either working full-

time or retiring partially in the main job than does someone without

a pension. Since normally one must leave the job to collect a pension,

pension formulas which are actuarially unfair (i.e., with an expected

value that declines with each additional year of work) would reduce the

probability of work on the main job. In addition, since for individuals

interest rates paid on borrowed funds exceed rates received on loans, liquidity

effects of pension eligibility may encourage retirement. Finally, as

noted previously, partial retirement on the main job will be discouraged if

earnings     in   a year in which      the    individual works part-time ,ould be
counted in determining the pension benefit. The effect of public sector
pensions   is   similar to that of private pensions.
     Columns 5 and 6 consider the effects of mandatory retirement. The

consequences of having already faced mandatory retirement on the prob-

ability    of not retiring are enormous. Having already faced mandatory
retirement makes      it much   less   likely that an individual will be found

in full—time work. This effect declines with age. The reason for this

decline is that the probability of not retiring falls with age even for

those who do not face mandatory retirement, so that the older the worker,

the smaller is the difference in this probability associated with mandatory

retirement. As would be expected, the probability of partially retiring

in the main job is also lower for those who have already faced mandatory
                                     32



retirement        Some of tho ;e who have been for cod out of the i r        ma in   jb
retire fully,     while others are seen to take part-time jobs outside of

the   main job.    Those who will face mandatory retirement in the future

arc less likely to retire partially in their             main job than are those
with no mandatory retirement, less likely to retire partially outside

of their main job (but this effect is smaller), and by and large are

more likely to keep working full-time in that main job.

        For the Social Security variable, the re;nl.ts mdi rate that people

covered   by ccciii security Or     (J(nerni   ly     en ih.ly     H) H H t:Hr i tired
or   to be working full—time, and are more likely to be partially retired,

especially outside of the main job, than            arc thone    who   are not covered.
Remaining findings indicate that health             problems  the probability
                                                               ].ncreasc


of    full retirement and reduce the probability of fuiJ—time work, that those
with the responsibilities of supporting parents (or chi idren) are more
likely to be working full—time, and those without a spouse are more likely
to report they have retired.

partial Retirement Timoncj Those Not Subject to Mandatory Retirement
        In Table 6, we examine the behavior of an individual with a
particularly      interesting set of characterisitCs. The individual described

                                                                                     on the
 in this table has no pension, no mandatory retirement provisions

 main job, and no health problems. In addition, he is eligible for




       The sign and especially the magnitude of the effect on the proba-
 bility of partially retiring for 58-59 year olds of having already faced
 mandatory retirement reflects what is likely to be an aberrant relation-
 ship for a very small sample of individuals in this category.
                                         33



    Social   Security benefits, has no children at home, is not supporting parents,
    is   married with spouse present, and     has a wage offer in the third category
    for   both jobs.

           This    individual is interesting because he is typical of the indi-
 viduals analyzed in many retirement          models. He is neither forced out
    of   the main job by mandatory retirement or health nor is he enticed out
 by high marginal disincentives which are found in many pension plans.1
 Comparing Table 6 with the top part of Table 2, we find that this mdi-
 vidua]. has about the same total probability of partial retirement as the
 average      for everyone not subject to mandatory retirement (regardless of

pension status, health, etc), but the partial retiree is somewhat more

 likely than average to be in the main job. Moreover, this individual

is more likely than average to be working full-time, and           correspondingly
less      likely to be    fully retired. An important result from Table 6 is
that      even among people    not subject to mandatory retirement, a significant
number partially retire outside the main job. The data from the PSID,

cited earlier, suggest that a plausible reason for this is that many

people cannot reduce their workload in the main job and hence may find

the reduced workload in an alternative job attractive even if it involves

a lower wage rate. Together, these results lead us to question utility

function parameter estimates, such as those obtained by Gordon and         Blinder,


            remains the póssiblity of an involuntary separation through
          1There
a    layoff. The data
                    do not permit us to determine the reason for
separation from a job. Note, however, that for some older workers a
layoff may have an ambiguous meaning. That is, an employer with a UI tax
rate that is not very sensitive to changes in the
                                                   unemployment experience
of its :work force because the rate is at a
                                            ceiling or floor may agree
to layoff some older workers before they retire to allow them to collect
UI benefits. The period covered by the data predates changes in UI
regulations which were designed to deal with this problem.
                                     34


                                    Table 6


               Estimated Probabilites For An Individual
                  in Good Health, without a Pension, and
                  Not Facing Mandatory Petirementa

                               Retirement Status
                                      Partially    partially Re-
                        Not           Retired in   tired Outside
                        Retired       Main Job     of Main Job     Retired
Age
                        .988           .003         .001           .008
58—59
                        .970           .012         .011           .007
60—61
                        .865           .047         .036           .052
 62
                        .827           .035         .054           .085
 63                 -


                        .616            .048         .088          .249
 64
                        .396            .099         .089           .417
 65
                        .218            .075         .129           .578
66—67
                        .099            .064         .117           .720
68—69




        1Other characteristics for this individual are enumerated in the
text.
                                      35



based   on models which predict that       all partial   retirement should occur
in the inai.n job unless mandatory retirement or involuntary separation
intervene.
       Dichotomous Dependent Variables
       To answer   the last of the questions we posed above, we turn now to

the implications of our findings for retirement studies which utilize a

dependent variable which is dichotomous —         retired    or not retired. A

problem arises for such studies because there are only two retirement

categories, with no clear cut criteria for deciding whether the partially

retired should be classified as retired or not. The obvious question is

thether findings are    affected   by the choice of   which   category the partially

retired     are placed in. This question can be answered by comparing the
changes in the probabilities reported in the bottom panel of Table 5
with the negative of those in the top panel. The bottom panel indicates
the   responsiveness of the probability of being         retired   to variation in

the independent variables, where the partially retired are not counted

in the retired group. The top panel indicates the reponsiveness of the

probability of full—time work to variation inthe iiidependent variables, and

hence the negative of these figures indicates the responsiveness of the

probability of retirement to variation in independent variables, where

in this case the partially retired are counted as retired.

       It   is readily apparent from these figures that the choice of
definition,    i.e. whether the partially retired        are classified as retired
or   not retired, may have a substantial impact on the measured effects

of the explanatory variables on retirement probabilities. For example,

a higher wage in the non-retirement job reduces the probability of
                                            36



              when the partially retired are counted           as retired, but when
retirement
                                                 it either has little effect on ar increases
they are not counted,depending on age,

theprobability of full retirement. A similar effect can be observed for mend—
atoryretirement (coltmn 6). Other such effects can also be seen..ThesereSults
demonstrate that the discrepenCy in findings between retirement equations
                                                                   which
using different definitions for a dichotomous retirement variable,

in    turn depends    on   the   size and   direction   of the effects of variation in


the  independent variable on the probabilities of partial and complete
retirement, can, in some cases, be quite large. Thus we find that the
treatment of partial retirement may importantly influence the findings
of studies using a dichotomous retirement variable.
Interaction     Effects

                                                               reported   in the foot-
        A ni.mther   of   interaction effects, which are
                                                                This means that the
notes to Table 5, are statistically significent.
                                        that table are not necessarily the responses
average responses reported in
                                                    the sample. While we do not
 we   would expect from each individual in
 report in detail the effects of these interactions, some major effects

 should be mentioned.
                                                          between the pension variable
         1. There is a significant interaction

 and the wage offer in the main job. Among those with no pension, a

 higher wage in the main job reduces slightly both the probability of

 complete retirement and the probability of partially retiring outside

 the main job. Among those with a pension, a higher wage in the main job

 increases by as much as twenty percentage points the probability of

 complete retirement, and it reduces the probability of partially retiring

  outside the main job substantially more than for those with no pension.
                                     37


            the other side of this interaction, low wage workers who are

covered by a pension are more likely to retire partially outside of the

main job than are those who are not covered. Among        high   wage workers,

those covered by a pension are less likely to retire partially outside

of their main job than are those with no pension. Instead, among high

wage workers those with a pension are even more likely to retire fully.

       2. Health status and private pension coverage exhibit a significant

interaction effect. Poor health reduces the probability of working full

time more for those with no pension than for those with a pension. Among

those who are healthy, pension coverage reduces the probability of working

full-time more than for those who are unhealthy.

       3.   Pension coverage and   mandatory   retirement provisions exhibit
a significant interaction effect. For example, among        those    who do not
have a pension, individuals who will face mandatory retirement are
more likely to keep working full-time than are those who         will not face
mandatory    retirement. Among those who have a pension,     individuals who
will   face mandatory retirement are less likely to keep working full—time

than are those who do not face mandatory retirement .        Also,   individuals

are less likely to keep working full—time if they are covered by a

pension than if they are not, and the negative effect of pension coverage

is even stronger among those who will face mandatory retirement on their

main job than it is among those who will not.



                             IV Conclusion

       This paper has considered the role of partial retirement in the

analysis    of retirement behavior. It has been structured       to provide
                                       38



answers to six questions posed at the outset. These answers are

summarized in the following conclusions:             (1) Descriptive statistics

pertaining  to partial retirement demonstrate that partial retirement is
indeed an important phenomenon. (2) Some individuals partially retire
in their main job but a relatively larger number partially retire outside
of   their main job.    (3) Individuals face a number of different opportunity

sets. Most are not free to reduce hours in their main jobs. Differing

opportunities for work on a full-time or part-time basis in the main job

and for employment outside of the main job may be included in the

specification of the relevant structural equations of a life cycle retire-

ment model by appropriate modifications of the lifetime budget constraint

and/or modifications of the form of the utility function.                (4) The

probability of partial retirement, especially of partial retirement

outside of the main job, is related significantly to indicators of

coverage from pension programs, mandatory retirement provisions, wage

offers in main and partial retirement jobs, health, family status, and

of course age.      (5) For those who are not forced out of their main job

                                                                    or who are not
by poor health or by mandatory retirement provisions,
                                                                      both within and
 attracted out by pension provisions, partial retirement

 outside the main job is an important phenomenon.               The numerical importance

 of partial retirement outside of the main job for this group calls into

 question results based on models which make no allowance for this phenomenon.

 (6)
        parameter estimates in studies of retirement behavior which use a

 dichotomous dependent variable are sensitive to the way the partially

 retired are classified — as retired or not retired.

        A next   important   step   to be   taken   if   we are to understand retire—
                                  39



ment behavior is to follow on the path-breaking work of Gordon and      Blinder.
Although these authors considered only a limited number    of   job environments,
their work specifying and   estimating   a basic structural model of retire-

              most importantly the parameters of the utility function,
ment, including

was an important step forward. In the absence of good structural estimates,
we cannot determine the effects of the major changes in retirement policy
which have recently been proposed, such as changes in the ages of normal
and early retirement under social security, changes in the permissible
age' for mandatory retirement, and changes in the structure and coverage of
private pension programs. If, on the other hand, the parameters of the
utility function and. their distributions were known, we then would be in
a position to simulate the effects of programs with rules that would
result in kinks and bends in the budget line that have not as yet been
encountered. However, if parameters estimates obtained from a structural
model are to be reliable enough for use in policy analysis, the structural

model must be specified correctly. This requires a full understanding of
the opportunity set available to each individual. According to the
evidence developed here, this opportunity set differs among individuals,
especially the opportunities for partial retirement. n understanding
of how and why these opportunities differ is a key requirement for any

structural analysis of retirement behavior.
                                  40




                               References

Bishop, Yvonne N., Stephen E. Feinberg, and      Paul   W. Holland, Discrete

     Multivariate Analysis: Theory and       Practice   (Cambridge,

     Massachusetts: The MIT    Press,   1975).

Boskin, Michael J., and   Hurd, Michael D. "The Effect of Social Security
     on Early Retirement." Journal      of   Public EconomiCs 10, 1978.

Burkhauser,Richard and Quinn, Joseph, "The Effect of Changes in
     Mandatory Retirement Rules on the Labor Supply of Older Workers",
     mimeo, 1980.
Burbidge, John B., and Robb, A. Leslie. "Pensions and Retirement
     Behavior." Canadian Journal of Economics, August 1980.
Clark, Robert L. and Johnson, Thomas. "Retirement In Dual Career
     Families." Mimeographed, North Carolina State University, June 1980.
Deardorff,    Alan V. and Stafford, Frank P.,    "CompensatiOn of Cooperating

             EconometriCa 44, July 1976, pp. 671—684.
     Factors,"
Deutermann, William V. Jr. and Brown, Scott c., "Voluntary part-Time
    Workers: A Growing Part of The Labor Force," Monthly Labor Review,
     Vol. 101, June 1978, pp. 3—10.
Fields, Gary S. and Mitchell, Olivia S., "Pensions and Optimal Retire-
     ment Behavior", rnimeo, Cornell University, March 1981.
                                                        Reservation Wages
Gordon, Roger H., and Blinder, Alan S. "Market Wages,
      arid Retirement,"   Journal of public Economics, Vol. 14, 1980,

      pp. 277—308.
 Gustman, Alan L., and Steinmeier, Thomas L., "Some Theoretical and
     Empirical Aspect of the Analysis of Retirement Behavior," Final
     Report, su.titted to the Office of Planning, Policy and Research,
     LMSA/PWBP, U. S.  Department of Labor, February 1981.
                     3., Analysis of Qualitative Data, (New York:      Academic
 Haberinan, Shelby
      Press, 1978).
 Hamermesh, Daniel S., "A Genera]. Empirical Model of Life—Cycle Effects
      In Consumption and Retirement Decisions," rnimeo, 1981.
                                  41




Kurz, Mordecai, The Life Cycle Hypothesis and The Effects of Social
     Security and Pensions On Ftily Savings, Stanford, May 1981.
Parsons, Donald 0., "The Male Labor Force Participation Decisioji:
     Health, Reported Health and Economic tncentives." Mimeographed,
     Ohio State University, February 1980.
Quinn, Joseph F., "The Extent and Correlates of Partial Retirement,"
     Mimeo, 1980.

_______ "Microeconomic  Determinants of Early Retirement: A Cross—
     Sectional view of white married men," Journal of Human Resources,
     XII (3), 1977, 329—346.
Reimers,   Cordelia. "Factors Affecting the timing of Retirement of
     American   Men." Mimeographed,    Princeton University, March 1977.
Rosen,   Harvey S., "Taxes In A Labor Supply Model with   Joint Wage Hours
     Determination," Econometrica, vol. 44, no. 3, May     1976.
Saxmnartino, Frank. "A   Model of the Retirement Decision." Paper
     presented at the Labor Workshop, University of Wisconsin, Madison,
    February    1978.
                            Barton M., "Social Security And The
Zabalza, A., Pissarides, C. and
    oice Between Fulk.time Work, Part—Time Work and Retirement,"
    Journal of Public Economics, vol.     14, 1980. pp. 245—76
