NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMPLOYEE VALUATION OF PENSION CLAIMS
AND THE IMPACT OF INDEXING INITIATIVES

James E. Pesando

Working Paper No. 767

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
September 1981

Professor of Economics, University of Toronto and Research
Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am indebted
to participants in the pension workshop at the NBER, and especially
to Fischer Black, for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this
paper. The research was sponsored by the program in the Economics
of Pensions at the NBER and by S.S.H.R.C. Research Grant No.
1.10..80..0310. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #767
September 1981

EMPLOYEE VALUATION OF PENSION CLAIMS AND

THE IMPACT OF INDEXING INITIATIVES

ABSTRACT

There is discussion in both Canada and the United States
government's

of the

requiring private pension plans to provide contractual

cost

of—living protection. This paper employs both an auction and an implicit
contract model to identify the compensating wage differentials required

of possible indexing initiatives. The contract model, motivated by the
prevalence (especially in Canada) of ad hoc cost—of—living adjustments
to pensions in pay, presumes that workers have a call option on the investment earnings in excess of the interest rate assumption used to value the

plan. The case for policy action would appear to rest on either (1) the
assumption that workers misperceive the value (and, possibly, the security)

of pension benefits or (2) the presumption that society should subsidize
pension income by providing to pension plans an investment vehicle (such
as an index bond) whose risk—return characteristics cannot be duplicated
by portfolios of existing assets.

James E. Pesando
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto M5S lAl

Canada
(416)

978—8621

1. INTRODUCTION
In both Canada and the United States, the benefits provided by
occupational pension plans in the private sector typically contain no
contractual cost—of--living protection. To many advocates of reform,

this is the foremost limitation of such plans. As is well known (Bodie
(1976), Pesando and Rea (1977), Feldstein (1980)), the real return to
traditional plan assets — fixed—income securities and common stocks —

is

adversely affected by unanticipated inflation. Thus the absence of

contractual indexing is typically ascribed to the "open—ended commitment"
faced by plan sponsors In the absence of an index bond or an equivalent

Investment vehicle. Those who consider the possibility of requiring
private plans to index pension benefits frequently cite the need for a
parallel government initiative, such as selling price—indexed annuities

to sponsors of eligible pension plans (Economic Council (1979)) or issuing

index bonds (President's Commission (1980))) Alternatively (Task Force
(1979)), the government could mandate performance Indexing, in which
inflation—augmented or "excess" investment earnings above a statutory
real rate would be applied to escalating the value of pensions in force.

Those who advocate a refrom initiative are concerned with the
fact that members of private pension plans are exposed to a great deal

of inflation risk. This exposure stems from the fact that accrued pension benefits have the investment characteristics of a long—term bond.

Significantly, advocates of reform fail to consider the possibility that

workers may prefer not to have fully indexed pension benefits. Bodie (1980)
demonstrates that the expected return on the portfolio whose real return

2

has minimum variance —

treasury

bills hedged against unanticipated infla-

tion by a small (long) position in a diversified portfolio of commodity

futures —

is

approximately zero. If this portfolio adequately approxi-

mates an asset with a risk—free real rate of return, and if workers have
full information, then the explanation for the absence of contractual

indexing must be restated. poyees are not sufficiently risk averse
that they are willing to earn a zero real return on foregone wages in

order to obtain fully and contractually indexed pension benefits. Alternatively, employees may hold portfolios (inclusive of pension wealth) in
which they have diversified away the inflation risk associated with the
accrued value of their pension benefits.

Leaving aside (for the moment) the question of whether a reform
initiative can be justified, this paper seeks to identify the compensating
wage differentials required if alternative indexing initiatives were man-

dated by the government. This issue, in turn, draws attention to the question of how members of defined benefit plans2 value their pension benefits

in the context of current versus deferred wage tradeoffs. The primary
purpose of the paper is to illustrate that the wage offsets likely to
accompany an indexing initiative are potentially quite large, may be

difficult to predict, and may vary substantially across firms. In so doing,
the paper highlights the information required of workers if they are to

assess correctly the accruing value of their pension benefits. The rationale
for proposed indexing initiatives, although not necessarily so stated,

would appear to depend heavily on the presumption that workers have incomplete information.

3

To some, the choice of an appropriate model to value pension bene-

fits may seem apparent. If the pension is not indexed, but is payable
with certainty, then the accruing value of the contractual benefit is

determined using the risk—free nominal rate of interest. The prevalence
of ad hoc cost of living adjustments to pensions in pay in both Canada
and the United States suggests, however, that this procedure may under-

state the value to workers of their accruing pension benefits. The
paper thus uses two models to assess the impact of possible indexing initia-

tives. In the auction model, employees receive compensation equal to the
value of their marginal product in each period and only benefits legally
due under the terms of the plan are factored into employee valuation of their

accruing benefits. In the contract model, workers have a call option on
the investment earnings in the pension plan above the assumed valuation

rate. In spite of the defined benefit formula, workers thus have an equity
interest in the pension plan's assets. This model is motivated by the
evidence (especially in Canada) that many firms use "excess" investment

earnings to finance cost—of—living adjustments to pensions in pay. Because
pension benefits in this contract model are —

in

effect —

partially

indexed,

the wage offsets required of possible reform initiatives are less than
those implied by the auction model.

The paper is organized as follows. First, the auction model is
reviewed and its salient features noted. Since indexing initiatives might
enhance the security as well as the contractual value of pension benefits,
explicit treatment is .accorded the options inherent in defined benefit

plans. Second, evidence regarding ad hoc cost—of—living adjustments in
Canada and the United States is briefly reviewed in order to motivate

4

the contract model. The contract model is next presented, and its econo-

mic rationale and empirical validity are briefly discussed. The impact
of possible indexing initiatives is then analyzed, with the auction and
contract models identifying the probable upper and lower bounds to the

offsets required elsewhere in the compensation package. Throughout the
analysis, features of Canada's occupational pension plans provide the

main institutional background, although most of the analysis is directly
applicable to plans in the United States as well.

2. THE AUCTION MODEL
In a spot auction market, the employee's valuation of his accruing

pension benefits is quite straightforward. He receives in each period
total compensation equal to the value of his marginal product and must
value only the benefits

due under the terms of the plan. The

valuation is complicated solely by the need to consider the put options
implicit in the existence of defined benefit plans.

In Canada, as in the United States prior to the passage of ERISA

in 1974, there is no plan termination insurance.3 Further, most employer—
sponsored plans contain explicit provisions which permit the sponsor to
terminate the plan with the employer's obligation equal to the lesser of

vested benefits or the assets in the plan. Treynor (1977) argues that
the implicit liability of the firm, so long as it is an on—going concern,

is to honour all vested pension claims. Sharpe (1976), by contrast,
analyzes the question of optimal funding policy on the explicit assumption
that employers stand prepared to terminate a plan if it is in their interest

5

to do so. As noted by Bulow (1979), the absence of plan terminations is
not sufficient to refute this view of employer behaviour since the threat
of plan termination can presumably be used to extract appropriate wage

concessions. On the other hand, the widespread absence of plan terminations may reduce and ultimately eliminate the credibility of such a threat.

Both views as to employer willingness to terminate unilaterally an occupation pension plan are incorporated into the subsequent analysis.

Assume that economic agents are rational and have access to the
same capital market, that the relevant option contracts are available in
the capital market (or would be so if agents desired), and that there are

no taxes.4 Assume first that employers will terminate their plans if it
is in their interest to do so. Following Sharpe (1976), the firm promises
at the beginning of each period to pay its employees a nominal pension

claim L1, known at present with certainty, at the end of the period.

The firm establishes a pension fund (A) to help meet this obligation,
which will have a (presently uncertain) value A1 =

(l+)A0,

where

is the (uncertain) return on the plan's assets. At the end of the year,
the pension liabilities will be discharged in full if A1 >

any excess (A1 — L1)

reverting to the firm. If A1 <

L1,

L1,

with

then employees

receive only A1 and the firm is not liable for the difference. In effect,
the firm has a call option on the assets with a striking price L1. Employees,
in turn, hold a contract to receive the certain pension payment L1, and
have sold a put option on the assets in the fund with a striking price L1.

Let w denote the current wage paid in period t, let VMPt denote the
value of the worker's marginal product, and —

for

simplicity — assume that

a(r) is the measure of risk pertinent to the pricing of the relevant options.

6

Then, under the auction model, the following obtains.

w + PV(L1) —

PV(PUT(A

,

L,

cT(i))) =

VMPt

(1)

The compensation package consists of three components: the current wage
plus the contractual value of the pension claim, less the value of the

"pension put". The latter component recognizes, in effect, that the pension benefit actually paid may fall short of its contractual value. The

lower the degree of funding (A) and the higher the degree of risk (a(i))
of the plan's assets, given L1, the greater will be the value of the put
option and cet.

the higher must be w if (1) is to obtain.5 If the

plan's funds are invested solely in the risk—free asset and thus earn the

risk—free rate (rf) and if the plan is fully funded when valued at the

risk—free rate (i.e. A(l + rf) =

L1),

then the value of the put option

is zero. In general, this will not be the case.
If, as argued by Treynor (1977), the implicit obligation of an ongoing firm is to honour all (vested) pension benefits, then the optioned

assets expand to include the equity (E) in the firm. So long as
then the pension liability will be discharged in full.

+ A .? L1,
Let

denote the return on the firm assets inclusive of the funds in the

pension plan and let a() denote the measure of risk relevant to option
pricing. Then (1) becomes:

w' + PV(L1) — PV(PUT(A + E, L1, a(fl) =

Since E > 0,

the value of the put option cet.

than in (1) and thus w >

w.

VMPt

is less in (1)'

Further, in (1)' unlike (1), the employee

7

must factor the likelihood of firm insolvency into the valuation of the
pension put and thus into the valuation of his pension claim.

Finally, if the pension benefit L1 is fully insured, either by
a private insurance company or through public termination insurance such
as that required by ERISA, both (1) and (1)' reduce to:

+

Clearly, w >

w.

PV(L1)

=

(1)"

VMPt

If benefits are fully insured, then the informational

requirements imposed on the employee falls since he no longer has to value
the pension put in assessing the value of his accruing pension benefit.

This auction model has two important implications. First, the
reported interest rate assumptions used in formal plan valuations are just
a "shell" and convey no information regarding employee valuation of accru-

ing pension benefits.6 If the pension benefit is nominal (i.e. non—indexed),
then rational employees use the risk—free nominal rate —
valuation

not

the reported

assumption — to calculate the present value of the contractual

benefit L1. If this nominal rate includes an inflation premium, then
employees value this contractual benefit on the implicit assumption that
it will be eroded by the inflation —

in

this simple model — expected to

occur during its accrual period. If the contractual benefit L1 is viewed
as the lump sum necessary to purchase a requisite annuity, then its valuation will be premised as well on the erosion of the real value of the pension in force.

Second, under (1), the decision by the employer to underfund the plan

will raise the value of the pension put. Since the interest rate assumption
represents a means by which the employer can either accelerate or retard

8

the degree of funding, given the benefit formula, this is the only avenue

through which the reported interest rate assumption can influence employee

valuation of accruing pension benefits. Under (1)', there can be no presumption that additional payments to the pension fund will enhance the

security of the benefit and thus reduce the value of the pension put. If
the firm had unencumbered access to assets in the plan, then additional
debt—financed contributions which were used to acquire additional bonds
for the pension fund would leave the value of the pension put unchanged.7
If these same contributions were used to acquire additional stocks in the

pension fund, the riskiness of the firm would increase and the value of

the pension put would rise. For purposes of the subsequent analysis,
it will be assumed that altering the level of contributions under (1)

will leave the value of the pension put unchanged.

3. "AD HOC" COST—OF—LIVING ADJUSTMENTS: LIMITATIONS OF THE AUCTION MODEL
There are a number of concerns regarding the validity of the auction

model described above. With the possible exception of tax considerations,8
there is no reason why a firm would choose to provide a pension plan. In
addition, discontinuities associated with (1) cliff vesting rules and
(2) early retirement options render suspect the prediction that in every

priod the current wage will adjust to offset fully any change in the accruing value of the pension benefit.9 Of particular relevance to this paper,
however, is the tendency for large employers in the non—union sector to
make cost—of—living adjustments to pensions in pay.
There are no official data compiled by the Government of Canada on

either the magnitude of frequency of these adjustments. Two private surveys,

9

however, provide evidence on this issue. The Report by Tomenson—Alexander
(1978) notes that 117 of the 149 large (active membership of at least 500)

plans surveyed provided some form of cost—of—living adjustments to pensions

in pay during the period 1971—1975. For the majority (101 respondents),
the adjustments were not required under the terms of the plan and thus

were entirely ad hoc. For those plans reporting adjustments, the payments
averaged two—thirds of the amount necessary to offset fully the impact of

inflation as measured by the consumer price index. The most recent Report
on Survey of Pension Plans in Canada (March, 1980) by the Financial Executives Institute Canada (FEIC) indicated that 75% of the respondents had

taken some action to offset the impact of inflation. Again, in the great
majority of cases, this action was taken unilaterally by the plan sponsor.
In the United States, data compiled by the Bankers Trust Company (1980)

indicate that approximately 70% of large employers made cost—of—living
adjustments during the period December 1974 to December 1979, typically

on an ad hoc basis. These increases appear to have been somewhat less
generous than those made in Canada, averaging about 25% to 30% of the

amount required to fully offset the impact of inflation. The key point,
of course, is that since employees can never be paid less than the value
of their marginal product in the auction model, ad hoc cost—of—living
payments represent gratuitous transfers of wealth from employers/shareholders
to retired employees.

Of equal importance, there is evidence that a significant proportion

of these payments is being financed out of "excess" investment earnings,
or investment earnings in excess of the assumed valuation rate. The FEIC
reports that 59.9% (by plan respondent) of the cost increases were funded

10

out of plan assets, while 31.8% were "expensed as paid". It would appear

that "expensed as paid" refers to payments out of general corporate

revenues, although this is not clear from the questionnaire. In the
Tomenson—Alexander survey, the ad hoc adjustments were financed — in
whole or in part — through general corporate revenues for only 32 of the

117 firms which made these adjustments. The majority of firms thus financed
the

ad hoc payments by creating new unfunded liabilities which were dis-

charged through a combination of plan surpluses and special payments. At
least in Canada, the likelihood that many firms are using "excess" investment earnings to finance ad hoc cost—of—living adjustments and/or nominal
benefit enrichments (career average plans) is widely acknowledged within
the private pension industry.

4. THE IMPLICIT CONTRACT MODEL
The essence of the contract model suggested by the stylized facts
noted previously can be illustrated using the one—period model introduced

earlier. Again, let L1 represent the nominal value of a pension claim

due at the end of the period. Then PV(L1), calculated at the risk—

free nominal rate rf identifies the contribution Af necessary to
fully fund the plan. If the plan sponsor values the plan on the basis

of an interest rate assumption r <

A

(where A(l+r) = L1)

rf.

then the required contribution

will exceed Af. Assume (for simplicity)

that the funds are invested at the risk—free rate. Then the plan will

experience an actuarial surplus equal to (A —

Af)(l +

rf). Under the

auction model, this surplus would revert to the employer. Under the con—
tract model, this surplus would be returned to the employee, in this case

11

in

the form of an ad hoc enrichment to the nominal benefit L1.
Since these adjustments are (1) the result of an implicit contract

(2) paid later than the period when they are earned, it is logical to
assume that the large firms who make these payments also behave according
and

to

(1)'. For simplicity, it will be assumed that these large firms have

no probability of going bankrupt and hence that the value of the pension

put is equal to zero. In general, the return to the plan's assets will

be uncertain. The contract model requires that if

receives the contractual benefit L1. If

< rv, the employee

> r, then the employee

receives the augmented benefit L = A (i+i ) > L .
1
V
1
1

Since the contractual

benefit is nominal, the risk—free nominal rate rf is still used to calculate its present value. Thus the employee's compensation is:

w" + PV(L1) + PV(CALL(A ,

A(l+r),

a())) =

VMPt

(2)

The employee has a call option on the investment earnings in excess of

those implied by the valuation rate. If the employee retires at the end
of the period, he receives an "ad hoc" increase in his pension. If he
is still an active worker at the end of the period, he receives either an

amendment to the benefit formula or an appropriate increase in his next

period's wage. Note that the degree of risk in the pension fund — and
thus the value of the call option —
contract.

is

an integral part of the implicit

Note also that w (in (1)") > w"

The rationale for firms and workers entering into this type of
implicit contract may

may

be

be tied to a risk—sharing arrangement. Employees

concerned with the preservation of the real value of their pension

12

benefits. They may be unwilling, however, to assume the full cost — a very
low and perhaps zero real return on foregone wages —

indexing. Instead, employers (because

<

r

of

full and contractual

does not lower the con-

tractual benefit L1) and employees share the investment risk associated
with the plan's assets. To the extent that workers who terminate prior
to retirement are not granted ad hoc adjustments when their deferred pensions become payable,1° this contract may also serve as a turnover penalty

in situations where workers have firm—specific human capitaL The fact that
these contracts are not written explicitly into the pension plan may be

of significance in this regard, since the firm is thus not bound by statutory
vesting provisions.

As noted, there is informal evidence which suggests that this con-

tract model may have widespread validity, especially in Canada. More

formally, the model predicts that cet.

those plans which use a lower

valuation rate will grant more generous cost—of—living adjustments to pen-

sions in pay. In principle, this prediction is testable, although the
requisite data are not readily available. The FEIC data that are available
do

provide evidence that actuarial experience and ad hoc adjustments are

linked. For those
(called
of

final earnings11 plans in which actuarial deficits

"experience deficiencies") were large, or between 5.0%

accrued liabilities, no

and 75%

annual or biannual payments were made. For

firms in which experience deficiencies were small, or less than 2.5% of

accrued

liabilities, a full 50% had made annual cost—of—living adjustments

during the past few years. If — as seems probable — the frequency of the
ad hoc payments is a good proxy for their generosity, the results are
consistent with the prediction of the contract model.

13

5. THE IMPACT OF INDEXING INITIATIVES
If the government were to legislate an indexing requirement, it

could take at least three forms: (a) full and contractual indexing
without the simultaneous introduction of an index bond or its equivalent
by the government; (b) full and contractual indexing with the introduction of such an instrument; and (c) performance indexing, in which "excess"
investment earnings above a statutory real interest rate are used to

make cost—of—living adjustments to pensions in pay.'2 If workers have
full information, then option (a) is clearly inefficient since workers

subject to today's market opportunities have not opted for fully indexed

benefits. Option (b) might be efficient, but only if the new instrument
provided by the government (e.g. an index bond offering a real return of
3%) possessed risk—return characteristics that could not be reproduced

with existing assets. Option (c), with the statutory real rate replacing
the valuation rate, is effectively the implicit contract model sketched
earlier in the paper.

Consider first the impact of (a) or (b). Assuming that the minimum—
variance portfolio now available is an adequate approximation to an asset
with a risk—free real rate of return, they differ only in that the risk—

free real interest rate (if) is presumably higher in (b) than in (a).

In the auction model, i replaces rf in calculating PV(Li) in
(1)—(l)'', thus cet. 2• raising the value of accruing pension benefit
and requiring either a reduction in w and/or L1.13 To the extent that
sponsors of career average and flat benefit plans are forced in effect to
pre—fund the retroactive, nominal benefit improvements that typically occur,

the funded status of these plans will improve)4 Under (1), the value of

14

the put option will fall, thus cet. 2• re—inforcing the effects noted
above. Under (1)', the value of the put option does not necessarily fall,
at least in the case in which the firm finances its additional pension

contributions by issuing additional debt. Under (1)", the fully insured
case, the value of the put option is zero and any change in the rapidity

of funding occasioned by the indexing initiative will exert no impact on
the employment contract. In the contract model, options (a) and (b)

require that i replace rf in calculating PV(Li) in (2). The call
option in (2) no longer exists now that pension benefits are fully indexed.
So long as workers — as part of the implicit contract —

never receive

more than full cost—of—living protection, then the increase in the value

of PV CL )

t 1

must exceed the value of the call option if rv > i f.

Since

this is likely to be the case, both (a) and (b) effectively require a reduc-

tion in w

and/or L1. Consistent with the earlier analysis, the value

of the pension put is assumed equal to zero and thus any impact on the
funded status of plans requires no compensating wage differential.

Let i now designate the statutory real interest rate in the per-

formance indexing initiative. For the auction model, rf continues to be
used to determine PV(Li), but workers now have a call option on investment earnings in excess of

Thus, again, a reduction in w and/or

must occur. Since i would be the rate which plan sponsors would
be required to use to establish contribution rates, the pre—funding of
nominal, retroactive benefit improvements in career average and flat
benefit plans would also impact on the employment contract via the valua-

tion of the put options as discussed previously. For the contract model,

performance indexing would simply lead to the substitution of i for rv

15

in the call option in (2). For i <

r,

which is typical, the value

of the call option cet. . increases and thus an offsetting reduction in

w and/or L1 is required.
Thus, the introduction of any of the initiatives — under both models —

is

likely to require a reduction in w or L1 or both. Unless workers

are willing to devote a higher fraction of their lifetime earnings to pen-

sions, a reduction in L1 is inevitable. Policy—makers, in short, must
recognize that the initiatives are likely to force workers to take "low
start, escalating" as distinct from "high start, non—escalating" pensions.

If workers prefer "high start, escalating" pensions because they are liquidity
constrained and/or concerned with the security of less than fully insured

benefits, the initiatives would be welfare reducing. Finally, in both
models, the introduction of a retroactive initiative would arbitrarily
redistribute wealth from shareholders to workers with past service credits

under the terms of the plan. In the auction model, these windfall gains
would exceed the new unfunded liabilities created when plan sponsors

valued accrued benefits at the statutory real rate rather than at their

previous valuation rate. This result reflects the fact that nominal
interest rates typically exceed valuation rates. Under the full information assumption, there is no rationale for requiring that any indexing
initiative be made retroactive.

How large will the wage offsets actually be? Assume that the value
of the pension put is equal to zero. Under the auction model, the increase
in the value of the pension benefit when full and contractual indexing is

introduced is easy to calculate. It is simply equal to the present value

of the benefit calculated at i less its present value when calculated

16

at rf. Under the contract model, the calculation is complicated by the
presence of the call option in (2). Assume that (i) the plan is fully
invested at

(ii) the statutory real rate is i. and (iii) the rate

of inflation is always greater than or equal to r —

i•

In this special

case, the increase in the value of the pension benefit is equal to the

present value of the required annuity calculated at i less its value
when calculated at r. This simple result occurs because, in the absence
of the indexing initiative, the real value of the benefit declines with

certainty at a rate equal to r —

If

In

general, this exact result

will not obtain and the use of the difference between the annuity valued

at i and r

to measure its increased value will only be approximate.

Subject to this approximation, however, an important result emerges. As
in the case of a defined contribution plan, the value to the employee of

his accruing pension benefit is measured by the value of the employer's
contribution to the plan.

Consider the simple case of a pension benefit (annuity) that is

payable with certainty for 15 years. Assume that i and rf equal 2%
and 12%, respectively. Assume that r equals 6%, which is in line with
current practice in both Canada (Table 1) and the United States. Under
the auction model, the value (at the date the annuity becomes payable)

of the benefit increases by a full 89% if full and contractual indexing

is introduced. Under the contract model, the value of the benefit rises
by 32%. The smaller increase in value under the contract model is due to
the fact that the benefit is, in effect, partially indexed prior to the
introduction of the government's initiative.

17

To provide a more complete assessment of the impact of a possible
indexing initiative, one must consider the stylized features of alternative

plan designs. If post—retirement indexing (only) is introduced, then its
impact will be the same for all plans under the auction model. Under the
contract model, its impact will vary with the plan's valuation assumption.
If pre— and post—retirement indexing is introduced, its impact — even in
the auction model —

will

vary with the plan's benefit formula. Assume

that the government mandates full and contractual indexing and issues index

bonds with a real interest rate of 2% (3%). Assume, again, that the value
of the pension put is zero. So long as the risk—free nominal rate exceeds
the (maximum) valuation assumption, the impact of the indexing initiative

will always be greater under the auction model. It is thus instructive,
for the range in interest rate assumptions reported in Table 1, to note
the magnitude of the wage offsets required even under the contract model.

The exercises (Table 2) illustrate the impact of (i) post—retirement
and (ii) pre— and post—retirement indexing on the required contribution

for a flat benefit, a career average and a final earnings plan. As
noted, the contribution rates established by the choice of the interest
rate assumption approximate the value of accruing pension benefits in the
rates

contract model. Because of the widespread use of projected benefit funding, contribution rates are calculated using both accrued and projected

benefits methods.16 The benefit in the career average plan is 2% of each
year's earnings; in the final earnings plan, 2% of earnings in the final
year of employment times the number of years of service; in the flat benefit plan, a fixed amount equal to 2% of earnings in the first year of
employment (projected benefit funding) or 2% of the earnings of a representative

18

member at age 40 (accrued benefit funding), both times the number of years

of service. Plan members are assumed to remain with certainty in the plan
until age 65 and to draw their pensions for exactly 15 years. The issues
of termination and vesting, as well as the more complex benefit structures
of actual plans, are thus ignored.

For pst—retirement indexing, the contribution rates must be recalculated with the annuities payable under the terms of the plans now valued

at the real interest rate of 2% (3%). For pre— and post—retirement indexing,
the recalculation of the contribution is more complicated. Because the
benefit is tied to earnings in the very last year of employment in the final
earnings plan, and since —

by construction — the inflation factor is the

same in both the interest rate and salary scale assumptions, there is no

change in the contribution rate that is established when only post—retirement

indexing is required)7 In the flat benefit and career average plans, where
inflation does erode the real value of accruing pension benefits, pre—
retirement indexing does require further increases in the contribution rate.
Details of all calculations are reported in Appendix A.

The results, while only suggestive, highlight the magnitude of the
increases in contribution rates — and thus the required wage offsets —

if an indexing initiative is introduced. If pst—retirement indexing (at
3%) is introduced, the contribution rate (projected benefit funding) rises
from 5.69% of covered earnings to 7.90% for career average plans initially

valued at an interest rate assumption of 7.5% and from 11.14 to 12.09 for

plans valued at an interest rate of 4.2%.18 If both pre— and post—retirement
indexing (at 3%) are introduced, the contribution rate rises to 14.47% of

earnings for both plans. Flat benefit plans are typically renegotiated —

19

and the amendments made retroactive —

at

each contract renewal. The sharp

increase in contribution rates under pre— and post-retirement indexing
thus illustrate the impact of requiring that plan sponsors cost the benefits in real terms on a continuing basis, rather than periodically revising
the benefit formula and thus establishing new unfunded liabilities.

Finally, it is straightforward using the formulae presented in Appendix A
to calculate the reduction in the benefit formula which will hold the

required contribution rate constant. If post—retirement indexing (at 3%)
is introduced, the benefit must be reduced from 2.0% to 1.49% per year
of service in both the final average and career average plans originally
valued at an interest rate of 7.5%.

6. SUARY AND CONCLUSION
Reform advocates have proposed a variety of initiatives to improve

the cost—of—living protection provided by private pension plans. The
most straightforward would require that plans provide benefits that are
fully indexed to the consumer price index, and would be accompanied by
the government's issuing index bonds earmarked for pension plans.

This paper has demonstrated that the wage offsets (which could take
the form of reductions in initial pension benefits) required of this or

similar initiatives are potentially quite large. These offsets may be
difficult to predict in view of the uncertainty which exists concerning
the appropriate model with which to value accruing pension benefits, and

they may vary sharply across firms. Wage offsets are largest in the auction
model, where the impact of the initiatives is to transfer purely nominal

into real pension benefits. In the contract model, wage offsets are smaller

20

because pension benefits are already partially indexed in spite of the
fact that benefits under the formal terms of the plan are purely nominal.
If workers are rational, and thus do not (for example) misperceive nominal
to be real pension benefits, the contract model is likely to provide the
lower bound to the wage offsets required of an indexing initiative.
Further, as emphasized in the text, the introduction of an indexing initiative may

—

by accelerating the degree of funding (especially) in flat bene-

fit and career average plans — enhance the security of contractual benefits
and thus require further wage offsets on this account.

If rational agents enter into voluntary employment contracts, then
externally imposed constraints on the form of these contracts will be

inefficient. This possibility is raised by Pesando and Rea (1977) with
regard to the elimination of deferred vesting, by Lazar (1979) with regard
to a ban on mandatory retirement, and by Arnott and Gersovitz (1980) with

regard to the requirement that all pension benefits be fully funded. In
the present context, contractual indexing accompanied (say) by the issuance

of index bonds by the government may be efficient, but only if the index
bonds possess risk—return characteristics that cannot be duplicated by

portfolios of existing assets. Under the full information assumption, a
policy initiative would appear to require the explicit decision to subsidize
retirement income that flows through private pension plans.

In fact, advocates of reform would appear to implicitly reject the

full information assumption. Many reform advocates (Task Force (1979))
imply that workers, for example, have not appropriately discounted the
eroding impact of anticipated inflation on their nominal pension benefits.

Although this concern may be misplaced if labour markets are truly competitive,19

21

the fact that this and related concerns do exist must be acknowledged.
If the full information assumption is indeed suspect, a preferred policy

response might be to ensure, for example, that employers and workers alike
understand that plans must be valued on the basis of a real interest rate if
the contribution rates so determined are to be sufficient —

principle —

to

at

least in

provide fully indexed benefits.

Finally, the analysis in the text draws attention to two additional

points regarding private pension plans. First, under the auction model,
the use of employer contributions to measure the value of accruing pension
benefits in empirical tests of current versus deferred wage tradeoffs is

generally inappropriate. In view of the substantial variation in reported
valuation assumptions, the contribution rates established for a given

benefit formula may differ sharply. This fact may receive too little
attention from empirical researchers.2° Second, workers in the contract
model have an equity interest in the plan's assets and the distinction
between a defined benefit and a defined contribution plan thus becomes

blurred. The requirement that pension liabilities be independent of pension fund assets (and hence pension fund performance), which underlies the
augmented balance sheet employed recently by Black (1980) and

Tepper

(1981)

in their analysis of optimal funding and pension asset allocation, is clearly
violated and results so obtained may require modification.

22

FOOTNOTES

Analysis of household demand for index bonds (Fischer (1975)), Blinder
(1977), and Siegel and Warner (1977)) has already established that
borrowers could issue index bonds at lower ex ante real interest rates

than those required on traditional bonds. Attention (Fischer (1979) and
Levhari and Leviatan (1977)) has shifted to the conundrum posed by the
nonissuance of index bonds by private borrowers.
2

Defined benefit plans are those in which the benefit is defined by a
formula (e.g. 2% of final earnings for each year of service) and contri-

butions are varied so as to provide the indicated benefit. In defined
contribution plans, the pension is determined by the accumulated value

of the contributions made by or on behalf of the employee. For defined
contribution plans, there is no ambiguity in determining the value of

the worker's pension claim. It is simply equal to the employer's contri-

bution to the plan. In Canada, almost 95% of plan members are in defined
benefit plans. Unless otherwise specified, the term "pension plan" in
the text will refer to a defined benefit plan.

In December of 1980, the Province of Ontario introduced a termination
insurance scheme, although neither the federal government nor any other

province has followed Suit.
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) established the
Pension Benefit Guarantee Corporation to provide plan termination insurance

to private sector plans. Pension plans provided by state and local
governments, however, are exempted from the provisions of ERISA.

23

Employees in Canada can make tax deductible contributions to their
own defined contribution plans (called Registered Retirement Savings

Plans), and the funds accumulate on a tax free basis. The present
ceiling is $5,500 per year. Employees in the United States can make
contributions to Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), which offer
comparable tax advantages, but only to a limit of $1,500 per year.

Assume that either (1) employees can access the tax subsidies accorded
pension plans without requiring that they be a member of an occupational
pension plan or (2) labour is supplied perfectly inelastically in a com-

petitive labour market, in which case competition among firms will
ensure that the tax subsidy associated with pensions will benefit only

workers. Then the use of a before—tax, risk—free nominal interest rate
to value accruing benefits in an occupational plan would be appropriate
on the assumption that the (nominal) benefits are payable with certainty.
In the non—union sector, the existence of a poorly funded plan may not

be stable since terminating workers cannot be forced to assume the
costs of future contributions which enhance the value of all benefits

payable under the terms of the plan. See Bulow (1979).
6

Note that projected as distinct from accrued benefit funding (Barnow—

Ehrenberg (1979)) is also a "shell". The reported interest rate assumption —

like

the actuarial method —

is

simply a means of accelerating

or retarding (tax deductible) payments into the plan.

In the debt capacity model analyzed by Black (1980), the firm maximizes
its access to the tax subsidy associated with issuing debt by fully
funding its plan and holding only bonds in the pension portfolio.

24

8 If the firm could overfund the plan and gain the tax advantages
so offered (Bulow (1981)), then it would have an incentive to provide

a (defined benefit) plan. See also footnote 4.
In Canada, statutory provisions typically require that an employee's

pension benefits vest (i.e., he becomes legally entitled to a pension

payable

wder the terms of the plan) after he has reached age 45 and

completed 10 years of service. Although many plans have more liberal

provisions,

74.3% of plan members in 1978 were still in plans which had

a vesting requirement of ten or more years of service (Statistics

Canada (1980)). The "45 and 10" rule implies that an unrealistically
large offset in the current wage may be required in the year that the

employee's benefits actually vest. If an employee attains age 45 after
completing 10 years of service in a plan whose benefit is 2% of final
earnings for each year of service, and if it is assumed that the employee
lives with certainty for 15 years after the normal retirement age of 65,
then —

at

an interest rate of 6% (8%) —

the

value of his accruing benefit

rises from zero in the preceding year to 60% (37%) of his current salary
in this the year in which his benefit vests. If the employee 's produc-

tivity is unchanged, and if the value of the relevant pension put is

sufficiently close to zero that it can be ignored, then a corresponding

reduction in his current wage would be required. In fact, there is no
evidence that discrete wage reductions of this order of magnitude actually

take place. A similar argument applies to the date at which an employee
becomes eligible for an (actuarially unfair) early retirement benefit
under the terms of the plan.

25

10

If the worker forfeits the ad hoc enrichment if he terminates prior

to retirement, equation (2) must be modified accordingly. In general,
evidence on this issue is hard to obtain, although —

in

Canada —

there

is reason to believe that many terminated (vested) workers do not receive

ad hoc adjustments when their pensions become payable. This is clearly
the case when the firm discharges its obligation by purchasing a deferred

annuity from a life insurance company. The result is less clear when
the firm retains the worker "on the books" and begins to make pension
payments when the terminated worker reaches normal retirement age under
the terms of the plan.
11

Final earnings plans are plans in which the benefit is tied to the

employee's earnings at or near the time of his retirement. Detailed
data were compiled by the FEIC only for final earnings plans.
12

For a detailed discussion of performance indexing, together with simulation experiments designed to illustrate its potential effectiveness,
see Task Force (1979).

13
14

Feldstein (1981) also emphasizes this point.

In flat benefit plans, which typify the union sector, members receive a

fixed amount (e.g. $10.00 per month) for each year of service. In career
average plans, members accrue a benefit in each year equal to a fraction

(e.g. 2%) of that year's earnings. For both types of plans, but especially
for flat benefit plans, retroactive amendments are common. In Canada, the
unfunded liabilities created when retroactive amendments are made are

amortized over a 15 year period. In an inflationary climate, the succession of such amendments — designed in large part to offset the eroding

26

impact of inflation on the real value of accrued benefits —

virtually

guarantees that such plans will be poorly funded. For a discussion of
the funded status of flat benefit plans in the United States, most of
which is directly applicable to Canada, see Bulow (1979).
15

Note, for example, that if the inflation rate ('rr) is exactly equal to

r —

then the certain return on the plan's assets is rf =

if+TIrV

and the value of the call option is zero. The real value of the nominal

benefit L1 thus declines (instantaneously) at the rate
16

Ti.

For a detailed discussion of implicit contracts in the context of pro-

jected benefit funding, see Bulow (1979). In essence, this method is
valid only if there is an implicit contract that the more rapid rate of
benefit accruals which occurs as the worker ages will not be offset by
slower wage growth relative to that which would occur in a defined contribution plan.
17

Although an exogenous salary growth assumption is used in these illustrations, it should not be inferred that all inflation risk has been transferred
from the worker to the firm

in

the final earnings plan. So long as

indexing only applies in the post—retirement period, the worker's accrued
benefit during his active work years remains nominal and thus retains

the investment characteristics of a long—term bond. From this perspec—
tive, the mechanical nature of the exercises discussed in the text merits
emphasis.
18

Under the contract model, the different contribution rates are inter-

preted as follows. Assume that the real rate is 3% and that the nominal
rate is 7.5%, so that the expected rate of inflation is 4.5%. Then the

27

plan valued at 7.5% is premised on the real erosion of accrued benefits
at 4.5% per year during the pre—retirement period, compared to 4.2 — 3.0
= 1.2% for the plan valued at 4.2%. The plan valued at the lower rate,

in effect, contains an implicit commitment to escalate the value of
accrued benefits at 3.3% per year, which necessitates the higher contribution rate.
19

If labour is inelastically supplied, then competitive behaviour by
firms will ensure that the current wages paid to workers will discount
this anticipated erosion in the appropriate manner even if workers do
not fully perceive the true situation.

20

Woodbury (1980) uses the value of employer contributions in his tests

of preferences for wage and non—wage benefits without acknowledging the

cited in the text. Smith (1980) ,

using the present
value of accruing benefits in his tests, accepts the values as calculated
implications

by

although

the actuaries of each individual plan. In view of the acknowledged

variation in interest rate assumptions across plans, his procedure is
essentially equivalent to using employer contributions (exclusive of
amortization payments for unfunded prior service liabilities) to value
accruing pension benefits.

28

REFERENCES

Arnott,

R. and N. Gersovitz, "Corporate Financial Structure and the Funding

of Private Pension Plans". Journal of Public Economics (April

1980): 231—48.
Bankers Trust Company, Corporate Pension Plan Study: A Guide for the
1980's (New York: Bankers Trust Company, 1980).
Barnow, B. and R. Ehrenberg, "The Costs of Defined Benefit Plans and Firm

Adjustments". Qrterly Journal of Economics (November 1979):
52 3—40.

Black, F., "The Tax Consequences of Long—Run Pension Policy". Financial
Analysts Journal (July—August, 1980).
Blinder, A.S., "Indexing the Economy Through Financial Intermediation".

K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer (eds.), Stabilization of the Domestic

and International Econoy (Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1976).
Bodie, Z., "Common Stocks as a Hedge Against Inflation". Journal of

Finance (May 1976): 459—70.

—- - —,

"Purchasing Power Annuities: Financial Innovation for Stable

Real Retirement Income in an Inflationary Environment". NBER
Working Paper No. 442, February 1980.

Bulow, J., "Analysis of Pension Funding under ERISA". NBER Working Paper
No. 402, 1979.
"Tax

Aspects of Corporate Pension Funding Policy". Mimeograph,

April 1981.
Economic

Council of Canada, One

in

Three: Pensions for Canadians to

2030 (Ottawa: Economic Council of Canada, 1979).

29

Feldstein, N., "Inflation and the Stock Market". American Economic Review

(December 1980): 839—847.
_____________
(May,

Financial

"Private

1981):

Pensions and

Inflation".

American

Economic Review

424—28.

Executives Institute

Canada, Report on Survey of Pension Plans

in Canada (Toronto: FEI Canada, 1980).
Fischer, S., "Corporate Supply of Index Bonds". NBer Working Paper
No.

331, March 1979.

__________ "The Demand for Index Bonds". Journal of Political Economy
(June

1975): 509—34.

Inman, R., "Public Pensions, Public Unions, and the Local Labour Budget",
Summer Institute Paper No. 80—9, National Bureau of Economic Research,
December 1980.

Lazear, E.P., "Why is There Mandatory Retirement?". Journal of Political

Economy (December 1979): 1261—1284.
Levhari, D. and N. Liviatan. "Risk and the Theory of Index Bonds".
American Economic Review (June 1977): 366—75.
Pesando, J.E. and S.A. Rea, Jr., Public and Private Pensions in Canada:

An Economic Analysis (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1977).
President's Commission on Pension Policy, An Interim Report, May 1980.

Sharpe, W.F., "Corporate Pension Funding Policy". Journal of Financial
Economics

Smith,

(June 1976): 183—93.

R.S., "Pensions, Underfunding, and Salaries in the Public Sector".
Mimeograph,

Siegel,

NBER, November 1980.

J. and J.B. Warner, "Indexation, and the Risk—free Asset and Capital

Market Equilibrium". Journal of Finance (September 1977): 1101—07.

30

Statistics Canada, Pension Plans in Canada in 1978 (Ottawa: Government
of Canada, 1980).

Task Force on Retirement Income Policy, The Retirement Income System in

Canada: Problems and Alternative Policies for Reform (Ottawa, 1979).
Tepper, I., "Taxation and Corporate Pension Policy". Journal of Finance

(March 1981): 1—13.

38

26

Career Earnings

Flat Benefit

1
0
1

0
0

3.0—3.9

1

less
than 3

ASSIflIPTION:

3

4

8

4.0—4.4

7

3

19

4.5—4.9

6

16

37

5.5—5.9

1

1

12

6.0—6.4

Number of Plans

1

3

12

6.5—6.9

0

0

1

1

8
0

7.5 or
above
7.0—7.4

Financial Executives Institute Canada, March 1980).

7

10

18

5.0—5.4

Interest Rate (%):

PLANS SURVEYED BY FINANCIAL EXECUTIVES INSTITUTE CANADA, FALL 1979

on Surveyof Pension Plans in Canada (Toronto:
Appendix J.

port

117

Final Earnings

Source:

No. of
Plans

Benefit Formula

THE INTEREST RATE

Table 1

5.10

5.51

5.59

Mean

Table 2

INTERFIRN VARIATION IN VALL!ATION AssUrpTIo::s:

I:?AcT o:

ESTINATED

COSTS OF PFtE— AND POST—RETIRENENT INDEXING

CONTRIBUTION RATE (% COVERED EARNINGS)

Not
Indexed

Inde:e: Real Interest Rate (i)
Post—Retirer2ent

(cly)
'rojected Benefit Funding (Entry Age 30)

Pre— and Post
Retirement

i=2.O

i3.O

i2.O i=3.0

:areer Average r7.5. g=6.4
r=4.2, g3.l

5.89
11.14

8.48
12.97

7.90
12.09

18.24
18.24

r7.5, g6.4

14.76
19.80

21.23
21.23

19.80
19.80

21.2 19.80

2.18
8.26

2.99
9.17

2.55
7.79
13.68
18.35

'inal Earnings

r=3.0, g=l.9
'lat Benefit

r6.7, g5.6
r3.5, g=2.4

14.47
14.47

21.23

19.80

2.78
8.55

15.50
15.50

10.18
10.18

3.67

3.44

9.07

8.46

15.72
15.72

11.41
11.41

19.69
19.69

18.35
18.35

19.69
19.69

18.35
18.35

4.85
10.80

4.19
10.07

15.72 1.41

ccrued Benefit Funding (Age 40)
areer Average

r=7.5 —

r4.2 —

'inal Earnings r7.5, g=6.4
r3.O, g=1..9
'lat Benefit

r=6.7 —
r=3.5 —

3.54

9.73

15.72

11.41

otes: 1. Range of interest rate (r) assumptions, by benefit formula, drawn from Report
on Survey of Pension Plans in Canada (Toronto: Financial Executives Institute
Canada, Narch 1980), Appendix J. Salary scale assumptions (g) determined by
subtracting grand mean interest rate/salary scale "spread" of 1.17. from
corresponding interest rates.
2. Benefit in career average plans is 2% of each year's earnings; in final earnings
plans, 2% of earnings in final year of employment; in flat benefit plans, a
fixed amount equal to 2% of earnings in first year of employment (projected
benefit funding) or 2% of earnings of representative member at age 40 (accrued
benefit funding). Plan members remain with certainty in plan until age 65,
and draw pensions for exactly 15 years.

3. Real interest rate of 2%, combined with nominal rate of 7.5%, implies an inflation rate of 5.5%, etc. The constant interest rate/salary scale "spread" of
1.17. implies that real salary gro'th is 0.9% when the real interest rate is
2% and 1.9% when the real interest rate is 3%.

APPENDIX A
CALCULATION OF CONTRIBUTION RATES UNDER PROJECTED AND ACCRUED

BENEFIT FUNDING

Projected Benefit Funding

1. Present value of benefits at member's retirement age:

Final

Earnings

Plan

Career Average Plan

e_r_dA =

VR

VR = kR

J

wesd,) :

(kR)w0(7;_1)(l_
VR = bR

e_dA =

e r(D

e_rdA

=

Flat Benefit Plan

(kR)W0e((l_

e)

bR(l- e_D_)

2. Accumulated value of contributions at member's retirement age (all plans):

c

R

3. Set VR =

4.

CR

= 1R

gs+r(R_s) =

o

—o\g—r
(RrR)

and solve for contribution rate (C)

Calculation of the impact on the contribution rate of valuing the annuity
payable under the plan at a real interest rate (1) rather than a nominal
interest rate Cr):

Final Earnings Plan
etc.

VR =

e1dA =

R

5. Calculation of the impact on the contribution rate of full indexing, both

pre— and post—retirement, with real interest rate (1) and inflation rate p
(p=r—i):

Same as in 4.

Final Earnings Plan:

D

R
Career Average Plan:

VR =

kR('RJI

w gs+p(R_s)

—j(A—R)

dA

s)Je
R

o

pR

—i(D—R)
e )((P)R_ 1) (-(l
= (kR)W
))
— a
1
o R(g—p)
D

VR = bR ePR J
R

Flat Benefit Plan:

e1dA

= bR

Accrued Benefit Fundin&

required in period t

1. Calculation of premium

to

purchase benefit

which accrues in period t
Final Earnings Plan
_________

g(R—t)—r(R—t)
Pt = kWt e

=

__
Career Average Plan

r)(Rt)

_r(A_R)dA =

tc

kWte

(l— e_r_

kWtert)

e —r(A—R) dA=kWe —r(R—t) 1(1...

Pt =

JD

R

D
—r(R—t) I

Flat Benefit Plan
_________________

Pt

be

2. Contribution rate (cr) equals pt

—r(R—t)
e—r(A—R) dA = be

divided by W t

—

1

— a—r(D—R)

3. Calculation of the impact on the contribution rate of valuing the annuity
payable under the plan at a real interest rate (i) rather than a nominal
interest rate (r):

Final Earnings Plan
_________

Pt =

g —t)—r(R—t)

kWe

1D

le_i(A_R)dA

etc.

=

4.

kWtet)(-(l_ e(1_1)

Calculation of the impact on the contribution rate of full indexing, both

pre— and post—retirement, with real interest rate (1)

Final Earnings Plan:

Same as in 3.
D

Career Average Plan:

p = kW

-i(R—t)
e

I
J

—i(D—R)
-i(R—t) 1
e_i(A_R)dA = kW e
))
(1(l—e

R
Flat Benefit Plan:
__________________

Pt =

beit)

D
—i(A—R) dA = be—i(R—t) 1
(1(l—e _i(D_R)))

e
J

R
Note: Member receives wage W at time he enters plan, works for R periods,
0

receives pension credit k for each period of service to be applied to
earnings

base under the plan (or a periodic payment b in the case of a

flat benefit plan), and draws pension for (D—R) periods. Salary grows
at the nominal rate g and the nominal interest rate is r

