NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND COMPULSORY ARBITRATION.
PRESCRIPTIONS FOR THE BLUE FLU

Casey Ichniowski

Working Paper No. 769

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

September 1981

Research for this project was funded by Grant No. 79—2—7 from the
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Christopher Kelly provided valuable
research assistance. This paper was presented at the NBER 1981
Summer Institute in the Labor program. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper /t769
September 1981

Collective Bargaining and Compulsory Arbitration:
Prescriptions for the Blue Flu

ABSTRACT

This paper reveals that municipal police departments are much less

likely to strike in states that have collective bargaining laws than in
states with no police bargaining law or when police bargaining has been

outlawed. Unlike previous research which has used the state as the unit
of observation, this study examine.s the municipal level decision to strike

for a pooled cross—section of 2998 municipal police departments.
Pooled cross—section estimates of this study reveal two important

relationships. First, municipalities in states that provide for collective
bargaining in any form experience significantly fewer police strikes than
do municipalities in environments where there is no law or where police

bargaining is specifically outlawed. Second, among states with duty—to—
bargain rights for police, those with compulsory arbitration provisions

experience significantly fewer strikes. Fixed—effect estimates that consider
strike probabilities of the same cities under different statutes qualifies
the first finding. Municipalities that experienced a change from a "no

law" environment to a bargaining law environment are less likely to experience
strikes while in the "no law" environment than are municipalities which

have always been in no law environments. However, fixed—effect estimates
confirm the finding that a compulsory arbitration provision significantly
reduces strike propensities. Interviews with representatives from cities
that experienced a police strike suggest that state agencies responsible
for the administration of arbitration mechanisms could help avoid strikes

by avoiding lengthy delays in the arbitration process after the expiration
of contracts.

Casey Ichniowski
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 868—3912

Strikes by public safety employees in the government sector inter-

rupt vital services and may pose serious threts to life and property.
To avoid such interruptions, state policy makers have enacted a wide range
of regulations for the process that determines compensation and working

conditions. Strikes by government employees with few exceptions are
illegal in all

states

and for all occupational categories. Such regu-

lations do not eliminate public sector strikes, as strikes by government
employees have become more numerous over recent years reaching a historical

high in 1978 with 481 strikes involving 193,700 workers. Other state
laws provide for different degrees of collective bargaining rights for
public employees and for various dispute resolution mechanisms sometimes
including compulsory binding arbitration.
How would one expect these various statutory provisions for bar-

gaining rights and impasse procedures to affect the incidence of strikes

by public employees? The institutional forces embodied in state bargaining
laws could influence work stoppages in several ways. Environments with

collective bargaining may experience more industrial conflict than those
without statutory bargaining frameworks, with some control for the level
of union activity in other sectors of the environment, since collective
bargaining formally institutes a process which may increase the interaction of labor and management representatives and thereby increase the
opportunity for bringing up issues that are difficult to resolve.

Conversely, despite increasing formal communication, a process
which increases the voice and participation of employees may tend to lessen
conflict by presenting opportunities for parties to work out issues with

a hrondcr perspective on possible solutions. Furthermore, by providing
for unit certification procedures, collective bargaining statutes could
reduce the likelihood of recognition strikes.

LI
The impact of these bargaining statutes and dispute resolution

—L--

of the studies
mecrianisms has been studied extensively in recent years. Many

have focused on the impact of these statutory provisions on compensation
of public employees with particular emphasis on the effect of compulsory

arbitration.2' Yet, specifically for the case of arbitration statutes,
the intended effect of the statute is the avoidance of work stoppages
by providing for a binding resolution to impasses in negotiations short

of a strike. No study has presented a comprehensive test of the impact
of bargaining statutes and of other factors on public sector strikes.
This study seeks to fill this void by calculating estimates of the impact
of different bargaining laws across the fifty states on strike activity
for the occupation of police.

The effects of collective bargaining laws on strikes have been

analyzed in rather misleading ways. For example, the Public Service
Research Council (PSRC) found that states that passed collective bargaining
laws experience an increase in the number of public employee strikes per
year after the passage of a collective bargaining law. This study does not
adequately address the existence of a similar time trend in strike activity
for states not passing bargaining laws, differences

in the number of muni—

cipaLitis across states, or differences in strike activity or bargaining
provisions for different occupational groups; still these shortcomings

do not prevent the PSRC from concluding "that compulsory collective
bargaining in the public sector causes an increase in strikes.. .and that
a method other than compulsory collective bargaining for conducting employee—

interest."1
employer relations in the public sector would be in the public
Academic research has also been constrained by data availability,
the most widely cited study to date (Burton and Krider, l975)' limited
to aggregate state level data for the years prior to 1971. Since then
other simple descriptive comparisons of
(Wheeler, 1975; Kochan,

strike frequencies across states

l979)' have been conducted. Yet much more sophis—

tJcated research designs are needed to provide a definitive assessment

of the effects of alternative laws on strikes6'

Specifically, to achieve

such an assessment, the design should account for several important con-

siderations. The design should allow for a comparison of strike ratios
across environments where no law exists, and where different types of

impasse procedures exist. To the extent possible, this comparison should
go beyond a simple dichotomy such as law/no law or factfinding/arbitration.
The design should also consider differences in the number of municipalities
and thereby obtain a better control over the number of departments that

could go on strike. The design should control for other municipal and
state characteristics that could affect strike frequencies, while also
considering the specific details of bargaining statutes for different

occupational groups. Finally, one would want the design to maintain
valuable time series features and examine the same municipalities in
different statutory environments.

This study is able to examine the impact of different bargaining
statutes on the municipal—level decision to strike by integrating all
occurrences of work stoppages for the years 1972, 1973, 1976, 1977 and
19/8 by municipal

police

departments into a pooled cross—section time

series data set of 2,998 municipalities. Furthermore, by examining thirteen states which legislated changes in the police bargaining statutes
in time

1/2Lo 1978

period, this study elaborates on pooled cross—section

estimates by examining the same municipalities but in different statutory

environments. To provide a better understanding of the àauses of police work
stoppages these two sets of empirical estimates are enhanced by interviews with union and municipal officials from the cities experiencing
wurk stoppages.

Pooled cross—section estimates of this study reveal two important

rHationships. First, municipalities in states that provide for collective

bargaining in any form experience significantly fewer police strikes than
do municipalities in environments where there is no law or where police
4

bargaining is specifically outlawed. Second, among states with duty—to—
bargain rights for police, those with compulsory arbitration provisions

experience significantly fewer strikes. Fixed—effect estimates that
consider strike probabilities ot the same cities under different statutes

qualifies the first finding. Municipalities that experienced a change
from a "no law" environment to a bargaining law environment are less likely
to experience strikes while in the "no law" environment than are muni-

cipalities which have always been in no law environments. Moreover, though
based on a limited number of observations, municipalities that switch from
a "no law" environment to a duty—to—bargain environment without arbitration
are more likely to experience police strikes in the duty—to—bargain en-

vironment. However, fixed—effect estimates confirm the finding that, among
cities that switched from duty—to—bargain environments without binding
arbitration to environments with arbitration, the arbitration provision significantly reduces the strike propensities of those cities.

Interview

responses suggest that state agencies responsible for the administration
of arbitration mechanisms should try to avoid delays in the arbitration
process after the expiration of contracts in order to make this mechanism
as effective as possible in avoiding work stoppages.
Ilie

remainder of this paper is divided into five sections. Section

U describes the municipal police data set. Section LII presents the models
used to estimate the hypothesized relationships. Section IV presents the
two sets of empirical estimates of determinants of strike frequency: pooled
cross—section estimates and "fixed effect" estimates that examine the same

citiesin different environments. Section V presents evidence gathered
about the cities experiencing strikes through interviews with labor and
management representatives from those cities. The final section summarizes

the major

findings.
4

II.

Data and IIypotheses

1.

Strike Activity

Work stoppages among the municipal police departments in the national
sample of cities are measured according to information collected by the
Industrial Relations Unit of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
BLS Form 3006 contains data on work stoppages by occupational category

and level of government. Information for all municipal level work stoppages involving police were collected for the years 1972, 1973, 1976, 1977

and 1978. These work stoppages are analyzed along three dimensions——frequency,
duration, and breadth. The frequency of strike activity is determined

by the existence of a work stoppage for a given municipality. The duration
of the stoppage is taken directly from BLS Form 3006, while breadth is
measured by man—days idle which is calculated as the product of duration
and the tijumber of uniformed police officers. The nature of the data col-

lection process by the BLS virtually assures that no police work stoppage
in any city in the national data set is overlooked.7'

2. State Bagining Laws
The major objective of this study is to gauge the impact that
different legal environments for collective bargaining have on the fre-

quency of police work stoppages. The variables constructed to measure the
leg;1

environment

take into accourLt two principal dimensions of these

laws——bargaining rights and impasse procedures. These bargaining environments have been defined by networks of state statutes, court opinions,
and opiilioris by state attorney generals.8'

The most important right granted employees in a state bargaining

environment is the duty—to—bargain. Under such a bargaining right not
only is the public employer required to bargain with representatives of

—6—

employee organizations, but employees also have the right to form and join

an organization. Other state bargaining frameworks which permit bargaining
establish the legality of collective bargaining for covered employees.
However, under such frameworks employers are not obligated to participate

in the bargaining process. Other state frameworks establish the right
of employees or employee organizations to "meet and confer" with employers

or the right "to present proposals". In some state jurisdictions collective
bargaining for certain groups of public employees is explicitly illegal,
while in others the law is completely silent on the subject of public
employee bargaining rights.

In states where the duty of employers to bargain with employee
organizations has been established, impasse procedures for resolving bar-

gaining conflicts have generally been instituted. Dispute resolution
mechanisms in this sector generally are perceived in a hierarchical fashion:
mediation, factfinding, voluntary binding arbitration, and compulsory

arbitration. These third party processes have a tendency of becoming
more formal and judicial in nature the closer they come to compulsory
arbitration in the hierarchical setting.
in this study, four general classifications of collective bargaining

laws for police are considered. States with no specific provisions for
police cnl1ctive bargaining or states in which bargaining is explicitly illegal
form one category. In a second group are states which grant police labor orga—
nizations the right to present their views to employers regarding terms of em—
ploymeut, hut which fall short of a duty—to—bargain provision.

In the third

category are states which have a duty—to—bargain provision but no compulsory
arhitrrttion mechanism for resolving disputes. Finally, the fourth group is corn—

posed of states which not only have duty—to—bargain laws, but which provide for

compulsory arbitration as well. A complete list of the states and the categorization

—1-P-

of

their police bargaining laws according to this classification scheme

is given in the Appendix.

In formulating these four categories, a degree of subjectivity
was used in selecting the criteria to differentiate among the state bar-

gaining laws. States having no explicit law governing police collective

bargaining are grouped with states in which bargaining is illegal. This
is partly done in consideration of the historical development of state

bargaining laws. Until 1958, no state had a municipal employee bargaining
law and sentiment toward public employee bargaining, particularly for

public safety employees, was hostile. Viewed this way, the absence of a
specific state law is more correctly classified with laws specifically

outlawing police bargaining. A critical distinction between duty—to—bargain
and bargaining permitted provisions is that in the former class the choice
to bargain lies with the employee organization, while with the latter the

choice lies with the public employer. Compulsory binding arbitration within
a duty—to—bargain environment makes another significant change in the bar-

gaining process. In such an environment, police labor organizations need
not rely on the final consent of the public employer to determine the terms
and con(1iI ions of their employment, but rather a neutral third party has

power to arbitrate these contract terms.

Since this study involves all fifty states, some potentially important differences among bargaining statutes within a given category may be

overlooked. Maine's police bargaining statute, for example, does provide
for a degree of binding arbitration; however, the arbitrator's decision
is

of

only radvisory in regard to salaries and wages".1 Because of the nature
salaries and wages a a preeminent subject of bargaining, the Maine

statute

was classified with

arbitration.

which

duty—to—bargain states having no compulsory

Yet, the Maine

differentiates it

statute does possess an important feature

from the other states within that category. Like—

—8—

wise, among arbitration statutes, differences between types of arbitration
are overlooked; issue—by—issue arbitration, last—best offer arbitration,

and last—best offer package arbitration are all distinct versions of legislated arbitration but are included wJthin the same category.

Moreover, differences in state laws regarding strike penalties

are not captured. The New York statute penalizes striking public employees
two—for—one in pay (the loss of a day's pay for not working and an additional
penalty of a day's pay for striking illegally1), while Wisconsin fines
an employee ten dollars per day.1 Both these states are included in

the same hrbitration category. Penalties levied against police employee

organizations involved in a strike also vary within groups. Still, police
strikes (either by statutory language or court opinion) with rare exception

are treated as illegal. Despite these caveats, looking at all fifty states
does have a significant advantage in that the entire spectrum of attitudes
toward police bargaining are considered by examining categories of reasonably
similar forms of state legislation.
3.

Other Bargaining Status Variables

The collective bargaining status of a municipality with its police

departnent s measured by a dummy variable for the presence of a written
labor contract. This variable is derived from responses to two questions
("does your city have a written labor contract covering wages, hours, and
conditiono 1)1 emplnymcnt for police personnel?" and "what year was the

first written labor contiact signed?") in a survey of municipal personnel

o1[ics by Freeman, Ichiiiowski, and Lauer.12/ It is assumed that cities
responding affirmatively to the first question have continually been party
to a po! fto contract since the date given in response to the second question.13/

Th absence of a contract could be an additional factor that could cause
a strike, as minicipal police officers seek the "recognition" embodied in

a written agreement. This contract variable will examine the possibility

—9.-

that these -"recognition" strikes are relatively more frequent.

Also used in the analysis is a variable introduced in the Freeman,
Ichniowski, and Lauer study which measures the police bargaining environment in a state; that is the percentage of all municipalities in a state

with police labor agreements. This variable is derived from 985 responses
obtained from the above contract status survey.'4' As hypothesized in

other research on bargaining statutes,' a high level of this percent
contract variable may be the result of the passage of a bargaining statute.

Because of this possibility of collinearity and a causal relationship
between the law and percentage contract variable, strike frequency equations
will be estimated with and without the latter variable, since part of an
eftect attributable to percent contract may, in fact, be indirectly attributable to the passage of a bargaining law.

4. State—level Control Variables
Since the bargaining environment is defined along state boundaries,
it is important to control for other state—wide characteristics having an
effect on strike outcomes so that the state bargaining law does not sub—

stflute for the effects of other factors. The collective bargaining variable
(perrent-ige of cities in a state with a written labor agreement with their

police departments) is one such variable. Other state characteristics
used as controls include four geographic region dummy variables (Northeast,
North (:cntral, South, and West),16' the percentage of a state's nongri—
cultural work force who are public employees, and the percentage of the

noungrtcultural work force that is unionized. The latter two controls will
indicate how favorable is the climate toward unions intitiating work stop-

pages. A'so, high levels of unionism should correspond to higher area
wic-'s ad may increase the expectations about a reasonable wage increase.
This would again lead one to expect a positive relation between these

state unionism varinbles and strike activity. Specifically, one wants a

-lu-

negative coefficient on a bargaining law variable in a strike activity equation
to represent more a dampening effect of the law on work stoppages and less
the effect of other state influences which tend to discourage public sector
union activity or militancy.

5. Municipal Level Control Variables
Other explanatory variables included in this analysis are three
government type dummies (Council—Manager, Mayor—Council, and Commission),

a central city dummy, population, per capita income, total municipal revenue,
number of departmental employees, and maximum step salary for patroimen.1'
Negative coefficients aie expected for the salary variable since
relatively low salaries should produce greater dissatisfaction among police

officers. In work stoppage equations, the effects of other municipal
level characteristics are less obvious in specifications which include

a police salary level control. For a given level of police compensation,
one might reasonably expect ability—to—pay measures to signal to police
employees unrealized potential wage gains; therefore, positive relationships

should be expected. However, one might expect negative coefficients on
these variables if wealthier communities can use revenues to avert strikes

in wvs other than by granting higher salaries, possibly through better
fringes not captured with the salary variable or by providing better equip—

mont or conditions. Central city status and population might also be
expected to

have

positive coefficients in strike equations with salary

controlled since police duties in urban or high population areas could

be more hazardous. Furthermore, for a municipality of a given population,
a larger department could signal a situation in which it is less likely

that aM enployee interests will be satisfied. In this case, one would
exrcc:t

positive

coefficients on department size. The government type

controls will investigate how differences in municipal government structure
afFect strike activity.

III. Econometric Models
In order to identify the correlates of strike activity among police,

the

S

most appropriate unit of observation is the bargaining unit level at

which the decision to strike occurs. Although multiple bargaining units
do exist within a police department, particularly

distinguishing superior

officers from patrolmen in large cities, this study uses the municipal
police department as the unit of observation.

To identify the determinants of strike frequency a logit model
of the following form Is specified:

1

÷

P (STRIKE.) =
1

where P(STRIKE.) =

l+e i

the probability of a police work stoppage occuring
in the

.th

municipality

= a vector of independent variables of the ith

-*

and X.

municipality
The logit specification overcomes the difficulty that ordinary least squares
regression would have for modeling the binary strike outcome, as the OLS
technique produces inefficient estimates and predictions, possibly out-

side the 0—I range by forcing a normal structure on the error term. Since

no a pori reason exists for preferring the normal cumulative density
function to

that of

the logistic cumulative density function, no attempt

to supplement logit with probit analysis is made. Once

coefficients

are estimated, relative strike probabilities for an average city, differing
only on the bargaining law variable, will be calculated by evaluating the
logistic equation using the mean level of the control variables while
allowing the law dummies to vary.

Since police strikes are extremely rare events, one would like
to extend the cross—section model given in the logistic equation by uti—

lizing the additional strike information across five years. A pooled

-12

cross—section sample using 206 cities for 1972 and 1973 and 862 cities for

1976, 1977, and 1978 is constructed. For the 1972 and 1973 portions of
the sample, 1973 levels of the control variables are used. For the 1976,
1977, and 1978 portions, 1978 levels of control variables are used.18/

For the salary control in 1972, 1976, and 1977, the salary level will be
a salary post—dating certain cities' strikes, so that the salary coefficient
in the strike equation may be distorted by potential impacts of strikes

on salaries in these years. For the bargaining statutes, variables will
reflect the actual environment in each of the five years.

Despite the weakness of pooled cross—section analysis caused by
possibly inappropriate levels of certain independent variables in some

years, it does have many advantages. It provides additional data on rare
events. Furthermore, municipalities in any one year's cross—section may
not have equal conditional probabilities of striking in that year along
the dimension of an omitted variable, a multi—year contract.

If the multi—

year contracts that do exist do not expire in the same proportion across
the different bargaining environments in any given year and, as one would
expect, the probability of a work stoppage is less during the term of a

contract coefficients on bargaining statute dummy variables in a one
year cross—section equation will not accurately reflect the effect these

1a have on strikes. Municipalities not bargaining in one year should
bc engngl in bargaining during the time considered in the pooled sample.
The issue which remains is that states with fewer written labor
agreements (most commonly the no bargaining law states) may tend more often

toward an annual salary determination process. To the extent that this

is truc, my positive coefficient on the no bargaining law variable should
bE

akcn as a signal of the salary determination process occuring more

often. This should increase the number of opportunities for police to

-13-

become disgruntled over the setting of salaries. However, this influence
should not be viewed as reducing the validityof any law coefficients
obtained from this analysis. The degree to which the different bargaining
laws move the parties away from an annual salary determination process,
is measured by the degree to which this method of reducing industrial
conflict in this sector is promoted by different statutory bargaining
environments.

The pooled cross—section equations to be estimated make a significant methodological improvement in the study of the impact of bargaining laws on public sector strike activity by controlling for other
observable state and municipal characteristics that could affect strike

propensities. Still, there exist two very different explanations for
any correlations between bargaining laws and strike propensities detected

in the cross—section equations. One possibility is that the Institutional
forces embodied in the statutes affect how likely a police department is
to go on strike according to the arguments presented in the previous section.
Another very different possibility Is that the law—strike relation reflects
selectivity in the passage of bargaining statutes, with states passing
bargaining laws differing from those without laws in unobserved charac-

teristics. For example, a negative relation between strikes and environments with bargaining laws may be due to collective bargaining laws reducing
the

proh-1)i

I ity 01

strikes.

Conversely, states that enact bargaining

statutes may be composed of cities that had already been less likely to
strike, so that the negative coefficients would indicate a grouping of
states with cities that were less prone to strike prior to the enactment
of a law.

(Parallel arguments can be made for arbitration—strike relation—

sli i ps)

By taking advantage of the longitudinal component of the law variables,
a fixed effect model disentangles the two possible causes for a law—strike

-j_1

relationship.

Fixed—effect logit equations cannot be estimated since the

maximum likelihood procedure will not converge for equations using categories for which there is no variance along tI'e dimension of the dependent

variable. Furthermore, the precise nature of the data set precludes
estimating a fixed effect model using an OLS "differencing from the mean"

procedure. As described above, when municipalities are pooled across the
years 1976, 1977, and 1978, the 1978 levels for the control variables

(other than for the bargaining environment variables) are used. Since 1973
levels o! the control variables are available for a much smaller number
of cities, there will be no variation in the level of most independent

variables for a majority of the municipalities in the sample. Because the
"differencing from the mean" procedure is not well—suited to this data
set, it

is

not possible to control completely for "omitted city—specific"

effects.

However, by extending the four bargaining statute dummy variables
to reflect information on changes in bargaining statutes, one can specifically
control for those omitted city—characteristics that are correlated with
the passage of bargaining laws by comparing the likelihood of striking
for the nrne municipalities but in different statutory environments.

Over the seven year period examined in this study, states experienced the

following changes: no law to bargaining permitted, to duty—to—bargain and
to

arbitration.

Of particular interest will be comparisons of the "no law"

cnefflcftnts for states that never experienced a change in law status to "no

law" coefficients for states that did experience a law change. Also, special
attention will be given to the comparisons between the before and after
environments of states that switched to arbitration mechanisms during the

period ccmsidered in this study. While the inclusion of this more detailed
set of law variables in an OLS regression does not control for omitted city—
specific effects as rigorously as a "differencing from the mean" procedure,

i will allow for the examination of selectivity bias in the passage of

bargaining laws. Moreover, by including a set of law variables that describes all possible law changes, the law variables are less constrained

l9/
than those used in a "differencing" procedure.

IV. Empirical Results
Table 1 presents a tabulation of strikes occurring under the dif-

ferent statutory bargaining environments. For any of the five years,
strikes were most frequent in the "no law" category. Furthermore, across
all years, more strikes occurred in the no law category (60.5% of all

strikes) than all other categories combined. Only 5 strikes, or 6.2%
of all strikes took place in environments that provided for compulsory

interest arbitration mechanisms. However, with the number of cities in
the pooled cross—section sample as a divisor, the strike propensity

aning duty—to—bargain cities is of the same magnitude as it is among no

law cities. These proportions for arbitration and bargaining permitted
cities indicate much smaller strike propensities.

To investigate this pattern in more detail and to discover to
wliit extent certain bargaining statutes can be thought to reduce the like-

lihood ni police strikes, more rigorous statistical tests are applied to

the daLa. Table 2 presents logit coefficients obtained from estimating
pnoied cross—section equations in which a number of other characteristics

which cn1 afiect strike probabilities are controlled. The results
ar clearS—cut, never affected by the addition of the possibly confounding

pPr(cnt contract variable. Across both the earlier years (1972 and 1973)
and the later years (1976, 1977, and 1978), the point estimates indicate
that cities in environments which provide for some form of collective
bargriiiiio experience fewer strikes than cities in environments outlawing

hugatning or with no provision for bargaining. The consistent ranking
indicates that among these three types of bargaining environments, cities
in states with arbitration are least likely to experience strikes, and

—16—

TABLE 1: POLICE STRIKES IN DIFFEREINT BARGAINING ENVIRONMENTS
FOR 1972, 1973, 1976, 1971, and 1978
(Strikes as a proportion of city—years given in parentheses)*

Type of Police
Bargaining Statue

1. arbitration

1972
2

(.061)

2. duty—to—bargain

4

1973

0
(0)
1

Year
1976

2
1
(.004) (.007)

4

(.182) (.043) (.030)

3.

bargaining per—
miLLed

4. no bargaining law
or bargaining
illegal

Total

1

1

1977

2

8

1978

Total
5

0

(.006)

(0)
3

(.078)(.031) (.053)
2

1

(.016) (.016) (.010) (.OlO)(.005)
11

3

10

20

8

17

7

(.009)
49

(.12f) (.035) (.036) (.029)(.063)

(.049)

21
20
(.023) (.024)

81
(.027)

18
(.087)

5

(.024)

17
(.020)

*City_years in the data set include 206 municipalities in 1972
and 1973, and 862 municipalities in 1976, 1977, and 1978.

-17-

1AI1 2:

LOGIIT COEFFICIENTS AND STANDARD ERRORS FROM POOLED CROSS—SECTION
ESTIMATES OF THE LIKELIHOOD OF POLICE STRIKES WITH DIFFERENT BARGAINING STATUTES

1972 — 1978

1972 — 1973

1976 — 1978

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

2998

2998

412

412

2586

2586

Mean of independent
variable
.027

.027

.056

.056

.022

.022

Observations

1. Law \rarjahle

a. arbitration 2.6O***_2.73***

b. duty to
bargain

(.59)

(.61)

—.24

—.31

(.37)

(.39)

c. bargaining _l.42***_l.45***
(.47)
permitted
(.47)

2. Percent
Contract

——

.48
(.70)

_2.16** —2.41*
(1.28) (1.58)

_3.31***_3.48***
(.81)

(.81)

—.58

—.70

_.59*

_.70*

(1.31)

(1.35)

(.41)

(.43)

_l.32* _1.38*
(1.11) (1.13)
.62

(2.34)

_1.79***_l.78***
(.57)

(.57)
.75
(.81)

Other control variables include two government type dummies, three region dummies
and up to four year dummies; population (and control for population less than
10,000); per capita income; total municipal revenue; department size; central city
dummy; percentage of nonagricultural work force that is unionized; percentage of
nonagriiitural work force that is in public employment; private maximum salary;
and a dummy for the presence of written labor contract.

j 'nil cant at .01 level
igriificant at .05 ]evel
— significant at .10 level
—

*

—18—

"duty—to—bargain" cities most likely of the three. While the logit coefficients on the "duty—to—bargain" law variables are not significant
at conventional levels for the earlier years, all other law coefficients

are significant. To interpret these coefficients in terms of strike
probabilities the column 2 equation is estimated at the mean for all charac-

teristics while allowing the law dummies to vary. This estimation yields
strike probabilities of .0025, .0271, and .0089 for arbitration, duty—

to—bargain and bargaining permitted cities respectively. The estimate
for no law cities is .0367 thr from two to fifteen times greater than the
20 /

strike

prcbabilities for cities in states in the other law categories.
To understand the degree to which the negative relationship

between the passage of bargaining laws and strike activity is causal in
nature, the more detailed set of law variables that describe all changes

in statutory environments is introduced into the analysis. To what degree
is the increase in the absolute value of the negative law coefficients
from the 1972—1973 sample to the 1976—1978 sample in Table 1 the result
of the movement of less strike prone cities from no law environments into

the various bargaining law environments? The law dummies listed in the
left hind column of Table 3 differentiate cities that were always in no
1.-iw environments from cities in no law environments but that moved into

another statutory environment. With 862 cities in the later year cross—
sections, and twelve cities from the earlier year cross—sections that are
nnt contained among the 862 cities, there are 874 distinct municipalities

in this data set. Column 1 of Table 3 gives the number of these cities
in each category, while columns 2 and 3 give the number of strikes and
strikes as

Finn tIin

proportion of the 2998 city—year observations in each category.

proportions,

several interesting observations can be made.

CLties in "no law" environments through 1978 (line 1) account for all no

1w strikes. Despite only 53 city year observations in no law states

j

1

4-

166

89

32

21

F02

10

65

6

277

(1)

——

(.084)

7

——

0
(.000)

——

——

(.037)
1

——

——

(.09)

—.12

(.04)

(.09)

—.09

.00
omitted

——

(.005)
4
(.007)

—

—

*

Significant
Significant
Significant

at .10 level

at .05 level

(s

(7)

——

——

——

——

(.06)

—.

(.02)
l2***

——

omitted

(.01)
.00

—.004

——

.06***
(.02)

——

(.04)

.04

.002
(.02)

—

——

(.06)

—.08

——

(.02)

—.01

—

12**
(.06)

—.

——

(.06)

—.10

(.03)

.O7***

——

.00

omitted
—.07

—.03

.01
(.02)

——

(8)

prior to
law change

(.06)
——

——

——

prior to
after law
law change
change
——

.012

(.05)

—.03

——

prior to
after law
law change
change

)

4

(.000)

0

(.000)

0

(.000)

(.000)

——

(.049)
0

(.000)
0

0
(.000)
9

o

——

after law
change

(3)

(.000)

(.052)

prior to
law change
49

(2)

.045

I

(9)

(.02)

('O2)

—.1O

(.02)

—.O5'

(.03)

(.01)

(.03)

—

(.01)

(-04)

—.03

——

after law
change

.027

OEFFTCIENTS Ni) STANDARD ERRORS FOR DETAILED LAW VARIABLES IN STRIKE
FREQUENCY EQUATIONS
OLS Regression for
OLS Regression for
OLS Regression for
Cities
Number of strikes
of
Sample
City—Years
Sample of City—Years
Complete pooled cross—
as % of city-years)
fur wkiiji initial
for which final status section
samplea
status was NO LAN°
was ARBITRATIONa
874
81
1239
978
2998
——
.027

REGRESSL

Number

3:

Other control variables include those listed in note
to Table 2 plus percent contract.
—
at .01 level

NO LAW to
ARBITRATION
BARGAINING PERMITTED
throughout
BARGAINING PERMITTED to
ARBITRATION
DUTY TO BARGAIN
throughout
DUTY TO BARGAIN
ARBITRATION
ARBITRATION
throughout

**

a)

9.

8.

7.

6.

5.

4.

BARGAIN

NO LAW to BARGAINING
PERMITTED
NO LAW to DU'ry TC

2.

3.

NO LAW throuChout

pendeut Variabi

—

1.

Mean of In

Observations

Env

Descript1Latutory

TABLL

—20—
that eventually changed to a bargaining statute of some form (column 2 of
lines 2, 3, and 4), one observes no strikes in these cells.

An examination

S

of

these same cities in their later statutory environments (column 3 of

lines 2, 3, and 4) indicate that these same cities did not experience
strikes if the change was to bargaining permitted or arbitration environ-

ments. However, the cities described in line 3 exhibit greater strike
propensities following a change to a duty—to—bargain environment. Columns
4 and 5 present coefficients from an OLS regression

for the sample of cities

for which the initial year bargaining environment was no law. OLS point
estimates in column 4 indicate that no law cities that eventually moved
into bargaining law environments were less strike prone than other no
In fact, the movement from no law to duty-to—bargain produces

law cities.

a significant increase in strike activity for the same cities. These results,
while based on a limited number of observations in certain cells, indicate
that part of the negative relationship observed in bargaining law coefficients
in Table 1, is the result of a "selectivity" scenario in which states with
cities less prone to strikes under no law environments pass bargaining
legislation.
\flen

one makes the same sort of comparisons between duty—to—bargain

environments with and without compulsory arbitration one arrives at a very

different ronciusion. The proportions in Column 3 indicate strike propen—
sitics fr it ins in citity—to—bargain environments for all seven years of
.(H,

(line

Tracking

7) and .007 for cities in environments with arbitration (line 9).

the

set of cities which moved from duty—to—bargain environments

without arbitration to environments with arbitration, one observes an
even greater reduction in strike probabilities (.084 in column 2 of line 8
aol .005

in

column 3 of line 8). The coefficients from the OLS regression

presented in columns 6 and 7 for the sample of city—years for which the

stntutory environcnt was arbitration by 1978 corroborate these results.
Arbitration coefficients, whether it is arbitration throughout the seven

—21—

year period

or arbitration preceded by another environment, are all virtually

identical in magnitude. For this set of coeficients, the only coefficient
significantly different from zero is a significantly positive coefficient
for cities with duty—to--bargain preceding arbitration (line 8, column 6).

Results for the entire 2,998 sample using the complete set of detailed law
variables are given in columns 8 and 9 and consistently reflect the above
patterns.

While these results lend support to the argument that part of the
negative relationship for bargaining law coefficients discerned in the
cross—section estimates of Table 2 is due to states with less strike prone
cities passing bargaining laws, the impact of a compulsory arbitration

mechanism is unambiguous. Even among those cities moving from duty—to—
bargain environments without arbitration to environments with arbitration,
one observes a significant decrease in strike frequency consistent with

the earlier cross—section estimates. Compulsory arbitration provides an

effective dispute resolution mechanism to avoid strikes. However, a duty—
to—bargain provision without arbitration is in some ways a "half—way house"
which grants employees the right to bargain but is not necessarily coupled

with an effective means to settle contract disputes. The evidence suggests
that

strike

activity in states with a duty—to—bargain provision could be

reduced icnificantly providing for a compulsory arbitration mechanism.

V. Fe! ic Strikes — Evidence from Interviews
The

sample of 81 strikes were also investigated separately. However,

quantitative estimates from equations which modeled strike duration as
a function of the array of independent variables yielded no significant

partial 'orrelatjons. This is consistent with the previous literature of
strkc activity which indicates that factors which explain one dimension
of strike activity well (frequency), do not generally provide much ex—
planatory power for other dimensions of strike activity (duration in days

—'21/
or man—days).

Part of the explanation for this is due to very little

variation in strike duration. Across all statutory environments, police
strikes are short. For the 81 strikes, the average duration was 6.1
days with 51% 3 days or less and 84% 9 days or less.

Still, important questions remain about these 81 strikes. Most
obvious is that despite the consistency of the finding that compulsory
arbitration mechanisms reduce strike frequency, five municipal police
departments in such environments did strike during the period considered

in this study. What differentiates these departments, and what problems
in the bargaining relationship could the arbitration provision not over-

come? To answer such questions interviews with labor and management
representatives from the five cities with arbitration strikes were con-

ducted. Also interviewed were representatives from the municipalities

which experienced police strikes in any state in 1978. Compensation and
working conditions were of course issues in the majority of these strikes;
however, the interviews were intended to find out why the various processes
available for arriving at the terms and conditions of employment could
not avert work stoppages.
ic)r the five police work stoppages in states with compulsory interest

nrbitration mechanisms, the most common reason cited by labor and manage—
mont representatives was the occurrence of lengthy delays in the dispute
resolution proccss and frustration over the length of time that had elapsed
since the expiration of t.he last contract. These delay related causes

wcrc cited for four of the five strikes. In one instance, a lack of continuity in the city's representative helped to cause the delay with the
city having seven city managers in the seven year period prior to the strike.

Fwthcrmore, this department, operating without a successor contract, felt
the management was in no hurry to reach a settlement because of a state

1o mandating a 3% cap on interest on back pay awards. In another instance,

2

TABLE

4:

INTERVIEW RESPONSES FROM REPRESENTATIVES FROM MUNICIPALITIES
EXPERIENCING POLICE STRIKES

Number
Contacted

Strikes by
Law type

Number of
Responses

Arbitration
5

(5)

Duty to
Bargain (20)

-•

3

5

3

Years Rep—s Reasons Cited for Strike
resented

Number times
Cited*

1972, 1976, frustration over delays of
1977
arbitration process and
length of time elapsed after
expiration of last contract

1978

4

lack of clarity in communi—
cations between or within
negotiating parties

3

attempt to gain recognition
in a written contract

2

police strike as show of
support for firefighter
strike

1

police seeking voluntary
local option interest
arbitration provision
in current contract

1

protest over demotion
of_chief

1

Bargaining
Permitted
1

0

1978

17

14

1978

(7)

No law
(49)

* Only reas(jn'
law

5

attempt to gain union
recognition in a written
contract

5

extreme and persisting
political tensions between
police department and
city administration

2

ctp1 two or more times are included in the table for arbitration and no
For the three strikes in duty—to—bargain states, the principal reason

catgr ics.

for each

No alternative but to
strike in the absence
of any form of impasse
procedure

strike

is listed.

—24—

the

strike

occurred over the first contract ever negotiated under the state's

arbitration law, and the parties' lack of famliarity with the system
helped to cause delays. Related to the problems of delays in the arbitration
system are unclear communications between negotiators or within a negotiating

team. In one case, a police union representative said the department's
attorney had misinformed union officials of the city's most recent contract

offer and this helped to induce the strike. In the situation involving
the turnover of seven city managers, communications channels were further
confused by the practice of union officials of lobbying the members of
the city council to transmit their bargaining proposals to the city manager.
In two cases, additional problems were caused by the attempt to gain the

recognition of a written agreement for the first time. In one of these
cases, a department for a small town of about 3,000 people, negotiators

were unfamiliar with the workings of the arbitration mechanism. In the
other case, involving a city of approximately 39,000 people, management
refused to recognize the employees' right to make use of the arbitration
procedure, relying instead on the long—standing practice of deciding the
terms of employment unilaterally in meetings between the mayor and police
chief

For the other three statutory environments, representatives from
the 21 municipalities and their police departments which experienced strikes

in 1978 were contacted. Representatives of four of these 21 municipalities
would not respond to telephone or written inquiries, including three from
"no I aw"

environments and the only

1978 strike in a "bargaining permitted"

environment.

For the three duty—to—bargain strikes, one was a sympathy strike
for a firefighters work stoppage; another was a protest of the demotion
of a police chief who then joined the rank—and—file police on the picket
line.

The final strike was specifically aimed at obtaining a contract

provision providing for a local option to arbitrate future contract dis-

putes. While the department was successful in securing this contract
language, the local option to arbitrate contract disputes has not since
been employed.

For the fourteen "no law" strikes, six involved municipalities

without written contracts and eight with contracts. In five of the six
municipalities in which some form of bargaining had led in the past to
written agreements, police representatives cited the absence of any procedures to address impasses as forcing the strike to bring additional

pressure to bear on the dispute. In five of the eight strikes in a no
contract situation, representatives cited the desire of the police to

obtain a written agreement as a major issue leading to the strike. The
final reason listed in this category in Table 4 is political tension.
While this factor is evident to some degree in many strikes, in two cases,

it was given particular emphasis. In one case, the newly appointed police
chief, a former marine corps general, was attempting to change department

procedures drastically, and a protest strike eventually occurred. In
another case, the police department's persistent difficulties with the mayor,
who had a penchant for tearing up tentative agreements in front of the
employees' representative, was a major cause of the strike.

VI. Conclusion
The statutory bargaining environments under which police bargaining
is conduL ted have a significant impact on the likelihood that a municipal

police department will be engaged in work stoppages. Simple cross—section
estimates indicated that fewer police strikes occur in states with some

statutory provision for bargaining. Fixed—effect estimates revealed that

this roIionship is due to greater strike propensities for municipalities
in sLates that never enacted a bargaining law. Cities in "no law" environments that did enact a bargaining statute were less likely to experience
;t:rikes than cities in no law environments that never enacted any such pro—

visions. Furthermore, cities that did switch from no law environments to
duty—to—bargain environments without arbitration were significantly more
likely to experience strikes after the enactment of the duty—to—bargain
law.

By providing for a compulsory binding arbitration mechanism to

resolve disputes over negotiations of police contracts, states reduce the
likelihood that their municipalities will experience police work stoppages.
ThIE

result is

environm'nts

especially clear in comparisons between duty—to--bargain

with and without arbitration provisions, and is borne out

in both the simple cross—section estimates and the estimates that
for

selectivity bias.

one

could reasonably extend this

Milwaukee

Based on

the less rigorous tests

control

in other research,

finding to the occupation of firefighters.

and New York City, which is subject to a special city—level

law and not the state law, provide the only examples where firefighters
have engaged in a work stoppage where a compulsory arbitration law existed.22/

Questions remain to be answered. Precisely how costly are these
interruptions in essential services caused by work stoppages by public

safety employees in terms of the threat to lives and property?

What costs

are incurred in providing the administrative mechanisms for dispute reso—
lution ncjianisms? What are the incremental costs in providing art arbitration
mechanism where the dispute resolution procedures such as mediation and
frict firtcling already exist? It is clear that the sentiment of voters and

tax payr toward public employees is changing significantly.

In a 1980

public referendum, Massachusetts voters followed the lead set by taxpayers

in California in passing a "tax—cap" provision. Moreover, the language
of Massachusetts' Proposition 2 1/2 included a rider for the repeal of its
compuloory arbitration mechanism for police and firefighters——the first
si H 'Thniigo back from an environment with arbitration. It is clear that

legislative debate will be influenced by a wide variety of economic and

political factors. Still, legislators should have the benefit of the best
evidence possible concerning the impacts that public employee bargaining

legislation are likely to have on outcomes as important as the interruption

of ssential protective services. Finally, while some evidence exists
on the impact of the bargaining provisions on other outcomes such as corn—

pensation,231it would be instructive to calculate the impact of such statutory provisions on salaries, fringe benefits and work stoppages for the

same data set. In this way, one can see whether a dampening effect of
arbItration on strikes is obtained at the price of higher levels of corn—

pensation, or whether such a statutory provision is preferable over a

range of industrial relations outcomes. Research with this data set is
in progress to obtain such estimates.

—28-

APPENDIX: STATE COLLECTIVE BARGAINING LAWS FOR POLICE

Year of Initial
Bargaining Law

State

Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas

Kentucky
Louisiana
Mairre

Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Pimpshire
N\]

'ersey

New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
O1ii

——
1972
1974
——
1961

Extent of Bargaining
Right in 1978

none
duty to bargain
bargaining permitted

none
bargaining permitted

none

——

1965
1970
1974
——
1970
——
1961
1975
1974
1972

arbitration
duty to bargain
duty to bargain

none
none
bargaining permitted
duty to bargain
arbitration
bargaining permitted

1967

1967
1975
1968
1966
1967

duty to bargain
arbitration
arbitration
duty to bargain
arbitration
bargaining permitted
arbitration

Oll;honia

1971

Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
south Dakota
Tennessee
Texas

1.971

duty to bargain
arbitration
arbitration
arbitration

Virginia

Washington
West

Virginia

Wisconsin
Wyoming

1967
——

1971
—-

1974

1978
1968
1968

none
duty to bargain

none
none
none

——

——

1977

none

——
——

1973

1967
1969

none

——

bargaining permitted

Ut au

1973
1969
1971

none
none

1961
——

1968
1968
——
1969

1974

none
bargaining permitted
duty to bargain
duty to bargain
arbitration
arbitration
arbitration

——
——

1973

1975

duty to bargain

——

1966
1969
1977
1965
1969
1971

Year Arbitration
Law Enacted
(where applicable)

duty

to bargain
none

arbitration

1967

none
arbitration

none

1971

—29—
Footnotes

Bureau of Labor Statistics, Analysis of Work Stoppages, 1978,

1/

Bulletin 2066, (Washington, DC: U.S. G.P.O., June 1980) Tables 18 and
19, PP. 38—43.

For a recent cross—state analysis of the impact of arbitration

2/

on salaries, see Craig Olson, "The Impact of Arbitration on the Wages of
Firefighters," Inddstrial Relations, Vol. 19, No. 13 (Fall 1980), pp. 325ff.
For a general review of studies of the impact of public sector unionism
on. compensation, see David Methe and James Perry, "The Impact of Collective

Bargaining on Local Government Services: A Review of Research," Public
Adminstration Review, (July/August, 1980) no. 4, pp. 361—365.
Public Service Research Council, "Public Sector Bargaining and

3/

Strikes," in Bureau of National Affairs, Government Employee Relations
Reporter, no. 676, (September 27, 1976) pp. F-l to F—7.

James F. Burton and Charles E. Krider, "The Incidence of Strikes

4/

in Public Employment," in Labor in the Public and Non—Profit Sectors,

Daniel S. Hamermesh, ed. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1975),
PP. 161—170.

See Hoyt H. Wheeler, "An Analysis of Firefighter Strikes," 26

5/

Labor Law Journal, 17, (January, 1975); Thomas Kochan, "Dynamics of Dis—
puto

Resolution,"

in Public Sector Bargaining, Benjamin Aaron, Joseph

Grodin, James Stern, eds. (Washington, DC: B.N.A., 1979).
6/

Research in progress by Craig A. Olson, James L. Stern, Joyce

Najita, and June Weisberger on public sector strikes in different occu-

pations overcomes these problems to some extent. Their empirical tests
focus on

sx

states all with duty—to—bargain provisions, so that results

apl)iy only to a limited sample of states.
7/

Eugene Becker, Director of the Industrial Relations Unit of the

Bureau of Labor Statistic;, described the process of collecting work stoppage

data. This unit of the BLS tracks strikes through the Federal Mediation
and Conciliation Service, the Census of Governments, and a network of news-

paper clipping services. Because of the public attention given to police
strikes, Eugene Becker was confident that police strikes in any municipality with a population over 10,000 are captured by a data collection

process which surveyed newspapers extensively. Since the only munici—
paflties with populations less than 10,000 are ones which submitted strike
forms to the BLS, it is unlikely that the strike variable is mismeasured
for the mur'icipalities in this data set. Among the 81 municipalities
experiencing police strikes, 16 had populations of less than the 1978
10,000 person lower limit that existed in the I.C.M.A. Municipal Yearbook

data. Still, simply entering these cities into the equations will con—
tarninate the results with an obvious effect of biasing the coefficient of

the population variable downward. In the econometric models to follow,

this problem is accounted for in two ways. First, a dummy variable is
added to the strike equation which assumes a value of one for cities with

less than 10,000 people. Second, cities of less than 10,000 are dropped
from the sample. In the latter case, results can be viewed strictly as
those for a sample truncated at populations of 10,000 so that results
only can be extended to the smallest communities with caution. For OLS
estimates for 1972 to 1978 pooled cross—section equations (equivalent
to the equation in column 2 of Table 2) all coefficients are virtually
unchanged from the truncated sample to the full sample with the less than

10,000 population dummy. While the population dummy attains the significant positive coefCicient one would expect given this sampling procedure,
the coellicients on the population variable are —.023 in the truncated
snmpie and —.024 in the full sample both with standard errors of .009.
8/

U.S. Department of Labor, "Summary of Public Sector Labor Relations,

—31-

1978," (Washington, DC: G.P.O., 1979); Bureau of National Affairs,

"Summary of State Labor Laws," (Washington, DC: B.N.A., 1978); Allen
Gammage and Stanley Sacks, Police Unions (Springfield, Illinois: Charles
C. Thomas, 1973).
9/

U.S. Department of Labor, "Public Sector Labor Relations, 1978,"

pp. 22—24.

10/

U.S. Department of Labor, "Public Sector Labor Relations, 1978,"

p. 39.
11/

Wisconsin Statutes Ch. 111, Sec. 111.70, sub 4, ch. 2 (1959; last

amendment effective June 7, 1978).
12/

Richard B. Freeman, Casey Ichniowski, and Harrison Lauer, "Collective

Bargaining, City Interdependencies, and Public Sector Compensation: The
Case of Police," National Bureau of Economic Research (October, 1980),
unpublished.
13/

For cities which experienced work stoppages but which did not

respond to the survey, contract status is taken from item 5 of BLS Form
3006.

14/

of

Freeman, Ichniowski, and Lauer, "Collective Bargaining: The Case

Police".

15/

Thomas Kochan, "Correlates of State Public Employee Bargaining

Lnws," Industrial Relations, Vol. 12, No. 3,
Burton
16/

(October

1973), pp. 322ff.

and Krider, "The Incidence of Strikes in Public Employment,' p. 155.
The

Northeast

states are: Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts,

New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsyl—

vania. North Central encompasses Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, Wis—
consin. Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, and
Sojl:h Dakota. The South region is composed of Delaware, Florida, Georgia,
Maryland, North Carolina, South Carolina, Virginia, West Virginia, Alabama,
<nntucky, Tennessee, Mississippi, Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas.

—32—

And the West is Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico,
Utah, Wyoming, Alaska, California, Hawaii, Orqgon, and Washington.
171

Government type and metropolitan status data are from International

City Managers Association, "Master Code" Data Tape (Washington, DC: I.C.M.A.,

1978). International City Management Association, Municipal Yearbook, 1978,
(Washington, DC: I.C.M.A., 1978) provides data on per capita income and
per capita city revenue and department size. U.S. Bureau of the Census,
City and County Date Book, 1972 provides data on per capita income and
municipal revenue for an earlier period.

1978 compensation data are from International City Management
Association, "1978 Police Salary" Data Tape, Washington, DC, 1978. 1973
compensation and department size data are from International Management
Association, "Personnel Policies in Municipal Police Departments," Washington,

DC, 1973. Cities experiencing police work stoppages for which no salary
information was available from these sources were surveyed by telephone
for this data.
18/

In this data set, certain municipal level characteristics were

missing on several observations. At least one municipal control variable

wi missing for 47 of the 862 observations in the large sample of cities.
In a seven—step process these missing variables were estimated by an ordinary
least squares estimating equation using available

variables that would

a 4p4 seem reasonable predictors for missing variables.
The following list indicates the variables for which observations

wcu missing and the variables used to estimate missing values:
Actual uniformed police in 1978 =

f(actual

uniformed police in 1973),

crua1 uniformed police in 1973 =

f(actual

unifromed police in 1978),

1970 Population
1975 Population

=

f(l975

population),

=

f(l970

population),

Actual uniformed police in 1978 =

f(population

in 1975),

—33—

Actual uniformed police in 1973 =

f(population

Total city revenue in 1978

=

f(state,

Total city revenue in 1973

=

f(total

Per capita income in 1978

=

f(state,

in 1970),

1975 population),
city revenue in 1978),

1975 population, 1978 total

revenues),

=

SMSA dummy

f(1978 laws, government type, 1975
population, percent unionized in state,
percent public workers in state,
contract status in 1978, actual uniformed
police in 1978, 1978 total city revenue,
1978 per capita income).

A "differencing from the mean"

19/

procedure

would produce four law

change variables: a no change group; and three other groups for those
changing into bargaining permitted, into duty—to—bargain, and into arbitration.
In the differencing procedure, a city that remained arbitration throughout
would obtain the same value for the change—in—law variables as a city
that remained no law throughout (i.e., all change—in—law variables will

be zero). The more detailed set of law variables can differentiate between
such groJju. Also, with the more detailed set of law variables, one can
obtain a direct estimate of the difference between a city that changed
ft-cm a duty—to—bargain to an arbitration environment; whereas, with the

differencing procedure, the strike propensity of such a city would be
constrained to be the difference between the "change to duty—to—bargain"
ani

"change to arbitration" coefficients.

20/
city"

Calculating the differences in strike probabilities for an "average

bitt in different legal environments is suspect since characteristics

of 'iticc

vary significantly across

states in different bargaining environ-

ments; that is, the "average city" in the "no law" category is different

than the "average city" in the "arbitration" category. To compute how
much of the difference in

strike
liv

propensities is attributable to differences

trike—inriiicing rFiarncterintfrs acrnss en—

vironments, separate strike equations are estimated for cities in no law
environments and for cities in environments with some form of bargaining

law. When one evaluates the "bargaining law" strike equation using the
mean level of characteristics from cities in "no law" states, one estimates

a hypothetical strike probability of .010. While the two groups' strike
equations indicate that strikes in "no law" cities are over four times as
likely (predicted strike frequencies of .025 for "no law" cities and M0
for "bargaining law" cities), only 21% of the 1.9 percentage point difference can be attributed to differences in the characteristics of the
cities between the two different kinds of statutory environments.

Separate strike equations were also estimated for the sample of

cities with and without written contracts. From information contained
in the BLS strike form, 48 strikes for recognition are identified and all

such strikes do in fact occur in the no contract sample. The number of
recognition strikes and the percentage of cities without contracts by law

category are: arbitration — 2 (of 5) and 4.3%; duty—to—bargain — 9 (of 20)
and 33.5%; bargaining permitted — 5 (of 7) and 33.5%; no law — 32 (of 49)

and 79.1%. Bargaining statute logit coefficients have the same rank order
in both -arn1es, but tend to be smaller in magnitude for the recognition

strikes in the no contract sample. For the law variables, the coefficients
from the no contract and contract samples respectively are: arbitration ——

—2.78 and —3.51; duty—to—bargain —— —.16 and —.42; and bargaining permitted ——

-.87
217

and -2.17.

Robert N. Stern, "Quantitative Strike Analysis," Industrial Relations,

Vol. 17, No. 1, (February 1978), p. 38.
22/

Thomas Kochan, "Dynamics of Dispute Resolution," in Public Sector

Birini, Benjamin
DC: B.N.A., 1979).

Aaron, Joseph Grodin, James Stern, eds., (Washington,

Jj

23/

Craig Olson, "The Impact of Arbitration of the Wages of Firefighters,"

pp. 325ff.

