                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE INTERACTION BETWEEN RESEARCH
                 AND PUBLIC POLICY: THE CASE
                   OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE


                      Daniel S. Hamermesh



                     Working Paper No. 171




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                        September 1981




Professor of Economics, Michigan State University, and Research
Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. Neither of those
organizations is in any way responsible for or, necessarily, sup-
portive of the inferences drawn here. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Many
colleagues at the NBER and elsewhere made helpful comments on an
earlier draft. A detailed summary of the results of the question-
naire is available upon request from the author. To be presented
at the meetings of the American Economic Association, Washington,
D.C., December 1981.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #771
                                                      September 1981



                The Interaction Between Research and Public Policy:
                        The Case of Unemployment Insurance


                                      ABSTRACT


     This   essay examines the role of economic research in affecting the

recommendations of the National Commission of Unemployment Compensation,

and the likely impacts of that Commission and economists' research findings

on policy. Using a questionnaire addressed to Commission members, I find

that most became quite aware of the results of research on the labor—

market effects of unemployment insurance, with the degree of recognition

proportional to the strength of the consensus among economists on a

particular result; that the members had little awareness of the identity

of particular economists who had done the research; and that, though the

members claimed their recommendations were influenced importantly by

research, that influence is difficult to detect in the Commission's

Report. Because that   Report   goes against the tenor of current labor—

market policy, its short—run impact will likely be small; and, because

the focus of interest in policy will change over time, its long—term

influence may not be great. Economic research, though, is shown to have

had an immediate impact in three specific cases; and its long—run effect,

by conditioning the policy discussion, has been and will like be substantial.



                                                 Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Marshall Hall
                                                 Michigan State University
                                                 East   Lansing, MI 48824
      Unlike politicians, economists do not take opinion polls on their

performance. But we are prone to occasional self—examination, asking

whether all the articles, books and testimony in areas related to public

policy have done more than gain tenure and higher salaries for their

authors. Views on this issue have ranged from the remarkably optimistic

(Walter Heller on macro policy in the early l960s); to the modest

(George Stigler on a benefit—cost analysis of economics); to the very

negative (John Dunlop on labor economics). The self—examination here

deals with only one specific program, unemployment insurance. By

providing quantitative evidence linking research results with the percep-

tions of them by their consumers and their impact on policy, we can use

this small program to illuminate the broader issue of the utility of

economics.

      Unemployment insurance (UI) is particularly well—suited for our

purposes. Empirical research on UI has clearly been one of the growth

stocks in labor economics since the early 1970s. This explosion coincided

with ( and may have been caused by) the persistent high unemployment during

this period and some major changes in UI policy. With the Pmendments of

1970 (P.L. 91—373), a permanent program of extended benefits (covering

weeks 27—39 of unemployment), to be triggered when unemployment is temporarily

high, became effective; coverage of wage and salary workers became nearly

universal with the 1976 Amendments (P.L. 94—566); for the first time,

Federal benefit standards (regulating receipt of UI benefits and retirement

income, and proscribing payments to teachers on summer vacation) were

instituted; and in 1979 some UI benefits became taxable as ordinary income

under P.L. 95—600.       (See Daniel Hamermesh, 1977, for a discussion of these

changes and of the program's operating details.)
                                     —2—



     The 1976 Amendments also provided for a National Commission on

Unemployment Compensation (NCUC) to study the program and make recommendations

for change. Its 13 members were appointed in 1977 and 1978 by the President,

the Speaker of the House and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate, and

included trade union, business and public representatives. A large

minority had a backround dealing with issues in UI. The NCUC held over 100

days of meetings and hearings, and issued a final report in Fall 1980.

     Let us consider what economists have contributed to our knowledge of

the effects of UI, and then try to answer several questions: To what extent

were the NCUC's deliberations influenced by economic research, both that

funded by the NCUC and other work? What determined the direction of the

NCUC's recommendations? How will they and the economic research affect

policy in the 1980s ——   in   short, what will be the net impact of the NCUC

and of our own work?

I. What Are the Economic Effects of UI?

     The burgeoning interest in UI has generated impressive theoretical

and empirical results. Nonetheless, the major accretions to our knowledge

result from measuring impacts that were envisioned as long ago as

the l930s when the Federal mandate for state UI programs was first imposed.

In decreasing order of precision, the empirical findings (see Alan Gustman

for a recent summary) are:

1) The median UI recipient faces a replacement rate that is about half of

his after—tax earnings; and a substantial fraction, especially low—wage and

secondary workers, face net replacement rates in excess of three—fourths.

2) Higher net replacement rates induce longer spells of unemployment.

The nearly two dozen studies of this issue indicate fairly consistently that

a 20 percent increase in UI benefits induces between one half and one extra

week of measured unemployment (3 to 6 percent), other things equal. The
                                  —3—

NCUC funded some research projects that confirmed earlier results on this

point.

3) UI benefits accrue disproportionately to households in the third through

ninth (next to lowest) deciles of the income distribution; on net they

reduce the Cmi coefficient on after—tax incomes.

4) By providing incentives to stabilize employment fluctuations,

reduced experience rating of UI taxes (narrower rate structures on

tax schedules, and a lower taxable base) increases layoff rates and thus

the number of spells of unemployment. Here too, the NCUC supported research

that strengthened this conclusion. The size of the impact is unclear; estimates

of the effect of instituting a tax structure like that in the state with

the most complete experience rating range from a one percent to a 33 percent

reduction in the layoff rate in manufacturing.

5) Longer potential duration of benefits induces workers to stay unemployed

longer, other things equal, though less so in recessions. The estimates,

including one from a project funded by the NCUC, extend up to one extra

week of actual unemployment for each week of extra potential duration.

6) Perhaps one half of benefits accrues to persons whose

consumption would not be reduced in the absence of those benefits

(see, eg,,, Daniel Hamermesh,1982). Since the program's major goal is the

maintenance of a standard of living, this suggests the benefits are not

completely target efficient.

7) Broadened coverage, eased eligibility and higher weekly benefits and

potential duration induce workers to spend more time in the labor force.

This increases total market production, partly offsetting the lost production

implicit in points (2) and (5) above, though perhaps increasing the loss

in welfare.
                                  —4—



II. Awareness and Use of Economic Research

     How did these findings, which include some of the most concrete

results in labor economics (or applied economics generally!) impinge

upon the NCUC? To examine this I distributed a short questionnaire to

the 12 Commission members who participated in the NCUC's work; nine responses

were made (anonymously). The answers on questions about awareness of

research findings, of producers of research, and of effects of policy

changes represent, to my knowledge, the first set of responses by such a

group to specific questions of this type.

     On a scale from 4 ("Have seen summaries of the results and have a

good grasp of findings") down to 1 ("Am unfamiliar with research in this

area") the Commission members were asked to indicate their familiarity with

research on the effects of: 1) Longer potential duration and higher

weekly benefits on unemployment duration; 2) Experience—rated payroll taxes

on employment fluctuations; and 3) UI benefits on the distribution of

after-tax income. The respondents' claims of familiarity with research

results correspond remarkably closely to the degree of concreteness I

attached in the previous section to the results. On the first question the

average score was 3.7; on the second and third the scores were 2.7 and 2.6

respectively. If we can believe their claims, it appears that Commission

members were most aware of findings in those areas that have received the

most attention from economists.

     The NCUC members were able to convert their familiarity with research

findings into an appreciation of the likely impact of some hypothetical

changes in UI policy on the labor market: 1) Raise potential duration to

65 weeks; 2) Tax all UI benefits; 3) Abolish experience rating of

payroll taxes. A question on the impact of UI benefits on the distribution

of income was also asked. On the policy questions the Commissioners were
                                  —5—

asked to indicate what effects, between —1.5 and +1.5 percentage points,

the change would have on the aggregate unemployment rate. The averages of

their responses about the likely impact of the three changes were +.6, —.2

amd +.3 percentage points respectively. Eight of the nine respondents stated

that UI benefits make the income distribution "somewhat more equal"; the

other stated they had no effect. Though one might quibble about these magnitudes,

they seem remarkably close to what a careful reading of research results

would lead one to expect. Whether the "accuracy" of these responses

stems from the Commissioners' general acuity or from the careful reading

of research findings is unclear. However, the lack of previous familiarity

of many Commissioners with the UI program, coupled with their responses

to the first set of questions, suggests that they did become knowledgable

about the latest economic research on the impact of the program they

were reviewing.

     The Commissioners' familiarity with the results of economic research

did not extend to the recognition of the economists responsible for

the research results. Seven persons who had published two or more

articles or books on UI were listed in the questionnaire. The respondents

were asked to check whether or not they "were familiar with (had seen a

reference to or summary of) their work on UI." Also included were James

Braunfeld and Michael Hart, fictitious persons whose names (which are

dissimilar to those of any practicing labor economist I know of) I constructed.

One Commissioner was aware of Braunfeld's work; three were familiar with

Hart's work. Only three of the seven real economists achieved more

recognition than Hart. (Included among the four who did not was one

person who completed a project under contract to the NCUC.) One must conclude

that only three of the seven were really familiar to the Commissioners.

(As a partial check on this analysis, nine graduate students and recent

doctorates in economics were given this part of the questionnaire. The
                                    —6—

majority were not acquainted with the work of two of the seven real persons,

but none expressed familiarity with Braunfeld's or Hart's work.) Sic transit

gloria doctorum: Our works may we known, we often we are not!

III. Research and Recommendations

     The Commission made recommendations on all facets of the Federal—state

UI program. While economic research has nothing to say about many of these

issues, it carries some clear implications for others. Most radical (and

costly) of these was a set of recommendations that the Congress impose

standards on state programs' average and maximum benefits. These standards were

opposed by only two to five members, nearly all of whom could be called business

representatives. Together these would, if implemented, increase program costs

by at least 15 percent ($1.3 billion if the changes had been applied in

fiscal year 1979), and would result in higher replacement rates and some

increase in unemployment. Despite their clear awareness of the research

results linking higher replacement rates and longer duration of unemployment,

and the evidence that many recipients do not "need" the income, five of the

nine Commissioners responding claimed research played a major role or some

useful role in determining the recommendations on these benefit standards.

The other four respondents stated research had no effect. In light

of the clear contradiction between the recommendations and the research

findings, this appraisal by the majority of the respondents seems strange

indeed. Comparing the recommendations to the research, most observors

would conclude that the latter had no impact, though it may have restrained still

more generous recommendations.

    With three business and one state government representative dissenting

the Commission recommended that a permanent triggered (by state or national un-

employment rates) program of benefits for weeks 40 through 65 of potential duration
                                  —7—


be established. (This would make permanent the most generous extension enacted

during the 1974—75 recession.) Though the Commissioners indicated that a

nontriggered extension would raise aggregate unemployment by .6 percentage points

(see above), and though they were aware of the evidence on this issue, only

one of the nine respondents felt research did not affect this recommendation.

(One claimed it had a major role, two that it served some useful role, and five

that it had a slight role.) Here again there is a sharp contradiction among

Commissioners awareness of research results, their perceptions of how research

affected their recommendations, and those recommendations themselves.

     The Commission's views on experience rating are somewhat mixed. It

recommended that minimum tax rates exceed zero, clearly reducing the scope

for experience rating; it also urged that maximum rates be sufficiently high

that the "vast majority of benefit payments are effectively charged." Also,

the Commission endorsed increases in the annual amount of wages subject to taxation,

which would also increase the extent of experience rating. Five of the

nine respondents felt research played a major role in affecting this

recommendation. However, these recommendations were aimed at infusing revenue

into the program; and the research referred to may have been work showing

revenue projections rather than the program's labor—markets impact. While

we thus cannot claim too close a link between economic research and the

NCUC's recommendations, at least some claim can be made that the NCUC's direction

is consistent with economists' findings.

     The NCUC urged unanimously that Congress repeal the taxation of

UI benefits. Since benefits are only taxable if a family's taxable income

well exceeds the median, repeal would surely decrease the income—equalizing effect

of the program. The Commissioners were, as we saw, aware of the program's

effects in this context; either they could not or would not make the jump

to recognizing the disequalizing impact of their recommendation, or they
                                  —8—



did so but subordinated their interest in equalizing incomes to some

other goal. In this case, though, six of nine did respond that research

results had no impact on the recommendation, a response which seems quite

consistent with the facts.

     Though Commission members had a reasonable knowledge of what economists

as a group (but not individually) have found, economic research seems to

have had little effect on the actual recommendations of the NCUC. This, despite

the Commissioners' implied belief to the contrary. Rather, one may conclude that

the NCUC's recommendations on those issues which economists have studied were

highly political, with the union and most of the public representatives aligned

against most of the Commission's business members. In most of these cases

the majority's position supported changes that would exacerbate the

negative side effects that UI produces on the labor market.

     The Report can be summarized the same way Samuel Gompers summarized the

goals of organized labor —— MORE: Higher replacement rates, longer potential

duration of benefits, and easier eligibility for benefits. Regardless of one's

views on the appropriateness of these recommendations, it is difficult to

imagine a set of prescriptions that would be in more conflict with the massive

amounts of research on the labor—market impact of UI that economists have

produced in the past ten years. Despite their recognition of these effects,

the Commissioners may implicitly have viewed other factors, perhaps income

maintenance and macro stabilization, to be of greater importance. If they

did, their emphasis contradicts in part the evidence (point 6 in Section I) on

the program's target efficiency, and its necessity as an automatic stabilizer

(see Martin Feldstefn). So too, they may at least in part have acted out perceived

roles as representatives of groups with fixed positions on the issues. (This

seems to have happened in other commissions; see Robert Kilroy—Silk.)
                                     —9—



IV.   Impact,   Impact, Who Has an Impact?

      The picture in the previous section may appear bleak to those who seek an

immediate impact of economic research on the formulation of policy. Yet

economists' research findings have often had an immediate impact on policy, one

that the NCUC Report is not likely to obtain. Similarly, the long—run

effects of the economic research of the l970s on the UI program seems

likely to exceed that of the Report in those areas where the latter deals

with economic issues.

      In three areas the Congressional staff personnel I interviewed, none

of whom had formal training in economics, indicated that economic research

provided part of the impetus for changing the UI program. The taxation of

benefits received by high—income families resulted partly from some examples

of high net replacement rates that were shown for some secondary workers who

are UI recipients. The demonstration that these reduced work incentives

produce longer spells of unemployment was also important. Similarly, the

final extension of Federal Supplemental Benefits (FSB) (P.L. 95—19) included the

first Federal requirement defining suitable work (jobs that UI recipients must

accept or face a cut—off of benefits) more broadly than its definition for

recipients of regular and Extended (weeks 1—39) benefits. This stipulation stemmed

in part from evidence produced in an analysis of the job—search behavior of

persons who had exhausted FSB payments. Finally, a study of the disqualification

of claimants of regular UI benefits led to Federal legislation disqualifying

them from receiving Extended Benefit payments. Even beyond its use to buttress

proposed legislation, economic research has had a direct effect on those

areas where Federal policy affects UI programs.

      This role stands in sharp contrast to the likely immediate impact

of the recommendations of the NCUC. The NCUC members were appointed by a

Democratic President, Speaker and President Pro Tempore; the Report was filed
                                     —10---


just before a Republican President and President Pro Tempore assumed power.

Examination of recent legislation (P.L. 97—35) and discussions with staff persons

in both the executive and legislative branches indicate that the Commission's

recommendations in the areas where economists have provided evidence of the pro-

gram's impact will be ignored at least through 1984. (In other areas,

such as providing for states with large deficits in their UI accounts, where

program requirements dictate legislative action be taken, the NCUC's proposals

may well have a major effect.) Indeed, the current Administration's proposals

run counter to those presented by the Report. For example, imposing a Federal

standard requiring UI recipients to have worked at least 20 weeks in the base

period to receive benefits beyond 13 weeks of unemployment (97th Cong., S. 983)

represents an extreme interpretation of studies of UI and unemployment duration.

Ideology and political influence dominate most proposals that have been made

in the last ten years for UI policy, as one should expect in a program that

affects directly so many employers and workers.

     The long—run impact of the NCUC Report obviously cannot be foretold.

Nonetheless, the role that previous reports in other areas have played

suggests that, should conditions arise after 1984 that spur changes in the

program, the politics will be such as to dictate a different mix of

influences, and thus a different political outcome, from those that generated

this Report. It seems unlikely, in the crucial areas of benefit standards,

policy on potential duration, taxation of benefits, etc., that the Report's

long—term impact will exceed the short—run effects.

     This stands in sharp contrast to the likely future effects of the research

on UI that economists have done since 1973, including that funded by the NCUC.

Examination of the three cases cited above where research directly affected

changes in policy suggests one should not expect future policy changes to

arise directly out of past research: To affect changes in policy, research
                                 —11—



results must be recent. However, the increased certainty about the impact of

UI on the economy that has been provided by this spurt of research findings will,

as it has to some extent already, condition the debate over any future changes

in the program. One may reasonably conclude that the NCUC's major legacy, in

terms of its eventual impact on policy, may be the aid it gave to the

accretion of knowledge about the program. This conclusion and the contrast

between the short—run effects of prior economic research and the Commission's

recommendations suggest strongly that we economists should feel our

contributions in this area have been and will continue to be important. Whether

the same fairly optimistic inference can be drawn about economic research on other

topics is unclear. At the very least, though, the case of unemployment insurance

should provide some insight into the circumstances necessary for that research

to have an impact on policy.
                                      —12—



                                  REFERENCES


J.   Dunlop, "Policy Decisions and Research in Economics and Industrial

      Relations," md. L. Rel. Rev., April 1977, 30, 275—282.

N. Feldstein, "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment,"

      Journ. Pol. Econ., Oct. 1976, 84, 937—958.


A. Gustman, "Analyzing the Relation of Unemployment Insurance to

      Unemployment," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper

      No. 512, Cambridge, Mass., July 1980.

D. Hamermesh, Jobless Pay and the Economy, Baltimore, 1977.


____________    "Social   Insurance and Consumption: An Empirical Study,"

      Am. Ec. Rev., March 1982, 72, forthcoming.

W. Heller, New Dimensions in Political Economy, Cambridge, Mass., 1966.


R. Kilroy—Silk, "The Donovan Royal Commission on Trade Unions," in

      R. Chapman, ed., The Role of Commissions in Policy Making, London, 1973.

G. Stigler, "Do Economists Matter?" So. Econ. Journ., Jan. 1976,

      42,   347—354.
